Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AMPLE - EFFICIENT L EARNING OF I NFINITE - HORIZON
AVERAGE - REWARD MDP S WITH G ENERAL F UNCTION
A PPROXIMATION
 Jianliang He                                                     Han Zhong
 Department of Statistics and Data Science                        Center for Data Science
 Fudan University                                                 Peking University
 hejl@fudan.edu.cn                                                hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn

 Zhuoran Yang
 Department of Statistics and Data Science
 Yale University
 zhuoran.yang@yale.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         We study infinite-horizon average-reward Markov decision processes (AMDPs)
         in the context of general function approximation. Specifically, we propose a novel
         algorithmic framework named Local-fitted Optimization with OPtimism (L OOP),
         which incorporates both model-based and value-based incarnations. In particu-
         lar, L OOP features a novel construction of confidence sets and a low-switching
         policy updating scheme, which are tailored to the average-reward and function
         approximation setting. Moreover, for AMDPs, we propose a novel complex-
         ity measure — average-reward generalized eluder coefficient (AGEC) — which
         captures the challenge of exploration in AMDPs with general function approxi-
         mation. Such a complexity measure encompasses almost all previously known
         tractable AMDP models, such as linear AMDPs and linear mixture AMDPs, and
         also includes newly identified cases such as kernel AMDPs and AMDPs with Bell-
         man eluder dimensions.
                              √ Using AGEC, we prove that L OOP achieves a sublinear
         Õ(poly(d, sp(V ∗ )) T β) regret, where d and β correspond to AGEC and log-
         covering number of the hypothesis class respectively, sp(V ∗ ) is the span of the
         optimal state bias function, T denotes the number of steps, and Õ(·) omits loga-
         rithmic factors. When specialized to concrete AMDP models, our regret bounds
         are comparable to those established by the existing algorithms designed specifi-
         cally for these special cases. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the
         first comprehensive theoretical framework capable of handling nearly all AMDPs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a powerful tool for addressing intricate se-
quential decision-making problems. In this context, Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman,
2014; Sutton & Barto, 2018) frequently serve as a fundamental model for modeling such decision-
making scenarios. Motivated by different feedback structures in real applications, MDPs consist
of three subclasses — finite-horizon MDPs, infinite-horizon discounted MDPs, and infinite-horizon
average-reward MDPs. Each of these MDP variants is of paramount significance and operates in a
parallel fashion, with none being amenable to complete reduction into another. Of these three MDP
subclasses, finite-horizon MDPs have received significant research efforts in understanding their
exploration challenge, especially in the presence of large state spaces which necessitates function
approximation tools. Existing works on finite-horizon MDPs have proposed numerous structural
conditions on the MDP model that empower sample-efficient learning. These structural conditions
include but are not limited to linear function approximation (Jin et al., 2020), Bellman rank (Jiang
et al., 2017), eluder dimension (Wang et al., 2020), Bellman eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021),
bilinear class (Du et al., 2021), decision estimation coefficient (Foster et al., 2021), and generalized


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


eluder coefficient (Zhong et al., 2022). Moreover, these works have designed various model-based
and value-based algorithms to address finite-horizon MDPs governed by these structural conditions.
In contrast to the rich literature devoted to finite-horizon MDPs, the study of sample-efficient explo-
ration in infinite-horizon MDPs has hitherto been relatively limited. Importantly, it remains elusive
how to design in a principled fashion a sample-efficient RL algorithm in the online setting with
general function approximation. To this end, we focus on infinite-horizon average-reward MDPs
(AMDPs), which offer a suitable framework for addressing real-world decision-making scenarios
that prioritize long-term returns, such as product delivery (Proper & Tadepalli, 2006). Our work
endeavors to provide a unified theoretical foundation for understanding infinite-horizon average-
reward MDPs from the perspective of general function approximation, akin to the comprehensive
investigations conducted in the domain of finite-horizon MDPs. To pursue this overarching objec-
tive, we have delineated two subsidiary goals that form the crux of our research endeavor.

- Development of a Novel Structural Condition/Complexity Measure. Existing works are re-
  stricted to tabular AMDPs (Bartlett & Tewari, 2012; Jaksch et al., 2010) and AMDPs with linear
  function approximation (Wu et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021), with Chen et al. (2022a) as the only
  exception (to our best knowledge). While Chen et al. (2022b) does extend the eluder dimension
  for finite-horizon MDPs (Ayoub et al., 2020) to the infinite-horizon average-reward context, their
  complexity measure seems to be only slightly more general than the linear mixture AMDPs (Wu
  et al., 2022) and falls short in capturing other fundamental models such as linear AMDPs (Wei
  et al., 2021). Hence, our first subgoal is proposing a new structural condition. This condition
  is envisioned to be sufficiently versatile to encompass all known tractable AMDPs, while also
  potentially introducing innovative and tractable models into the framework.
- Algorithmic Framework for Addressing Identified Structural Condition. The second subgoal
  is anchored in the development of sample-efficient algorithms for AMDPs characterized by the
  structural condition proposed in our work. Our aspiration is to devise an algorithmic framework
  that can be flexibly implemented in both model-based and value-based paradigms, depending on
  the nature of the problem at hand. This adaptability guarantees that our algorithms possess the
  ability to effectively address a wide range of AMDPs.

Our work attains these two pivotal subgoals through the introduction of (i) a novel complexity
measure — Average-reward Generalized Eluder Coefficient (AGEC), and (ii) a corresponding al-
gorithmic framework dubbed as Local-fitted Optimization with OPtimism (L OOP). Our primary
contributions and novelties are summarized below:

- AGEC Complexity Measure. Our complexity measure AGEC extends the generalized eluder
  coefficient (GEC) in Zhong et al. (2022) to the infinite-horizon average-reward setting. How-
  ever, it incorporates significant modifications. AGEC not only establishes a connection between
  the Bellman error and the training error, akin to GEC but also imposes certain constraints on
  transferability (see Definition 3 for details). This modification proves instrumental in attaining
  sample efficiency in the realm of AMDPs (see Section 5 for detailed discussion). We demonstrate
  that AGEC not only encompasses all previously recognized tractable AMDPs, including tabular
  AMDPs (Bartlett & Tewari, 2012; Jaksch et al., 2010), linear AMDPs (Wei et al., 2021), linear
  mixture MDPs (Wu et al., 2022), AMDPs with low eluder dimension (Chen et al., 2022a), but
  also captures some new identified models like linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs (see Definition 14), kernel
  AMDPs (see Proposition 7), and AMDPs with low Bellman eluder dimension (see Definition 8).
- L OOP Algorithmic Framework. Our algorithm L OOP is based on the optimism principle and
  features a novel construction of confidence sets along with a low-switching updating scheme.
  Remarkably, L OOP offers the flexibility to be implemented either in the model-based or value-
  based paradigm, depending on the problem type.
- Unified Theoretical√Results. From the theoretical side, we prove that L OOP enjoys the regret of
  Õ(poly(d, sp(V ∗ )) T β), where d and β correspond to the AGEC and the log-covering number
  of the hypothesis class respectively, sp(V ∗ ) denotes the span of the optimal state bias function, T
  is the number of steps, and Õ hides logarithmic factors. This result shows that L OOP is capable
  of solving all AMDPs with low AGEC.

In summary, we provide a unified theoretical understanding of infinite-horizon AMDPs with general
function approximation. Further elaboration on our contributions and technical novelties are


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          Linear
      Algorithm              Assumption             Type        Tabular
                                                                          Mixture
                                                                                  Linear Eluder ABE Kernel AGEC

                          Bellman optimality    Model-based
     L OOP (Ours)                                                   󰃀       󰃀       󰃀      󰃀      󰃀        󰃀   󰃀
                             (finite span)      & Value-based
   S IM - TO -R EAL      Communicating AMDP
                                                Model-based         󰃀       󰃀        ✗     󰃀      ✗        ✗   ✗
 (Chen et al., 2022a)       (finite diameter)
     U CRL 2-V TR        Communicating AMDP
                                                Model-based         󰃀       󰃀        ✗      ✗     ✗        ✗   ✗
    (Wu et al., 2022)       (finite diameter)
         F OPO            Bellman optimality
                                                 Value-based        󰃀       ✗       󰃀       ✗     ✗        ✗   ✗
    (Wei et al., 2021)       (finite span)
       U CRL 2         Communicating AMDP
                                                Model-based         󰃀       ✗        ✗      ✗     ✗        ✗   ✗
 (Jaksch et al., 2010)    (finite diameter)


Table 1: A comparison with the most related algorithms on AMDPs. We remark that our assumption
is weaker since the communicating MDP satisfies the Bellman optimality and the diameter is bound
by the span. Besides, average-reward Bellman eluder dimension (ABE), kernel AMDPs, and AGEC
are new complexity measures proposed by our work. In particular, AGEC serves as a unifying
complexity measure capable of encompassing all other established complexity measures.


provided in Appendix A. Due to space limits, we only provide a comparison between our results
and mostly related works on AMDPs in Table 1. More related works are deferred to Appendix A.

2      P RELIMINARIES

An infinite-horizon average-reward Markov Dependent Process (AMDPs) is characterized by M =
(S, A, r, P), where S is a Borel state space with a possibly infinite number of elements, A is a finite
set of actions, r : S × A 󰀁→ [−1, 1] is an unknown reward function1 and P(·|s, a) is the unknown
transition kernel. The learning protocol for infinite-horizon average-reward RL is as follows: the
agent interacts with M over a fixed number of T steps, starting from a pre-determined initial state
s1 ∈ S. At each step t ∈ [T ], the agent observe a state st ∈ S and takes an action at ∈ A, receives
a reward r(st , at ) and transits to the next state st+1 drawn from P(·|st , at ).
Denote ∆(A) be the probability simplex over the action space A. Specifically, the stationary policy
π is a mapping π : S 󰀁→ ∆(A) with π(a|s) specifying the probability of taking action a at state s.
Given a stationary policy π, the long-term average reward starting is defined as
                                          󰀥 T                     󰀦
                                       1    󰁛
                     π
                    J (s) := lim inf E          r(st , at )|s1 = s ,     ∀s ∈ S,
                               T 󰀁→∞ T
                                            t=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to the policy, i.e., at ∼ π(·|st ) and the transition, i.e.,
st+1 ∼ P(·|st , at ). In infinite-horizon average-reward RL, existing works mostly rely on additional
assumptions to achieve sample efficiency. The necessity arises from the absence of a natural coun-
terpart to the celebrated Bellman optimality equation in the average-reward RL that is self-evident
and crucial within episodic and discounted settings (Puterman, 2014). To this end, we consider a
broad subclass where a modified Bellman optimality equation holds (Hernández-Lerma, 2012).
Assumption 1 (Bellman optimality equation). There exists bounded measurable function Q∗ : S ×
A 󰀁→ R, V ∗ : S 󰀁→ R and unique constant J ∗ ∈ [−1, 1] such that for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, it holds
                 J ∗ + Q∗ (s, a) = r(s, a) + Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) [V ∗ (s′ )],         V ∗ (s) = max Q∗ (s, a).       (2.1)
                                                                                         a∈A

The Bellman optimality equation, adapted for average-reward RL, posits that for any initial states
s1 ∈ S, the optimal reward is independent such that J ∗ (s1 ) = J ∗ under a deterministic optimal
policy following π ∗ (·|s) = argmaxa∈A Q∗ (·, a). The justification is presented in Wei et al. (2021).
Note that functions V ∗ (s) and Q∗ (s, a) reveal the relative advantage of starting from state s and
state-action pair (s, a) under the optimal policy, and are respectively called the optimal state and
   1
     Throughout this paper, we consider the deterministic reward for notational simplicity and all results are
readily generalized to the stochastic setting. Also, we assume reward lies in [−1, 1] without loss of generality.


                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


state-action bias function (Wei et al., 2021). Denote sp(V ) = sups,s′ ∈S |V (s) − V (s′ )| as the
span of any bounded measurable function. Note that for any solution pair (V ∗ , Q∗ ) satisfying the
Bellman optimality equation in (2.1), the shifted pair (V ∗ − c, Q∗ − c) for any constant c is still
a solution. Thus, without loss of generality, we can focus on the unique centralized solution such
that 󰀂V ∗ 󰀂∞ ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ). Following the tradition in the average-reward RL (Wei et al., 2020; 2021;
Wang et al., 2022; Zhang & Xie, 2023), the span sp(V ∗ ) is assumed to be known.
As aforementioned in the paper, distinct assumptions have been employed in average-reward RL re-
search to ensure the explorability of the problem, which includes ergodic AMDPs (Wei et al., 2020;
Hao et al., 2021; Zhang & Xie, 2023), communicating AMDPs (Chen et al., 2022a; Wang et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2022) and the Bellman optimality equation (Wei et al., 2021). Among these widely
adopted assumptions, we remark that the Bellman optimality equation is the least stringent one.
Note that the ergodic MDP suggests the existence of bias functions for each π ∈ Π, while the latter
two only require the existence of bias functions for the optimal policy. As for weak communicating
assumption, a weaker form of communicating MDP (Wang et al., 2022), it directly implies the exis-
tence of the Bellman optimality equation and thus is stronger (Hernández-Lerma, 2012). Given the
Bellman optimality assumption in (2.1), we introduce the average-reward Bellman operator below:
                                              󰀗                 󰀘
                                                         ′ ′
      (TJ F )(s, a) := r(s, a) + Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) max
                                                ′
                                                   F  (s  , a )   − J,   ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A,     (2.2)
                                              a ∈A

for any bounded function F : S × A 󰀁→ R and constant J ∈ [−1, 1]. Then, the Bellman optimality
equation in (2.1) can be written as TJ ∗ Q∗ = Q∗ . Moreover, we define the Bellman error:
                  E(F, J)(s, a) := F (s, a) − (TJ F )(s, a),     ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A.                (2.3)

Learning Objective Under the framework of online learning for AMDPs, the agent aims to learn
the optimal policy by interacting with the environment over potentially infinite steps. The regret
measures the cumulative difference between the optimal average-reward and the reward achieved
                                                            󰁓T
after interacting for T steps, formally defined as Reg(T ) = t=1 (J ∗ − r(st , at )).

3   G ENERAL F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION
To capture both model-free and model-based problems with function approximation, we consider a
general hypotheses class H which contains a class of functions. We consider two kinds of hypothesis
classes, targeting at value-based problems and model-based problems respectively.
Definition 1 (Value-based hypothesis). We say H is a value-based hypotheses class if all hypothesis
f ∈ H is defined over state-action bias function Q and average-reward J such that f = (Qf , Jf ) ∈
H. Let Vf (·) = maxa∈A Qf (·, a) and πf (·) = argmaxa∈A Qf (·, a) be the greedy bias function and
policy induced from hypothesis f ∈ H. Denote f ∗ be the optimal hypothesis under true model M.
Definition 2 (Model-based hypothesis). We say H is a model-based hypotheses class if all hypothe-
sis f ∈ H is defined over the transition kernel P and reward function r such that f = (Pf , rf ) ∈ H.
Let Qf , Vf , Jf , and πf respectively be the optimal bias functions, average-reward and policy in-
duced from hypothesis f ∈ H, which satisfies the Bellman optimality equation such that
                              󰀃           󰀄
            Qf (s, a) + Jf = rf + Pf Vf (s, a), Pf ′ Vf (s, a) := Es′ ∼Pf ′ (·|s,a) [Vf (s′ )],
for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A. Denote f ∗ as the hypothesis concerning the true model M.

The definition of hypotheses class H over the value-based (see Definition 1) and the model-based
(see Definition 2) problems in AMDP is different from the episodic setting (Du et al., 2021; Zhong
et al., 2022). The most significant difference is that the Bellman equation has a different form. As
a result, in the value-based scenario, instead of using a single state-action value function Qf in
episodic setting, the paired hypothesis (Qf , Jf ) is introduced to fully capture the average-reward
structure. Besides, we retain the definition of hypothesis over model-based problems, augmenting it
with an additional average-reward term Jf induced from (Pf , rf ). Since we do not impose any spe-
cific structural form to the hypothesis class, we stay in the realm of general function approximation.
As function approximation is challenging without further assumptions (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016),
we introduce the realizability assumption, which is widely adopted in literatures (Jin et al., 2021).


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 2 (Realizablity). We assume that f ∗ ∈ H.

Moreover, we establish the fundamental distribution families over the state-action pair upon which
the metric is built. Considering the learning goal defined over the empirical regret, throughout the
paper we focus on the point-wise distribution family D∆ = {δs,a (·)|(s, a) ∈ S ×A}, which includes
collections of Dirac probability measure over S × A. Discussions are deferred to Appendix A.

3.1   AVERAGE -R EWARD G ENERALIZED E LUDER C OEFFICIENTS

In this subsection, we are going to introduce a novel metric — average-reward generalized eluder
coefficients (AGEC), to capture the complexity of hypothesis class H for AMDP. Extended from
the generalized Eluder coefficients (GEC; Zhong et al., 2022) for finite-horizon MDPs, AGEC is a
variant to fit the infinite-horizon learning with average reward, and imposes an additional structural
constraint—transferability, motivated by Eluder condition (EC; Xiong et al., 2023) and proved mild
in Section 3.2, to ensure the tractability of the problems.
Definition 3 (AGEC). Given hypothesis class H, discrepancy function set {lf }f ∈H and constant 󰂃 >
0, the average-reward generalized eluder coefficients AGEC(H, {lf }, 󰂃) is defined as the smallest
coefficients κG and dG , such that following two conditions hold with absolute constants C1 , C2 > 0:

  (i) (Bellman dominance) There exists constant dG > 0 such that
      󰁛T                    󰀗 󰁛    T 󰁛t−1                               󰀘1/2
          E(ft )(st , at ) ≤ dG ·         󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22      + C1 · sp(V ∗ ) min{dG , T } + T 󰂃 .
      t=1                         t=1 i=1
                                                                               󰁿              󰁾󰁽              󰂀
      󰁿      󰁾󰁽         󰂀             󰁿            󰁾󰁽                󰂀                  Burn-in cost
        Bellman error                  In-sample training error

  (ii) (Transferability) There exists constant κG > 0 such that for hypotheses f1 , . . . , fT ∈ H, if
       󰁓t−1
         i=1 󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2 ≤ β holds for all t ∈ [T ], then we have
                                        2

             T
             󰁛                            2
                 󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂2 ≤ κG · β log T + C2 · sp(V ∗ )2 min{κG , T } + 2T 󰂃2 .
             t=1
                                                               󰁿               󰁾󰁽                󰂀
             󰁿            󰁾󰁽                󰂀                             Burn-in cost
             Out-sample training error

In the definition above, ζi is a subset of trajectory with varying meaning concerning the specific
choice of discrepancy function, and the expectation is taken over it; C1 , C2 are absolute constants
related to span sp(V ∗ ). To simplify the notation, we denote E(ft )(s, a) := E(Qft , Jft )(s, a) for all
(s, a) ∈ S × A. Besides, the Burn-in cost is taken at the worst case and it varies across different
settings but usually non-dominating. The intuition behind the metric is that, on average, if hypothe-
ses have small in-sample training error on the well-explored dataset, then the prediction error on a
different trajectory is expected to maintain a consistently low level (Zhong et al., 2022). In specific,
the dominance coefficient dG encapsulates the challenge inherent in assessing the performance of
prediction, specifically the Bellman error, given the consistently controlled in-sample training error
within the designated function class H. Moreover, due to the unique challenge of infinite-horizon
average-reward setting, we introduce the transferability coefficient κG to quantify the transferability
from the in-sample training error to the out-of-sample ones. Despite this additional structural con-
dition, we can verify that nearly all tractable AMDPs admit a low AGEC value (see Section 3.2).
Moreover, in Section 5, we will demonstrate the importance of such additional structural conditions
for achieving sample efficiency in AMDPs from the theoretical perspective.
Moreover, to facilitate further theoretical analysis, we make further assumptions on the discrepancy
function and hypothesis class as Chen et al. (2022b); Zhong et al. (2022).
Assumption 3 (Boundedness). Given any f ∈ H, it holds that 󰀂lf 󰀂∞ ≤ Cℓ · sp(V ∗ ) with Cℓ > 0.

The boundedness assumption is reasonable and uniformly satisfied, as in most cases, it takes the
Bellman discrepancy, defined as: for all ζt = {st , at , rt , st+1 } ∈ S × A × R × S, we have
                        lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) = Qg (st , at ) − r(st , at ) − Vf (st+1 ) + Jg ,                     (3.1)
                                                                                               󰀃           󰀄
or other natural derivatives, so that the discrepancy is generally upper bounded by O sp(V ) .         ∗



                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 4 (Generalized completeness). Let G be an auxiliary function class and there exists a
functional operator P : H 󰀁→ G, we say that H satisfies generalized completeness in G concerning
discrepancy function lf ′ if for any (f, g) ∈ H × (H ∪ G), it holds that
                                                                   󰀅              󰀆
                           lf ′ (f, g, ζ) − lf ′ (f, P(f ), ζ) = Eζ lf ′ (f, g, ζ) ,        (3.2)
where the expectation is taken over trajectory ζ. Besides, the operator satisfies that P(f ∗ ) = f ∗ .
The completeness assumption is an extension of the Bellman completeness for value-based hypoth-
esis (Jin et al., 2021), incorporating the notion of the decomposition loss function (DLF) property
proposed in Chen et al. (2022b). Our assumption diverges from the one posited in Zhong et al.
(2022), where an auxiliary function class P(H) ⊆ G is introduced to enrich choices, accompanied
with modifications tailored to accommodate the nuances of the average-reward setting.
Example 1 (Bellman completeness ⊆ Generalized completeness). Let the discrepancy function be
the Bellman discrepancy in (3.1) with ζt = {st , at , rt , st+1 }, and takes the (hypothesis-scheme)
Bellman operator, defined as T (f ) = {TJf (Qf ), Jf } for all f ∈ H, modified from (2.2). Then,
         lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) − lf ′ (f, T (f ), ζt ) = Qg (st , at ) − TJf Qf (st , at )
                                                                󰀅         󰀆           󰀅             󰀆
                          = Qg (st , at ) − r(st , at ) + Eζt Vf (st+1 ) + Jf = Eζt lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) ,
where the expectation is taken over the transition state st+1 from P(·|st , at ).
The preceding example illustrates that the Bellman discrepancy, a frequently employed discrepancy
function across problems, satisfies both assumptions. More examples and choices of the discrepancy
function for MLE-based algorithms are respectively provided in Appendix B and C.

3.2   R ELATION WITH T RACTABLE C OMPLEXITY M ETRIC

To bridge the gap between concrete function approximation instances and the relatively abstract
measure AGEC, this section introduces two intermediate metrics: the Eluder dimension (Russo &
Van Roy, 2013) and the Average-reward Bellman Eluder (ABE) dimension. In particular, Chen et al.
(2022a) employs the Eluder dimension to gauge the complexity of model-based hypothesis classes
for infinite-horizon learning. To provide an intuitive complexity of value-based hypothesis classes,
we additionally propose the ABE dimension, which is a generalization of the standard BE dimension
(Jin et al., 2021). These two metrics provide valuable insights into the nature of AGEC.

Eluder Dimension We start with point-wise 󰂃-independence notation (Russo & Van Roy, 2013).
Definition 4 (Point-wise 󰂃-independence). Let H be a function class defined on X and consider
sequence {z, x1 , . . . , xn } ∈ X .󰁳We say z is 󰂃-independent of {x1 , . . . , xn } with respect to H if
                                     󰁓n
there exists f, f ′ ∈ H such that      i=1 (f (xi ) − f (xi )) ≤ 󰂃, but |f (z) − f (z)| ≥ 󰂃.
                                                       ′      2                     ′


Based on 󰂃-independence, the Eluder dimension can be efficiently defined as below.
Definition 5 (Eluder dimension). Let H be a function class defined on X . The Eluder dimension
dimE (H, 󰂃) is the length of the longest sequence {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ X such that there exists 󰂃′ ≥ 󰂃
where xi is 󰂃′ -independent of {x1 , . . . , xi−1 } for all i ∈ [n].
The following lemma shows that a model-based hypothesis class with a low Eluder dimension has
low AGEC. Motivated by Ayoub et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2022a), we consider the Eluder dimension
over function class derived from the model-based hypotheses class H, defined as
                             󰀋              󰀃            󰀄                 󰀌
                     XH := Xf,f ′ (s, a) = rf + Pf ′ Vf (s, a) : f, f ′ ∈ H .
Note that Chen et al. (2022a) considered function class XH,V := {Pf V (s, a) : f ∈ P(H), V ∈ V},
where P(H) denotes the hypotheses class over the transition kernel and V denotes the hypotheses
class over the optimal bias function. We remark that definitions over function class based on (Pf , V )
with (f, V ) ∈ H × V and (Pf , rf ) with f ∈ H is almost equivalent and in this paper we focus on
XH under the latter framework, aligning with the model-based hypothesis (see Definition 2).
Lemma 1 (Low Eluder dim ⊆ Low AGEC). Consider the discrepancy function
                                      󰀃            󰀄
                    lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) = rg + Pg Vf ′ (st , at ) − r(st , at ) + Vf ′ (st+1 ),     (3.3)
with P(f ) = f ∗ , and the expectation is taken over st+1 from P(·|st , at ). Let dE = dimE (XH , 󰂃) be
the 󰂃-Eluder dimension defined over XH , then we have dG ≤ 2dE · log T and κG ≤ dE .


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Average-Reward Bellman Eluder (ABE) Dimension Before delving into details of the average-
reward BE (ABE) dimension, we start with two useful notations, distributional 󰂃-independence and
distributional Eluder (DE) dimension proposed by Jin et al. (2021), which is a generalization of
point-wise 󰂃-independence and Eluder dimension defined above (see Definitions 4 and 5).
Definition 6 (Distributional 󰂃-independence). Let H be a function class defined on X and sequence
{υ, µ1 , . . . , µn } be the probability measures over󰁳X . We say υ is 󰂃-independent of {µ1 , . . . , µn }
                                                       󰁓n
with respect to H if there exists f ∈ H such that         i=1 (Eµi [f ]) ≤ 󰂃, but |Eυ [f ]| ≥ 󰂃.
                                                                        2

Definition 7 (Distributional Eluder dimension). Let H be a function class defined on X and Γ be
a family of probability measures over X . The distributional Eluder dimension dimDE (H, Γ, 󰂃) is
the length of the longest sequence {ρ1 , . . . , ρn } ⊂ Γ such that there exists 󰂃′ ≥ 󰂃 where ρi is
󰂃′ -independent of the remaining distribution sequence {ρ1 , . . . , ρi−1 } for all i ∈ [n].

Now we are ready to introduce the average-reward Bellman Eluder (ABE) dimension. It is defined
as the distributional Eluder (DE) dimension of average-reward Bellman error in (2.3) over H.
Definition 8 (ABE dimension). Denote EH = {E(f )(s, a) : f ∈ H} be the collection of average-
reward Bellman errors defined over S × A. For any constant󰀃 󰂃 > 0, the
                                                                    󰀄 󰂃-ABE dimension of given
hypotheses class H is defined as dimABE (H, 󰂃) := dimDE EH , D∆ , 󰂃 .

The lemma below posits that the value-based hypothesis problem with a low ABE dimension shall
have a low AGEC in terms of the Bellman discrepancy.
Lemma 2 (Low ABE dim ⊆ Low AGEC). Consider the Bellman discrepancy function as defined
in (3.1) , and the expectation is taken over the transition state st+1 from P(·|st , at ). Let dABE =
dimABE (H, 󰂃), then we have dG ≤ 2dABE · log T and κG ≤ dABE .

The Eluder dimension and ABE dimension can capture numerous concrete problems, respectively
under model-based and value-based scenarios. Specifically, the Eluder dimension incorporates rich
model-based problems like linear mixture AMDPs (Wu et al., 2022), and the ABE dimension can
characterize tabular AMDPs (Jaksch et al., 2010), linear AMDPs (Wei et al., 2021), AMDPs with
Bellman Completeness, generalized linear AMDPs, and kernel AMDPs, where the latter three prob-
lems are newly proposed for AMDPs. Details about the concrete examples are deferred to Appendix
C. Combining these facts and Lemmas 1 and 2, we can conclude that AGEC serves as a unified
complexity measure, as it encompasses all of these tractable AMDP models illustrated above.

4    L OCAL - FITTED O PTIMIZATION WITH O PTIMISM
To solve AMDPs with low AGEC value (see Definition 3), we propose the algorithm Local-fitted
Optimization with OPtimism (L OOP), whose pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1. At a high level,
L OOP is a modified version of the classical fitted Q-iteration (Szepesvári, 2010) with optimistic
planning and lazy policy updates. That is, the policies are only updated when a certain criterion is
met (Line 2). When this is the case, L OOP performs three main steps:

- Optimistic planning (Line 4.1): Compute the most optimistic ft ∈ H within Bt that maximizes
  the corresponding average-reward Jt by solving a constrained optimization problem.
- Construct confidence set (Line 4.2): Construct the confidence set Bt for optimization using Dt−1 ,
  where all ft ∈ H satisfying LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ β is included. Here, β > 0
  defines the radius, corresponding to the log covering number of the hypothesis class H.
- Execute Policy and Update Υt (Line 8-10): Choose the greedy policy πt = πft as the exploration
  policy. Execute policy, collect data, and update trigger Υt = LDt (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt (ft , g).

Note that both the confidence set Bt and the update condition Υt are constructed upon the (cumula-
tive) squared discrepancy, which is crucial to the algorithmic design. It takes the form
                                                                   󰁛
            LDt (f, f ) − inf LDt (f, g), where LDt (f, g) =               󰀂lfi (f, g, ζi )󰀂22 , (4.1)
                          g∈G
                                                                  (fi ,ζi )∈Dt

where fi and ζi = (si , ai , si+1 ) are drawn from Dt , and lf ′ (f, g, ζ) is the discrepancy function,
which varies across different RL problems. The sum of squared discrepancy serves as an empirical
estimation of the in-sample training error (see Definition 3). Besides, we highlight two key designs:


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Local-fitted Optimization with Optimism - L OOP(H, G, T, δ)
                                                                     󰀃               󰀄
Parameter: Initial s1 , span sp(V ∗ ), optimistic parameter β = c log T NH∪G
                                                                          2
                                                                             (1/T )/δ · sp(V ∗ )
Initialize: Draw a1 ∼ Unif(A) and set τ0 ← 0, Υ0 ← 0, B0 ← ∅, D0 ← ∅.
 1: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 2:      if t = 1 or Υt−1 ≥ 4β then
 3:           Set τt = t.
 4:           Solve optimization problem ft = argmaxft ∈Bt Jft , where
                               󰀝                                            󰀞
                           Bt = f ∈ H : LDt−1 (f, f ) − inf LDt−1 (f, g) ≤ β ,              (4.2)
                                                            g∈G

 5:         Compute Qt = Qft , Vt = Vft and Jt = Jft .
 6:     else
 7:         Retain (ft , Jt , Vt , Qt , τt ) = (ft−1 , Jt−1 , Vt−1 , Qt−1 , τt−1 ).
 8:     Take at = argmaxa∈A Qt (st , a).
 9:     Observe rt = r(st , at ) and transition state st+1 .
10:     Update Dt = Dt−1 ∪ {(st , at , rt , st+1 ; ft )} and Υt = LDt (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt (ft , g).


- Consistent control over discrepancy: The construction of confidence set Bt ensures that the
  cumulative squared discrepancy is controlled at level β in each step. To see this, suppose τt = t,
  i.e., policy switches at the t-th step, then (4.2) ensures that LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤
  β. Otherwise, it we do not switch policy at step t, then we must have Υt−1 = LDt−1 (ft , ft ) −
  inf g∈G LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ 4β, as hypothesis ft = ft−1 remains unchanged.
- Lazy policy update: The regret decomposition in (5.1) elucidates that each policy switch incurs
  an additional cost of |Vt+1 (st+1 ) − Vt (st+1 )| in regret at each step (see (5.3)). This underscores
  the necessity of implementing lazy updates to achieve sublinear regret. Within the L OOP frame-
  work, policy updates occur adaptively, triggered only when a substantial increase in cumulative
  discrepancy surpassing 3β has occurred since the last update. Intuitively, a policy switch occurs
  when there is a notable infusion of new information from newly collected data. Importantly, such
  gap is pivotal as it provides the theoretical foundation for the implementation of lazy updates,
  leveraging the problem’s transferability structure (see (ii), Definition 3). Here, L OOP employs a
  threshold of 4β, considering inherent uncertainty and estimation errors between the minimizer g
  and P(ft ), ensuring that the out-of-sample error will exceed β under the updating rule.

Similar to previous works in general function approximation (Jin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021), our
algorithm lacks a computationally efficient solution for constrained optimization problems. Instead,
our focus is on the sample efficiency, as guaranteed by the theorem below.
Theorem 3 (Regret). Under Assumptions 1-4, there exists constant c such that for any δ ∈ (0, 1)
and horizon T , with probability at least 1 − 5δ, the regret of L OOP satisfies that
                                                󰀓            󰁳 󰀔
                                  Reg(T ) ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) · d T β ,
                 󰀃                  󰀄                         √
where β = c log T NH∪G2
                          (1/T )/δ ·sp(V ∗ ) and d = max{ dG , κG }. Here, (dG , κG ) = AGEC(H,
         √
{lf }, 1/ T ) are AGEC defined in Definition 3, G is the auxiliary function class defined in Definition
4, and NH∪G (·) denotes the covering number as defined in Definition 17.

Theorem 3 asserts that both value-based
                                    √      and model-based problems with low AGEC are tractable.
Our algorithm L OOP achieves
                           √  a Õ(   T ) regret and the multiplicative factor depends on span sp(V ∗ ),
problem complexity max{ dG , κG } and the log covering number. The proof sketch is provided in
Section 5 and the detailed proof is deferred to Appendix D.

5     P ROOF OVERVIEW OF R EGRET A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the proof sketch of Theorem 3. In Section 4, we elucidated the construc-
tion of the confidence set and the circumstances in which updates are performed. Here, we delve
into the theoretical analysis to substantiate the necessity of such designs.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Optimism and Regret Decomposition In L OOP, we apply an optimization based method to en-
sure the optimism Jt ≥ J ∗ at each step t ∈ [T ]. Based on the optimistic algorithm, we propose a
new regret decomposition method motivated by the standard performance difference lemma (PDL)
in episodic setting (Jiang et al., 2017), following the form as below:
                           󰁛T                      T
                                                   󰁛
               Reg(T ) ≤        E(ft )(st , at ) +   Est+1 ∼P(·|st ,at ) [Vt (st+1 )] − Vt (st ) . (5.1)
                               t=1                        t=1
                               󰁿        󰁾󰁽       󰂀      󰁿                       󰁾󰁽                      󰂀
                                   Bellman error                         Realization error
Step 1: Bound over Bellman Error The control over the Bellman error is achieved through
the design of a confidence set and update condition that combinely controls the empirical squared
discrepancy. Note that the construction of the confidence set filters ft with a limited sum of empirical
squared discrepancy. Note that LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt−1 (ft , g) can be regarded as an empirical
overestimation of the squared discrepancy, controlled at O(β) regardless of updating. Then,
                                           t−1
                                           󰁛
                In-sample training error =      󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22 ≲ β ∀t ∈ [T ],      (5.2)
                                                    i=1
with high probability, and β is pre-determined optimistic parameter depends on horizon T and the
log ρ-covering number. Recall that the dominance coefficient dG regulates that Bellman error ≲
󰁫 󰁓       󰀓󰁓                                           󰀔󰁬1/2                                  󰁳
       T      t−1
 dG t=1       i=1 󰀂E  ζ i
                          [l f i
                                 (f t , f t , ζ i )]󰀂2
                                                     2       , thus we have Bellman error ≤ O( dG βT ).

Step 2: Bound over Realization error The realization error is small if the switching cost is low
as the concentration arguments indicated that with high probability it holds
                                                           󰀃         󰁳          󰀄
                 Realization error ≤ sp(V ∗ ) · N (T ) + O sp(V ∗ ) · T log(1/δ) ,          (5.3)
                                      󰁿      󰁾󰁽      󰂀 󰁿             󰁾󰁽         󰂀
                                      Switching cost       Azuma-Hoeffding term
where N (t) denote Switching cost defined as N (T ) = #{t ∈ [T ] : τt ∕= τt−1 }. Motivated by the
recent work of Xiong et al. (2023), the main idea of low-switching control is summarized below.
The key step is that the minimizer g is a good approximator of P(ft ) such that
                       0 ≤ LDt (ft , P(ft )) − inf LDt (ft , g) ≤ β, ∀t ∈ [T ]              (5.4)
                                                        g∈G
with high probability based on the minimization and the definition of optimistic parameter β. In the
following analysis, we assume that (5.4) holds. Suppose that an update occurs at step t + 1, then
it implies that LDt (ft , ft ) − inf g∈G LDt (ft , g) > 4β and the latest update at step τt ensures that
LDτt −1 (fτt , fτt ) − inf g∈G LDτt −1 (fτt , g) ≤ β. Combine (5.4) with the arguments above, we have
                             󰀃          󰀄                                             󰀃            󰀄
   (i). LDt (ft , ft ) − LDt ft , P(ft ) > 3β, (ii). LDτt −1 (fτt , fτt ) − LDτt −1 fτt , P(fτt ) ≤ β.
                                                                                                       (5.5)
Based on the concentration argument     󰁓t   and (i), (ii) in (5.5), the out-sample training error  between
two updates is lower bounded by i=τt 󰀂Eζi [lfi (fi , fi , ζi )]󰀂22 > β. Let b1 , . . . , bN (T )+1 be the
sequence of updated steps, take summation over the T steps and then we have
             N (T ) bu+1 −1                                     T
             󰁛      󰁛                                           󰁛
 N (T )β ≤                    󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂22 =         󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂22 ≤ O(κG ·β log T ), (5.6)
             u=1    t=bu                                        t=1
where the first inequality follows arguments above and the second is based   󰀃 󰀄 on the definition of
                                        󰁓t−1                            2
transferability (see Definition 3) given i=1 󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2 ≤ O β for
                                                                                󰀃 all t ∈ [T ]. Thus,
                                                                                                   󰀄
we have N (T ) ≤ O(κG log T ) and the Realization error is bounded by O κG · sp(V ) log T .∗

Please refer to Lemma 11 in Appendix D.4 for a formal statement and detailed techniques.

6    C ONCLUSION
This work studies the infinite-horizon average-reward MDPs under general function approximation.
To address the unique challenges of AMDPs, we introduce a new complexity metric — average-
reward generalized eluder coefficient (AGEC) and a unified algorithm named Local-fitted Opti-
mization with OPtimism (L OOP). We posit that our work paves the way for future work, including
developing more general frameworks for AMDPs and new algorithms with sharper regret bounds.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Peter Bartlett, Kush Bhatia, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellért
  Weisz. Politex: Regret bounds for policy iteration using expert prediction. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3692–3702. PMLR, 2019.
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638–1646. PMLR, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal, Yujia Jin, and Tong Zhang. Vo q l: Towards optimal regret in model-free rl with
  nonlinear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06069, 2022.
Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463–474. PMLR, 2020.
Yu Bai, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provably efficient q-learning with low
  switching cost. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Peter L Bartlett and Ambuj Tewari. Regal: A regularization based algorithm for reinforcement
  learning in weakly communicating mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.2661, 2012.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1283–1294. PMLR, 2020.
Xiaoyu Chen, Jiachen Hu, Chi Jin, Lihong Li, and Liwei Wang. Understanding domain randomiza-
  tion for sim-to-real transfer. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Zixiang Chen, Chris Junchi Li, Angela Yuan, Quanquan Gu, and Michael I Jordan. A general
  framework for sample-efficient function approximation in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.15634, 2022b.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P Hayes, and Sham M Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. 2008.
Christoph Dann, Mehryar Mohri, Tong Zhang, and Julian Zimmert. A provably efficient model-free
  posterior sampling method for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:12040–12051, 2021.
Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre Ménard, Matteo Pirotta, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko. A
 kernel-based approach to non-stationary reinforcement learning in metric spaces. In International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3538–3546. PMLR, 2021.
Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826–2836. PMLR, 2021.
Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.
Dylan J Foster, Noah Golowich, and Yanjun Han. Tight guarantees for interactive decision making
  with the decision-estimation coefficient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08215, 2023.
Ronan Fruit, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ronald Ortner. Efficient bias-span-constrained
  exploration-exploitation in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1578–1586. PMLR, 2018.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Botao Hao, Nevena Lazic, Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Pooria Joulani, and Csaba Szepesvári. Adaptive
  approximate policy iteration. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 523–531. PMLR, 2021.
Jiafan He, Heyang Zhao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement
   learning for linear markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06132, 2022.
Onésimo Hernández-Lerma. Adaptive Markov control processes, volume 79. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.
Jiachen Hu, Han Zhong, Chi Jin, and Liwei Wang. Provable sim-to-real transfer in continuous
   domain with partial observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15598, 2022.
Jiayi Huang, Han Zhong, Liwei Wang, and Lin F Yang. Tackling heavy-tailed rewards in rein-
   forcement learning with function approximation: Minimax optimal and instance-dependent regret
   bounds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06836, 2023.
Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(51):1563–1600, 2010.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406–13418, 2021.
Dingwen Kong, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ruosong Wang, and Lin F Yang. Online sub-sampling for
  reinforcement learning with general function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07203,
  2021.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Pac reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Nevena Lazic, Dong Yin, Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, and Csaba Szepesvari. Improved regret bound
  and experience replay in regularized policy iteration. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6032–6042. PMLR, 2021.
Xiang Li and Qiang Sun. Variance-aware robust reinforcement learning with linear function approx-
  imation with heavy-tailed rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05606, 2023.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5175–5220. PMLR, 2022.
Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle: A generic model-
  based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. In Proceedings of the 55th
  Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 363–376, 2023a.
Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Wei Xiong, Han Zhong, Hao Hu, Shenao Zhang, Sirui Zheng, Zhuoran Yang,
  and Zhaoran Wang. One objective to rule them all: A maximization objective fusing estimation
  and planning for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18258, 2023b.
Ronald Ortner. Regret bounds for reinforcement learning via markov chain concentration. Journal
  of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:115–128, 2020.
Yi Ouyang, Mukul Gagrani, Ashutosh Nayyar, and Rahul Jain. Learning unknown markov decision
  processes: A thompson sampling approach. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scott Proper and Prasad Tadepalli. Scaling model-based average-reward reinforcement learning for
  product delivery. In European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 735–742. Springer, 2006.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian pro-
  cess optimization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:0912.3995, 2009.
Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 rl in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898–2933. PMLR, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Csaba Szepesvári. Algorithms for reinforcement learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial intelli-
  gence and machine learning, 4(1):1–103, 2010.
Jinghan Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Lin F Yang. Near sample-optimal reduction-based policy learning
   for average reward mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00603, 2022.
Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123–6135, 2020.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in reinforcement
  learning with generalized linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04136, 2019.
Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, Hiteshi Sharma, and Rahul Jain. Model-
  free reinforcement learning in infinite-horizon average-reward markov decision processes. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 10170–10180. PMLR, 2020.
Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, and Rahul Jain. Learning infinite-horizon
  average-reward mdps with linear function approximation. In International Conference on Artifi-
  cial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3007–3015. PMLR, 2021.
Yue Wu, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly minimax optimal regret for learning infinite-
  horizon average-reward mdps with linear function approximation. In International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3883–3913. PMLR, 2022.
Nuoya Xiong, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. A general framework for sequential decision-
  making under adaptivity constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14468, 2023.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Sample-optimal parametric q-learning using linearly additive features.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6995–7004. PMLR, 2019.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020.
Zihan Zhang and Xiangyang Ji. Regret minimization for reinforcement learning by evaluating the
  optimal bias function. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Zihan Zhang and Qiaomin Xie. Sharper model-free reinforcement learning for average-reward
  markov decision processes. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  5476–5477. PMLR, 2023.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Almost optimal model-free reinforcement learningvia
  reference-advantage decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  15198–15207, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Heyang Zhao, Jiafan He, Dongruo Zhou, Tong Zhang, and Quanquan Gu. Variance-dependent regret
  bounds for linear bandits and reinforcement learning: Adaptivity and computational efficiency.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10371, 2023.
Han Zhong and Tong Zhang. A theoretical analysis of optimistic proximal policy optimization in
  linear markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08841, 2023.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  Gec: A unified framework for interactive decision making in mdp, pomdp, and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.01962, 2022.
Dongruo Zhou and Quanquan Gu. Computationally efficient horizon-free reinforcement learning
  for linear mixture mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11507, 2022.
Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvari. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learn-
  ing for linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4532–
  4576. PMLR, 2021a.
Dongruo Zhou, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning for dis-
  counted mdps with feature mapping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12793–12802. PMLR, 2021b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    BACKGROUNDS AND T ECHNICAL N OVELTIES

Notations. For any integer n ∈ N+ , we take the convention to use [n] = {1, . . . , n}. Consider
two non-negative sequences {an }n≥0 and {bn }n≥0 , if lim sup an /bn < ∞, then we write it as
an = O(bn ). Else if lim sup an /bn = 0, then we write it as an = o(bn ). And we use Õ to omit the
logarithmic terms. Denote ∆(X ) be the probability simplex over the set X . Denote by supx |v(x)|
the supremum norm of a given function. x ∧ y stands for min{x, y} and x ∨ y stands for max{x, y}.
Given any continuum S, let |S| be the cardinality. Given two distributions P, Q ∈ ∆(X ), the TV
distance of the two distributions is defined as TV(P, Q) = 12 Ex∼P [|dQ(x)/dP (x) − 1|].

Infinite-horizon Average-reward MDPs. Pioneering works by Auer et al. (2008) and Bartlett &
Tewari (2012) laid foundation for model-based algorithms operating within the online framework
with sub-linear regret. In recent years, the pursuit of improved regret guarantees has led to the
emergence of a multitude of new algorithms. In tabular case, these advancements include numerous
model-based approaches (Ouyang et al., 2017; Fruit et al., 2018; Zhang & Ji, 2019; Ortner, 2020) and
model-free algorithms (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2021; Lazic et al.,
2021; Zhang & Xie, 2023). In the context of function approximation, P OLITEX (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2019), a variant of the regularized policy iteration, is the first model-free algorithm with
                                                         3
linear value-function approximation, and achieves Õ(T 4 ) regret for the ergodic MDP. The work by
                                                                                 2
Hao et al. (2021) followed the same setting and improved the results to Õ(T 3 ) with an adaptive
approximate policy iteration (A API) algorithm. Wei et al. (2021) proposed an optimistic√Q-learning
algorithm F OPO for the linear function approximation, and achieve a near-optimal Õ( T ) regret.
On another line of research, Wu et al. (2022) delved into the linear function approximation under
the framework of linear mixture model, which is mutually uncoverable concerning linear MDPs
(Wei et al., 2021), and proposed U CRL 2-V TR based on the value-targeted regression (Ayoub et al.,
2020). Recent work of Chen et al. (2022a) expanded the scope of research by addressing the general
function approximation problem in average-reward RL and proposed the S IM - TO -R EAL algorithm,
which can be regarded as an extension to U CRL 2-V TR. In comparison to the works mentioned, our
algorithm, L OOP, not only addresses all the problems examined in those studies but also extends its
applicability to newly identified models. See Table 1 for a summary.

Function Approximation in Finite-horizon MDPs. In the pursuit of developing sample-efficient
algorithms capable of handling large state spaces, extensive research efforts have converged on the
linear function approximation problems within the finite-horizon setting. See Yang & Wang (2019);
Wang et al. (2019); Jin et al. (2020); Ayoub et al. (2020); Cai et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2021a;b);
Zhou & Gu (2022); Agarwal et al. (2022); He et al. (2022); Zhong & Zhang (2023); Zhao et al.
(2023); Huang et al. (2023); Li & Sun (2023) and references therein. Furthermore, Wang et al.
(2020) studied RL with general function approximation and adopted the eluder dimension (Russo &
Van Roy, 2013) as a complexity measure. Before this, Jiang et al. (2017) considered a substantial
subset of problems with low Bellman ranks. Building upon these foundations, Jin et al. (2021)
combined both the Eluder dimension and Bellman error, thereby broadening the scope of solvable
problems under the concept of the Bellman Eluder (BE) dimension. In a parallel line of research, Sun
et al. (2019) proposed the witness ranking focusing on the low-rank structures, and Du et al. (2021)
extended it to encompass more scenarios with the bilinear class. Besides, Foster et al. (2021; 2023)
provided a unified framework, decision estimation coefficient, for interactive decision making. The
work of Chen et al. (2022b) extended the value-based G OLF (Jin et al., 2021) with the introduction
of the discrepancy loss function to handle the broader admissible Bellman characterization (ABC)
class. More recently, Zhong et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2023b) proposed a unified framework measured
by generalized eluder coefficient (GEC), an extension to Dann et al. (2021) that captures almost
all known tractable problems. All these works are restricted to the finite-horizon regime, and their
complexity measure and algorithms are not applicable in the infinite-horizon average-reward setting.

Low-Switching Cost Algorithms. Addressing low-switching cost problems in bandit and rein-
forcement learning has seen notable progress. Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011) first proposed an algo-
rithm for linear bandits with O(log T ) switching cost. Subsequent research extended this to tabular
MDPs, including works of Bai et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020). A significant stride was made
by Kong et al. (2021), who introduced importance scores to handle low-switching cost scenarios in
general function approximation with complexity measured by eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy,


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2013). Recently, Xiong et al. (2023) introduced the eluder condition (EC) class, offering a com-
prehensive framework to address all tractable low-switching cost problems above. In the context of
average-reward RL, Wei et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022a); Hu et al. (2022) de-
veloped low-switching algorithms to control the regret under linear structure or model-based class,
leaving a unifying framework for both value-based and model-based problems an open problem.

Further Elaboration on Our Contributions and Technical Novelties. Compared to episodic
MDPs or discounted MDPs, AMDPs present unique challenges that prevent a straightforward exten-
sion of existing algorithms and analyses from these well-studied domains. One notable distinction
is a different regret notion in average-reward RL due to a different form of the Bellman optimality
equation. Furthermore, such a difference is coupled with the challenge of exploration in the context
of general function approximation. To effectively bound this regret, we introduce a new regret de-
composition approach within the context of general function approximation (refer to (5.1) and (5.3)).
This regret decomposition suggests that the total regret can be controlled by the cumulative Bellman
error and the switching cost. Inspired by this, we propose an optimistic algorithm with lazy updates
in the general function approximation setting, which uses the residue of the loss function as the in-
dicator for deciding when to conduct policy updates. Such a lazy policy update scheme adaptively
divides the total of T steps into O(log T ) epochs, which is significantly different from (OLSVI.FH;
Wei et al., 2021) that reduces the infinite-horizon setting to the finite-horizon setting by splitting
                                                                                               √       the
whole learning procedure into several H-length epoch, where H typically chosen as Θ( T ) (Wei
et al., 2021). We remark that such an√adaptive lazy updating design and corresponding analysis
are pivotal in achieving the optimal Õ( T ) rate, as opposed to the Õ(T 3/4 ) regret in (OLSVI.FH;
Wei et al., 2021). Moreover, our approach is an extension to the existing lazy update approaches
for average-reward setting (Wei et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022) that leverages the postulated linear
structure and is not applicable to problems with general function approximation. Furthermore, to
accommodate the average-reward term, we introduce a new complexity measure AGEC, which char-
acterizes the exploration challenge in general function approximation. Compared with Zhong et al.
(2022), our additional transferability restriction is tailored for the infinite-horizon setting and plays
a crucial role in analyzing the low-switching error. Despite this additional transferability restriction,
AGEC can still serve as a unifying complexity measure in the infinite-horizon average-reward set-
ting, like the role of GEC in the finite-horizon setting. Specifically, AGEC captures a rich class of
tractable AMDP models, including all previously recognized AMDPs, including all known tractable
AMDPs, and some newly identified AMDPs. See Table 1 for a summary.

Discussion about distribution families Beyond the singleton distribution family D∆ taken in this
paper, there exists a notable distribution family DH = {DH,t }t∈[T ] , proposed in Jin et al. (2021),
where DH,t characterizes probability measure over S × A obtained by executing different policies
induced by f1 , . . . , ft−1 ∈ H, measures the detailed distribution under sequential policies. However,
in this paper, we exclude the consideration of DH for two principal reasons. First, evaluations of
average-reward RL focus on the difference between observed rewards r(st , at ) and optimal average
reward J ∗ — as opposed to the expected value Vhπ (i.e expected sum of reward) under specific
policy and optimal value at step h ∈ [H] in episodic setting — rendering the introduction of DH
unnecessary. Second, in infinite settings, the measure of such distribution becomes highly intricate
and impractical given different policy induced by f1 , . . . , fT over a potentially infinite T -steps. As
a comparison, in the episode setting a fixed policy induced by ft is executed over a finite H-step.

B    A LTERNATIVE C HOICES OF D ISCREPANCY F UNCTION
Note that there is another line of research that addresses model-based problems using Maximum
Likelihood Estimator (MLE)-based approaches (Liu et al., 2023a; Zhong et al., 2022), as opposed
to the value-targeted regression with reward function known. We remark that these MLE-based ap-
proaches can be also incorporated within our framework through the use of the discrepancy function:
                                           1
                        lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) =   |Pg (st+1 |st , at )/Pf ∗ (st+1 |st , at ) − 1|,                (B.2)
                                           2
where the trajectory is ζt = (st , at , st+1 ) with expectation
                                                         󰀃             taken over the next 󰀄 transition state st+1
from P(·|st , at ) such that Eζt [lf ′ (f, g, ζt )] = TV Pf (·|st , at ), Pf ∗ (·|st , at ) . To accommodate the
discrepancy function in (B.2), we introduce a natural variant of AGEC defined below.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 MLE-based Local-fitted Optimization with Optimism - M LE -L OOP(H, T, δ)
                                                                     󰀃              󰀄
Parameter: Initial s1 , span sp(V ∗ ), optimistic parameter β = c log T NH (1/T )/δ
Initialize: Draw a1 ∼ Unif(A) and set τ0 ← 0, Υ0 ← 0, B0 ← ∅, D0 ← ∅.
 1: for t = 1, . . . , T do    √
 2:      if t = 1 or Υt−1 ≥ 3 βt then
 3:           Update τt = t.
 4:           Solve optimization problem ft = argmaxft ∈Bt Jft , where
                               󰀝                                            󰀞
                           Bt = f ∈ H : LDt−1 (f, f ) − inf LDt−1 (f, g) ≤ β ,                             (B.1)
                                                                    g∈G

 5:           Update Qt = Qft , Vt = Vft , Jt = Jft and gt = inf LDt−1 (ft , g).
                                                                          g∈G
 6:     else
 7:         Retain (ft , gt , Jt , Vt , Qt , τt ) = (ft−1 , gt−1 , Jt−1 , Vt−1 , Qt−1 , τt−1 ).
 8:     Execute at = argmaxa∈A Qt (st , a).
 9:     Collect reward rt = r(st , at ) and transition state󰁓       st+1 .        󰀃             󰀄
10:     Update Dt = Dt−1 ∪ {(st , at , rt , st+1 )}, Υt = s,a∈Dt TV Pft (·|s, a), Pgt (·|s, a) .


Definition 9 (MLE-AGEC). Given hypothesis class H, the MLE-discrepancy function {lf }f ∈H
in (B.2) and constant 󰂃 > 0, the MLE-based average-reward generalized eluder coefficients
MLE-AGEC(H, {lf }, 󰂃) is defined as the smallest coefficients κG and dG such that following two
conditions hold with absolute constants C1 > 0:

  (i) (MLE-Bellman dominance) There exists constant dG > 0 such that
                           T
                           󰁛                                        T
                                                                    󰁛
                                 E(ft )(st , at ) ≤ dG · sp(V ∗ )         󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂1 .
                           t=1                                      t=1


  (ii) (MLE-Transferability) There exists constant κG > 0 such that for hypotheses f1 , . . . , fT ∈ H,
                       󰁓t−1                               √
       if it holds that i=1 󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂1 ≤ βt for all t ∈ [T ], then we have
        T
        󰁛                                                   󰁳
              󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂1 ≤ poly(log T )    κG · βT + C1 · sp(V ∗ )2 min{κG , T } + 2T 󰂃2 .
        t=1


The main difference between the MLE-based variant (see Definition 9) and the original AGEC (see
Definition 3) is that the coefficients are defined over the ℓ1 -norm rather than the ℓ2 -norm, and a
similar condition is considered in Liu et al. (2023a); Xiong et al. (2023). Now, we are ready to
introduce the algorithm for the alternative discrepancy function in (B.2) and please see Algorithm
2 for complete pseudocode. The main modification lies in the construction of confidence set and
update condition Υt . Here, the confidence set now follows
                                                                               󰁛
Bt = {ft ∈ H : LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ β}, LD (f, g) = −             log Pg (s′ |s, a).
                                       g∈G
                                                                                             (s,a,s′ )∈D
                                                                  󰁓  󰀃                      󰀄
In comparison, the update condition follows that Υt = (s,a)∈Dt TV Pft (·|s, a), Pgt (·|s, a) . Un-
like the standard L OOP algorithm, the the confidence set and update condition in the MLE-based
varint no longer shares the same construction. Following the literature of MLE-based algorithms,
we adopt the bracket number to approximation the cardinality of the function class.
Definition 10 (ρ-bracket). Let ρ > 0 and F is a set of functions defined over X . Under ℓ1 -norm, a
set of functions Vρ (F) is an ρ-bracket of F if for any f ∈ F, there exists a function f ′ ∈ F such
that the following two properties hold: (i) f ′ (x) ≥ f (x) for all x ∈ X , and (ii) 󰀂f − f ′ 󰀂1 ≤ ρ. The
bracketing number BF (ρ) is the cardinality of the smallest ρ-bracket needed to cover F.

The theoretical guarantee is provided below.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4 (Cumulative regret). Under Assumptions 1-2 and the discepancy function in (B.2) with
self-completeness such that G = H, there exists constant c such that for any δ ∈ (0, 1) and time
horizon T , with probability at least 1 − 4δ, the regret of M LE -L OOP satisfies that
                                                 󰀓           󰁳 󰀔
                                   Reg(T ) ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) · d T β ,
               󰀃             󰀄                  √
where β = c log T BH (1/T )/δ · sp(V ∗ ), d = dG κG . Here, (dG , κG ) = MLE-AGEC(H, {lf },
  √
1/ T ) denote MLE-AGEC defined in Definition 9 and BH (·) denotes the bracketing number.

The proof of Theorem 4 is similar to that of Theorem 3, and can be found in Appendix H.1.

C     C ONCRETE E XAMPLES
In this section, we present concrete examples of problems for AMDP. We remark that the under-
standing of function approximation problems under the average-reward setting is quite limited, and
to our best knowledge, existing works have primarily focused on linear approximation (Wei et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2022) and model-based general function approximation (Chen et al., 2022a). Here,
we introduce a variety of function classes with low AGEC. Beyond the examples considered in exist-
ing work, these newly proposed function classes are mostly natural extensions from their counterpart
the finite-horizon episode setting (Jin et al., 2020; Zanette et al., 2020; Du et al., 2021; Domingues
et al., 2021), which can be extended to the average-reward problems with moderate justifications.

C.1   L INEAR F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION AND VARIANTS

Linear function approximation Consider the linear FA, which encompasses a wide range of con-
crete problems with state-action bias function linear in a d-dimensional feature mapping. Specif-
ically, a √  linear function class H is defined as H = {Q(·,  √ ·) = 〈ω, φ(·, ·)〉, J ∈ JH |󰀂ω󰀂2 ≤
1
2 sp(V   ∗
           )   d}, where  the feature satisfies that 󰀂φ󰀂2,∞ ≤  2 with first coordinate fixed to 1. We
remark that such scaling is without loss of generality as justified in Lemma 19. To begin with, we
first introduce two specific problems: linear AMDP and AMDP with linear Bellman completion.
Definition 11 (Linear AMDP, Wei et al. (2021)). There󰀃 exists a known
                                                                   󰀄 feature mapping φ : S ×A 󰀁→
Rd , an unknown d-dimensional signed measures µ = µ1 , . . . , µd over S, and an unknown reward
parameter θ ∈ Rd , such that the transition kernel the reward function can be written as
                        P(·|s, a) = 〈φ(s, a), µ(·)〉,   r(s, a) = 〈φ(s, a), θ〉.                  (C.1)
for all (s, a)√∈ S ×A. Without loss of generality, we assume
                                                          √ that the feature mapping
                                                                              √      φ satisfies that
󰀂φ󰀂2,∞ 󰀃≤ 2 with first coordinate
                             󰀄        fixed to
                                             󰁕 1, 󰀂θ󰀂2 ≤   d and 󰀂µ(S)󰀂  2 ≤    d, where we denote
µ(S) = µ1 (S), . . . , µd (S) and µi (S) = S dµi (s) be the total measure of S.

We remark that the scaling on the feature mapping can help in overcoming the gap between the
episodic setting and the average-reward one by ensuring the linear structure of Q- and V-value func-
tion under optimality (Wei et al., 2021). To illustrate the necessity, note that
                                                                 󰀕               󰁝                 󰀖
   Q∗ (s, a) = r(s, a) + Es′ ∼P(s,a) [V ∗ (s′ )] − J ∗ = φ(s, a)⊤ θ − J ∗ e1 +     V ∗ (s′ )dµ(s′ ) ,
                                                                                 S

where denote e1 = (1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rd . Next, we provide the AMDPs with linear Bellman comple-
tion, modified from Zanette et al. (2020), which is a more general setting than linear AMDPs.
Definition 12 (Linear Bellman completion). There exists a known feature mapping φ : S ×A 󰀁→ Rd
such that for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, ω ∈ WH and J ∈ JH , we have
                                                             󰀗    󰁱                󰁲󰀘
                                                                      ⊤     ′ ′
               〈T (ω, J), φ(s, a)〉 := r(s, a) + Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) max
                                                               ′
                                                                    ω   φ(s  , a )    − J, (C.2)
                                                             a ∈A


Generalized linear function approximation To introduce the nonlinearity beyond linear FA, we
extend by incorporating a link function. In generalized linear FA, the hypotheses class is defined as


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   󰀃        󰀄                    √
H = {Q(·, ·) = σ ω ⊤ φ(·, ·) , J ∈ JH |󰀂ω󰀂2 ≤ d}, where 󰀂φ(s, a)󰀂2,∞ ≤ 1 and σ : R 󰀁→ R is
an α-bi-Lipschitz function with 󰀂σ󰀂∞ ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ). We say σ is α-bi-Lipschitz continuous if
                    1
                      · |x − x′ | ≤ |σ(x) − σ(x′ )| ≤ α · |x − x′ |, ∀x, x′ ∈ R.              (C.3)
                   α
We remark that the generalized linear function class H degenerates to the standard linear function
class H if we choose σ(x) = x. Modified from Wang et al. (2019) for the episodic setting, we define
AMDPs with generalized linear Bellman completion as follows.
Definition 13 (Generalized linear Bellman completion). There exists a known feature mapping
φ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd such that for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, ω ∈ WH and J ∈ JH , we have
                                                          󰀗                           󰀘
             󰀃                󰀄                                 󰀋 󰀃 ⊤              󰀄󰀌
           σ T (ω, J)⊤ φ(·, ·) := r(s, a) + Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) max′
                                                                   σ ω φ(s  ′ ′
                                                                             , a )      − J.  (C.4)
                                                             a ∈A


The proposition below states that (generalized) linear function classes have low AGEC.
Proposition 5 (Linear FA ⊂ Low AGEC). Consider linear function class HLin and generalized linear
function class HGlin with a d-dimensional feature mapping φ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd , if the problem follows
one of Definitions 11-13, then it have low AGEC under Bellman discrepancy in (3.1):
                     󰀃     󰀃        √      󰀄      󰀄            󰀃      󰀃        √    󰀄󰀄
            dG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) d󰂃−1 log T , κG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) d󰂃−1 .

Linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDP Moreover, we consider the linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs, which is modified from
the one in Du et al. (2021) under the episodic setting.
Definition 14 (Linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDP). There exists known feature mappings φ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd1 ,
ψ : S 󰀁→ Rd2 , and unknown vectors ω ∗ ∈ Rd1 , θ∗ ∈ Rd2 such that optimal value functions follow
                        Q∗ (s, a) = 〈φ(s, a), ω ∗ 〉,   V ∗ (s′ ) = 〈ψ(s′ ), θ∗ 〉,
                                                                                             √
for all (s, a,√s′ ) ∈ S × A × S. Without loss of generality, we assume that features 󰀂φ󰀂2,∞ ≤ 2 and
                                                                         √                      √
󰀂ψ󰀂2,∞ ≤ 2 with first coordinate fixed to 1, and 󰀂ω ∗ 󰀂2 ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ) d1 , 󰀂θ∗ 󰀂2 ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ) d2 .

The proposition below states that linear Q∗ /V ∗ also has low AGEC.
Proposition 6 (Linear Q∗ /V ∗ ⊂ Low AGEC). Linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs with coupled (d1 , d2 )-
dimensional feature mappings φ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd1 and ψ : S 󰀁→ Rd2 have low AGEC such that
                󰀃       󰀃         √       󰀄       󰀄            󰀃    󰀃    √      󰀄󰀄
        dG ≤ O d+ log sp(V ∗ ) d+ 󰂃−1 log T , κG ≤ O d+ log sp(V ∗ ) d+ 󰂃−1 ,
where denote d+ = d1 + d2 as the sum of dimensions of features.

The proposition above asserts that in linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs, with additional structural information
in state bias function, add Õ(d2 ) in complexity from the AGEC perspective. We remark that linear
FA, generalized linear FA, and linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs are typical value-based problems. The proof
of this proposition relies on ABE dimension as an intermediate, and then uses Lemma 2.

C.2   K ERNEL F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION

In this subsection, we first introduce the notion of effective dimension. With this notion, we
prove a useful proposition that any kernel function class with a low effective dimension has
low AGEC. Consider kernel FA, a natural extension to linear FA from d-dimensional Euclidean
space Rd to
          󰀋 a decomposable kernel Hilbert space K. Formally, a kernel󰀌      function class is defined
as H = Q(·, ·) = 〈φ(·, ·), ω〉K , J ∈ JH | 󰀂ω󰀂K ≤ sp(V ∗ )R , where the feature mapping
φ : S × A 󰀁→ K satisfies that 󰀂φ󰀂K,∞ ≤ 1. To measure the complexity of problems in a Hilbert
space K with a potentially infinite dimension, we introduce the 󰂃-effective dimension below.
Definition 15 (󰂃-effective dimension). Consider a set Z with the possibly infinite elements in a
given separable Hilbert space K, the 󰂃-effective dimension, denoted by dimeﬀ (Z, 󰂃), is defined as
the length n of the longest sequence satisfying the condition below:
                                       󰀫                                 󰀬
                                         1        󰀓    1 󰁛
                                                          n        󰀔 1
                                                                 ⊤
                              sup          log det I + 2     zi zi ≤       .
                         z1 ,...,zn ∈Z   n            󰂃 t=1            e


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, the concept of 󰂃-effective dimension is inspired by the measurement of maximum information
gain (Srinivas et al., 2009) and is later introduced as a complexity measure of Hilbert space in Du
et al. (2021); Zhong et al. (2022). Similar to Jin et al. (2021), we augment the assumption by
requiring the H to be self-complete under average-reward Bellman operator, i.e., G = H. Next, the
proposition below demonstrates that kernel FA has low AGEC.
Proposition 7 (Kernel FA ⊂ Low AGEC). Under the self-completeness, kernel FA with function
class HKer concerning a known feature mapping φ : S × A 󰀁→ K have low AGEC such that
                           󰀃                  󰀄                     󰀃               󰀄
              dG ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R log T, κG ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R ,
where denote X = {φ(s, a) : (s, a) ∈ S × A} as the collection of feature mappings.
The proposition above shows that the kernel FA with a low 󰂃-effective dimension over the Hilbert
space also has low AGEC. As a special case of kernel FA, if we choose K = Rd , then we can prove
that the RHS in the proposition above is upper bounded by Õ(d).

C.3    L INEAR M IXTURE AMDP

In this subsection, we focus on the average-reward linear mixture problem considered in Wu
et al. (2022). In this context, the hypotheses function class is defined as H = {P(s′ |s, a) =
〈θ, φ(s, a, s′ )〉,
r(s, a) = 〈θ, ψ(s, a)〉|󰀂θ󰀂2 ≤ 1} with known feature mappings φ : S × A × S 󰀁→ Rd ,
ψ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd , and an unknown parameter θ ∈ Rd . The problem is defined as below.
Definition 16 (Linear mixture AMDPs, Wu et al. (2022)). There exists a known feature mapping
φ : S × A × S 󰀁→ Rd , ψ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd , and an unknown vector θ ∈ Rd , it holds that
                          P(s′ |s, a) = 〈θ, φ(s, a, s′ )〉, r(s, a) = 〈θ, ψ(s, a)〉,
                                                                                   √       √
for all (s, a, s′ ) ∈ S × A × S. Without loss of generality, we assume 󰀂φ󰀂2,∞ ≤ d, 󰀂ψ󰀂2,∞ ≤ d.
Now we show that the linear mixture problem is tractable under the framework of AGEC.
Proposition 8 (Linear mixture ⊂ Low AGEC). Consider linear mixture problem with hypotheses
class H and d-dimensional feature mappings (φ, ψ). If we choose discrepancy function as
                           󰀕              󰁝                              󰀖
     lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) = θg⊤ ψ(st , at ) +   φ(st , at , s′ )Vf ′ (s′ )ds′ − r(st , at ) − Vf ′ (st+1 ), (C.5)
                                              S
and takes H = G with operator following P(f ) = f ∗ for all f ∈ H, it has low AGEC such that
                   󰀓     󰀓            √ 󰀔󰀔                 󰀓     󰀓           √ 󰀔󰀔
           dG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ )T / d󰂃 , κG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ )T / d󰂃 .
The proposition posits that AGEC can capture the linear mixture AMDP, based on a modified version
of the Bellman discrepancy function in (2.2). In contrast to the linear FA discussed in Appendix
C.1, the presence of the average-reward term in this model-based problem does not impose any
additional computational or statistical burden, and there is no need for structural assumptions on
feature mappings, such as a fixed first coordinate, considering discrepancy in (C.5).

D     P ROOF OF M AIN R ESULTS FOR L OOP

D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Proof of Theorem 3. Note that the regret can be decomposed as
                  󰁛T 󰀓                  󰀔 󰁛  T 󰀓                  󰀔
       Reg(T ) =       J ∗ − r(st , at ) ≤       Jt − r(st , at )                                          (optimism)
                       t=1                              t=1
                     T
                 (a) 󰁛
                                                  T
                                                  󰁛                        󰁫                                  󰁬
                  =          E(ft )(st , at ) −         Est+1 ∼P(·|st ,at ) Qt (st , at ) − max Qt (st+1 , a)
                                                                                           a∈A
                       t=1                        t=1
                       T
                       󰁛                          T 󰁫
                                                  󰁛                                                󰁬
                 (b)
                  =          E(ft )(st , at ) +         Est+1 ∼P(·|st ,at ) [Vt (st+1 )] − Vt (st ) ,             (D.1)
                       i=1                        t=1
                       󰁿        󰁾󰁽       󰂀        󰁿                       󰁾󰁽                      󰂀
                           Bellman error                           Realization error


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where step (a) and step (b) follow the definition of the Bellman optimality operator and the greedy
policy. Below, we will present the bound of Bellman error and Realization error respectively.


Step 1: Bound over Bellman error Recall that the of confidence set ensures that LDt−1 (ft , ft )
− inf g∈G LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ O(β) across all steps. Using the concentration arguments, we can infer
                                     t−1
                                     󰁛
                                            󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22 ≤ O(β),                   (D.2)
                                      i=1
with high probability and the formal statements are deferred to Lemma√       10 in Appendix D.3. In the
following arguments, we assume the above event holds. Take 󰂃 = 1/ T , recall the definition of
dominance coefficient dG in AGEC(H, J , l, 󰂃) and it directly indicates that
                                        󰀥                                    󰀦1/2
                 󰁛T                         T 󰁛
                                            󰁛 t−1                                    󰀓       󰁳      󰀔
                                                                           2
Bellman error =       E(ft )(st , at ) ≤ dG       󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζ)]󰀂2      +O sp(V ∗ ) dG T ,
                  t=1                              t=1 i=1
                                                    󰀓        󰁳     󰀔
and thus the Bellman error can be upper bounded by O sp(V ∗ ) dG βT .


Step 2: Bound over Realization error To bound Realization error, we use the concentration
argument and the upper-boundded switching cost. Note that
                      T
                  (c) 󰁛                                󰀃        󰁳          󰀄
Realization error =         [Vt (st+1 ) − Vt (st )] + O sp(V ∗ ) T log(1/δ) ,
                      t=1
                      T
                      󰁛                                              󰁳
                        󰀅                               󰀆   󰀃                   󰀄
                  =          Vτt (st+1 ) − Vτt+1 (st+1 ) + O sp(V ∗ ) T log(1/δ) ,              (Shift)
                      t=1
                      T
                      󰁛                                                             󰁳
                        󰀅                               󰀆                  󰀃                    󰀄
                  =          Vτt (st+1 ) − Vτt+1 (st+1 ) 1(τt ∕= τt+1 ) + O sp(V ∗ ) T log(1/δ)
                      t=1
                                         󰀃        󰁳          󰀄 (d) 󰀃           󰁳          󰀄
                  ≤ sp(V ∗ ) · N (T ) + O sp(V ∗ ) T log(1/δ) ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) · κG T log(1/δ) ,
                                                                                      (D.3)
where step (c) directly follows the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality and step (d) is based the fact that
󰀂Vτt − Vτt+1 󰀂∞ ≤ sp(V ∗ ) and the bounded switching cost such that N (T ) ≤ O(κG log T ), where
                                                         √
κG is the transferability coefficient in AGEC with 󰂃 = 1/ T . Please refer to Lemma 11 in Appendix
D.4 for the detailed statement and proof of the bounded switching cost.

Step 3: Combine the bounded erroes Plugging (D.2) and (D.3) back into (D.1), we have
     Reg(T ) ≤ Bellman error + Realization error
                  󰀓        󰁳       󰀔      󰀃          󰁳             󰀄       󰀓             󰁳 󰀔
             ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) dG βT + O sp(V ∗ )κG T log(1/δ) = O sp(V ∗ ) · d T β ,
                 √                                                                √
where d = max{ dG , κG } is a function of (dG , κG ) = AGEC(H,󰀃     {lf }f ∈H , 1/ 󰀄 T ). In the argu-
ments above, the optimistic parameter is chosen as β = c log T NH∪G 2
                                                                         (1/T )/δ · sp(V ∗ ), which
takes the upper bound of the optimistic parameters, aligning with the choice in Lemma 9, Lemma
10, and Lemma 11. Then finish the proof of cumulative regret for L OOP in Algorithm 1.              󵀓

D.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 9

Lemma 9 (Optimism). Under Assumptions 1-4, L OOP is an optimistic algorithm such that it ensures
Jt ≥ J ∗ for all t ∈ [T ] with probability greater than 1 − δ.
Proof of Lemma 9. Denote Vρ (G) be the ρ-cover of G and NG (ρ) be the size of ρ-cover Vρ (G).
Consider fixed (i, g) ∈ [T ] × G and define the auxiliary function
                                                               2                        2
                            Xi,fi (g) := 󰀂lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi )󰀂2 − 󰀂lfi (f ∗ , f ∗ , ζi )󰀂2 ,         (D.4)


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where f ∗ is the optimal hypothesis in value-based problems and the true hypothesis in model-based
ones. Let Ft be the filtration induced by {s1 , a1 , . . . , st , at } and note that f1 , . . . , ft is fixed under
the filtration, then we have
E[Xi,fi (g)|Fi ] = Eζi [󰀂lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi )󰀂22 − 󰀂lfi (f ∗ , P(f ∗ ), ζi )󰀂22 |Fi ]
                       󰁫󰀅                                            󰀆 󰀅                                            󰀆󰀏󰀏 󰁬
                 = Eζi lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi ) − lfi (f ∗ , P(f ∗ ), ζi ) · lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi ) + lfi (f ∗ , P(f ∗ ), ζi ) 󰀏Fi
                       󰁫 󰀅                     󰀆 󰀅                                           󰀆󰀏󰀏 󰁬
                 = Eζi Eζi lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi ) · lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi ) + lfi (f ∗ , P(f ∗ ), ζi ) 󰀏Fi
                        󰀅                  󰀆
                 = 󰀂Eζi lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi ) 󰀂22 ,
where the equation follows the definition of generalized completeness (see Assumption 4):
                     󰀫
                       Eζi [lf ′ (f, g, ζ)] = lf ′ (f, g, ζ) − lf ′ (f, P(f ), ζ),
                                                    󰀅                                󰀆
                       Eζi [lf ′ (f, g, ζ)] = Eζi lf ′ (f, g, ζ) + lf ′ (f, P(f ), ζ) .
Similarly, we can obtain that the second moment of the auxiliary function is bounded by
                                           󰀓                                      󰀔
                                                                                2
                     E[Xi,fi (g)2 |Fi ] ≤ O sp(V ∗ )2 󰀂Eζi [lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi )]󰀂2 ,

By Freedman’s inequality (see Lemma 18), with probability greater than 1 − δ it holds that
               󰀏󰁛t              t
                                󰁛                             󰀏
               󰀏                                            2󰀏
               󰀏   X i,fi (g) −   󰀂Eζi [lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi )]󰀂2 󰀏
                 i=1               i=1
                       󰀳󰁹
                        󰁸                                                          󰀴
                        󰁸                     t
                                              󰁛
                   ≤ O 󰁃󰁷log(1/δ) · sp(V ∗ )2
                                                                        2
                                                󰀂Eζ [lf (f ∗ , g, ζi )]󰀂 + log(1/δ)󰁄 .
                                                                i   i              2
                                                        i=1
                                                                                      󰁓t
By taking union bound over [T ] × Vρ (G), for any (t, φ) ∈ [T ] × Vρ (G) we have − i=1 Xi,fi (φ) ≤
                                                                                              2
O(ζ), where ζ = sp(V ∗ ) log(T NG (ρ)/δ) and we use the fact that 󰀂Eζi [lfi (f ∗ , g, ζi )]󰀂2 is non-
negative. Recall the definition of ρ-cover, it ensures that for any g ∈ G, there exists φ ∈ V󰂃 (G) such
that 󰀂g(s, a) − φ(s, a)󰀂1 ≤ ρ for all (s, a) ∈ S × A. Therefore, for any g ∈ G we have
                                              t
                                              󰁛                  󰀓      󰀔
                                          −         Xi,fi (g) ≤ O ζ + tρ .                                     (D.5)
                                              i=1

Combine the (D.5) above and the designed confidence set, then for all t ∈ [T ] it holds that
                                                                t−1
                                                                󰁛                     󰀓      󰀔
              LDt−1 (f ∗ , f ∗ ) − inf LDt−1 (f ∗ , g) = −              Xi,fi (g̃) ≤ O ζ + tρ < β,             (D.6)
                                    g∈G
                                                                i=1

where g̃ is the local minimizer to LD󰀃t−1 (f ∗ , g), and we󰀄 take the covering coefficient as ρ = 1/T
and optimistic parameter as β = c log T NH∪G2
                                                  (1/T )/δ ·sp(V ∗ ). Based on (D.6), with probability
greater than 1 − δ, f is a candidate of the confidence set such that Jt ≥ J ∗ for all t ∈ [T ].
                      ∗
                                                                                                    󵀓

D.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 10
                                                            󰀃            󰀃            󰀄     󰀄
Lemma 10. For fixed ρ > 0 and the optimistic parameter β = c sp(V ∗ )·log T NH∪G
                                                                             2
                                                                                 (ρ)/δ +T ρ
where c > 0 is constant large enough, then it holds that
                                       t−1
                                       󰁛                            2
                                              Eζi 󰀂lfi (ft , ft , ζi )󰀂 ≤ O(β),                                (D.7)
                                       i=1

for all t ∈ [T ] with probability greater than 1 − δ.

Proof of Lemma 10. Denote Vρ (H) be the ρ-cover of H and NH (ρ) be the size of ρ-cover Vρ (H).
Consider fixed (i, f ) ∈ [T ] × H and define the auxiliary function
                                       󰀐 󰀃          󰀄󰀐2 󰀐 󰀃                󰀄󰀐2
                         Xi,fi (f ) := 󰀐lfi f, f, ζi 󰀐2 − 󰀐lfi f, P(f ), ζi 󰀐2 ,


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let Ft be the filtration induced by {s1 , a1 , . . . , st , at } and note that f1 , . . . , ft is fixed under the
filtration, then we have
                                              2                       2
   E[Xi,fi (f )|Fi ] = Eζi [󰀂lfi (f, f, ζi )󰀂2 − 󰀂lfi (f, P(f ), ζi )󰀂2 |Fi ]
                           󰁫󰀅                                    󰀆 󰀅                                     󰀆󰀏󰀏 󰁬
                     = Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) − lfi (f, P(f ), ζi ) · lfi (f, f, ζi ) + lfi (f, P(f ), ζi ) 󰀏Fi
                           󰀅               󰀆     󰀅                                    󰀏 󰀆
                     = Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) · Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) + lfi (f, P(f ), ζi )󰀏Fi
                       󰀐 󰀅                   󰀆󰀐2
                     = 󰀐Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) 󰀐2 ,
where the equation generalized completeness (see Lemma 9). Similarly, we can obtain that the
second moment of the auxiliary function is bounded by
                                                 󰀓            󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐2 󰀔
                       E[Xi,fi (f )2 |Fi ] ≤ O sp(V ∗ )2 󰀐Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) 󰀐 ,     2
By Freedman’s inequality in Lemma 18, with probability greater than 1 − δ we have
           󰀏󰁛 t               t
                              󰁛 󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐 󰀏
           󰀏                    󰀐Eζi lfi (f, f, ζi ) 󰀐2 󰀏󰀏
           󰀏     Xi,fi (f ) −                         2
                i=1               i=1
                      󰀳󰁹
                       󰁸                                                      󰀴
                       󰁸                     t
                                             󰁛 󰀐 󰀅               󰀆󰀐 2
                  ≤ O 󰁃󰁷log(1/δ) · sp(V ∗ )2   󰀐Eζ lf (f, f, ζi ) 󰀐 + log(1/δ)󰁄 .
                                                                  i   i           2
                                                      i=1

Define ζ = sp(V ∗ ) log(T NH (ρ)/δ), by taking a union bound over ρ-covering of hypothesis set H,
we can obtain that with probability greater than 1 − δ, for all (t, φ) ∈ [T ] × Vρ (H) we have
                     󰀏󰁛t               t
                                       󰁛       󰀅              󰀆 󰀏󰀏
                     󰀏
                     󰀏    X i,fi (φ) −    󰀂Eζi lfi (φ, φ, ζi ) 󰀂22 󰀏
                         i=1                  i=1
                               󰀳󰁹
                                󰁸                                             󰀴
                                󰁸              t
                                               󰁛     󰀅               󰀆
                           ≤ O 󰁃󰁷ζ · sp(V ∗ )2   󰀂Eζi lfi (φ, φ, ζi ) 󰀂22 + ζ 󰁄 .                         (D.8)
                                                      i=1

The following analysis assumes that the event above is true. Recall that the L OOP ensures that
               󰁛t−1               t−1
                                  󰁛                            t−1
                                                               󰁛
                                                           2
                                                                       󰀃               󰀄
                    Xi,fi (ft ) =     󰀂lfi (ft , ft , ζi )󰀂2 −     󰀂lfi ft , P(ft ), ζi 󰀂22 ,
                  i=1                 i=1                             i=1
                                      t−1
                                      󰁛                                t−1
                                                                       󰁛
                                            󰀐 󰀃              󰀄󰀐            󰀐 󰀃            󰀄󰀐
                                  ≤         󰀐lfi ft , ft , ζi 󰀐2 − inf     󰀐lfi ft , g, ζi 󰀐2 ,
                                                              2       g∈G                   2
                                      i=1                                   i=1
                                  = LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ O(β),                         (D.9)
                                                            g∈G
where the last inequality is based on the confidence set and the update condition combined. Note
that if the update is executed at time t, the confidence set ensures that
                                LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ β,
                                                      g∈G
within the update step t. Otherwise, if the update condition is not triggered, we have fτt = ft and
                          Υt−1 = LDt−1 (ft , ft ) − inf LDt−1 (ft , g) ≤ 4β.
                                                            g∈G
Recall that based on the definition of ρ-cover for any f ∈ H, there exists φ ∈ Vρ (H) such that
󰀂g(s, a) − φ(s, a)󰀂1 ≤ ρ for all (s, a) ∈ S × A, we have the in-sample training error is bounded by
   󰁛t−1                               t−1
                                      󰁛
        󰀐 󰀅                     󰀆󰀐        󰀐 󰀅                     󰀆󰀐
        󰀐Eζi lfi (ft , ft , ζi ) 󰀐2 ≤     󰀐Eζi lfi (φt , φt , ζi ) 󰀐2 + O(tρ),   (ρ-approximation)
                                   2                                 2
    i=1                                 i=1
                                      t−1
                                      󰁛
                                  =         Xi,fi (φt ) + O(tρ + ζ)                                     ( (D.8))
                                      i=1
                                      t−1
                                      󰁛
                                  =         Xi,fi (ft ) + O(tρ + ζ) ≤ O(T ρ + ζ + β) = O(β),             (D.10)
                                      i=1
                                                        󰀃             󰀃            󰀄     󰀄
where the last inequality follows (D.9), and takes β = c (sp(V ∗ ) log T NH∪G
                                                                          2
                                                                              (ρ)/δ + T ρ .                   󵀓


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 11

Lemma 11. Let N (T ) be the switching cost with time horizon T , defined as
                                 N (T ) = #{t ∈ [T ] : τt ∕= τt−1 }.
                                                        󰀃            󰀃             󰀄     󰀄
Given fixed ρ > 0 and the optimistic parameter β = c sp(V ∗ ) log T NH∪G  2
                                                                              (ρ)/δ + T ρ , where
c > 0 is large enough constant, then with probability greater than 1 − 2δ we have
                                            󰀃                     󰀄
                                 N (T ) ≤ O κG log T + β −1 T 󰂃2 ,
where κG is the transferability coefficient with respect to AGEC(H, {lf ′ }, 󰂃).

Proof of Lemma 11. Denote Vρ (H) be the ρ-cover of H and NH (ρ) be the size of ρ-cover Vρ (H).

Step 1: Bound the difference of discrepancy between the minimizer and P(f ).
Consider fixed tuple (i, f, g) ∈ [T ] × H × G and define auxiliary function as
                                        󰀐 󰀃         󰀄󰀐2 󰀐 󰀃                󰀄󰀐2
                       Xi,fi (f, g) := 󰀐lfi f, g, ζi 󰀐2 − 󰀐lfi f, P(f ), ζi 󰀐2

Let Ft be the filtration induced by {s1 , a1 , . . . , st , at } and note that f1 , . . . , ft is fixed under the
filtration, then we have
                             󰀐 󰀃           󰀄󰀐2 󰀐 󰀃                   󰀄󰀐2
  E[Xi,fi (f, g)|Fi ] = Eζi [󰀐lfi f, g, ζi 󰀐2 − 󰀐lfi f, P(f ), ζi 󰀐2 |Fi ]
                            󰁫󰀅                                    󰀆 󰀅                                     󰀆󰀏󰀏 󰁬
                      = Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) − lfi (f, P(f ), ζi ) · lfi (f, g, ζi ) + lfi (f, P(f ), ζi ) 󰀏Fi
                            󰀅              󰀆      󰀅                                    󰀏 󰀆
                      = Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) · Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) + lfi (f, P(f ), ζi )󰀏Fi
                        󰀐 󰀅                  󰀆󰀐2
                      = 󰀐Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) 󰀐2 ,
where the equation generalized completeness (see Lemma 9). Similarly, we can obtain that the
second moment of the auxiliary function is bounded by
                                            󰀓          󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐2 󰀔
                   E[Xi,fi (f, g)2 |Fi ] ≤ O sp(V ∗ )2 󰀐Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) 󰀐2 ,

By Freedman’s inequality in Lemma 18, with probability greater than 1 − δ
               󰀏󰁛t                t
                                  󰁛 󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐 󰀏
               󰀏                    󰀐Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) 󰀐2 󰀏󰀏
               󰀏   Xi,fi (f, g) −                         2
                 i=1                  i=1
                       󰀳󰁹
                        󰁸                                                         󰀴
                        󰁸                     t
                                              󰁛 󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐
                   ≤ O 󰁃󰁷log(1/δ) · sp(V ∗ )2   󰀐Eζi lfi (f, g, ζi ) 󰀐2 + log(1/δ)󰁄
                                                                                2
                                                     i=1

Define ζ = sp(V ∗ ) log(T NH∪G
                            2
                                (ρ)/δ), by taking a union bound over ρ-covering of hypothesis set
H × G, with probability greater than 1 − δ, for all (t, φ, ϕ) ∈ [T ] × Vρ (H) × Vρ (G) it holds
                       󰀏󰁛t                t
                                          󰁛 󰀐 󰀅                 󰀆󰀐 󰀏
                       󰀏                    󰀐Eζi lfi (φ, ψ, ζi ) 󰀐2 󰀏󰀏
                       󰀏   Xi,fi (φ, ψ) −                         2
                        i=1                   i=1
                              󰀳󰁹
                               󰁸                                         󰀴
                               󰁸              t
                                              󰁛 󰀐 󰀅               󰀆󰀐 2
                          ≤ O 󰁃󰁷ζ · sp(V ∗ )2   󰀐Eζ lf (φ, ψ, ζi ) 󰀐 + ζ 󰁄 ,
                                                             i   i             2
                                                                                                         (D.11)
                                                    i=1

                                                  󰀐 󰀅                󰀆󰀐2
where ζ = sp(V ∗ ) log(T NH∪G
                            2
                               (ρ)/δ). Note that 󰀐Eζi lfi (φ, ψ, ζi ) 󰀐2 is non-negative, then it
            󰁓t
holds that − i=1 Xi,fi (φ, ϕ) ≤ O(ζ) for all t ∈ [T ]. Based on (D.11) and the ρ-approximation,
we have
                           󰁛t                 󰀓        󰀔
                        −     Xi,fi (f, g) ≤ O ζ + tρ ,       ∀t ∈ [T ],
                                i=1


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for any (f, g) ∈ H × G. Recall that β = c log(T NH∪G
                                                 2
                                                     (ρ)/δ)sp(V ∗ ), for all t ∈ [T ] we have
                                                       t
                                                       󰁛                                        t
                                                                                                󰁛
                                                                                     2                                  2
      LDt (ft , P(ft )) − inf LDt (ft , g) =                 󰀂lfi (ft , P(ft ), ζi )󰀂2 − inf          󰀂lfi (ft , g, ζi )󰀂2
                             g∈G                                                         g∈G
                                                       i=1                                      i=1
                                                         t
                                                         󰁛                           󰀓         󰀔
                                                   =−          Xi,fi (ft , g̃) ≤ O ζ + tρ ≤ β.                          (D.12)
                                                         i=1

Combine (D.12), and the fact that g is defined as the local minimizer among auxiliary class G and
P(ft ) ∈ G, then for all t ∈ [T ] we have the difference of discrepancy bounded by
                                 0 ≤ LDt (ft , PJt (ft )) − inf LDt (ft , g) ≤ β.                                       (D.13)
                                                                    g∈G

Step 2: Bound the out-sample training error between updates.
Consider an update is executed at step t+1, it directly implies that LDt (ft , ft )−inf g∈G LDt (ft , g) >
4β, while the latest update at step τt ensures that LDτt −1 (fτt , fτt ) − inf g∈G LDτt −1 (fτt , g) ≤ β,
where τt is the pointer of the lastest update. Combined the results above with (D.13), we have
                       󰀃           󰀄                                      󰀃              󰀄
   LDt (ft , ft ) − LDt ft , P(ft ) > 3β, LDτt −1 (fτt , fτt ) − LDτt −1 fτt , P(fτt ) ≤ β. (D.14)
It indicates that the sum of squared empirical discrepancy between two adjacent updates follows
                    t
                    󰁛
                          󰀂lft (ft , ft , ζt )󰀂22 = LDτt :t (ft , ft ) − LDτt :t (ft , PJt (ft )) > 2β,                 (D.15)
                   i=τt

where denote Dτt :t = Dt /Dτt . Based on the similar concentration arguments as Lemma 10, we have
                                                             󰁓t
the out-sample training error between updates is bounded by i=τt 󰀂Eζi [lfi (fi , fi , ζi )]󰀂22 > β.

Step 3: Bound the switching cost under the transferability constraint.
Denote b1 , . . . , bN (T ) , bN (T )+1 be the sequence of updated steps such that τt ∈ {bt } for all t ∈ [T ],
and we fix the recorder b1 = 1 and bN (T )+1 = T + 1. Note that based on (D.15), the sum of
out-sample training error shall have a lower bound such that
         T                                       N (T ) bu+1 −1
         󰁛                                       󰁛      󰁛
               󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂22 =                    󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂22 ≥ N (T ) · β.           (D.16)
         t=1                                     u=1    t=bu
                                                󰁓t−1                                  󰀃 󰀄
Besides, note that the in-sample training error i=1 󰀂Eζt [lfi (ft , ft , ζt )] 󰀂22 ≤ O β for all t ∈ [T ]
and based on the definition of transferability coefficient κG (see Definition 3), we have
        T
        󰁛                                       󰀃                                             󰀄
               󰀂Eζt [lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂22 ≤ O κG · β log T + sp(V ∗ )2 min{κG , T } + T 󰂃2                           (D.17)
         t=1
                                              󰀃                          󰀄
Combine (D.16) and (D.17), it holds N (T ) ≤ O κG log T + β −1 T log T 󰂃2 and finish the proof. 󵀓

E     P ROOF OF R ESULTS ABOUT C OMPLEXITY M EASURES
In this section, we provide the proof of results about the complexity metrics in Section 3. We remark
that the proof highly relies on Lemma 13 and Lemma 14, which are natural extentions to original
results in Jin et al. (2020); Zhong et al. (2022) and proofs are provided in Section G.1.

E.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof of Lemma 1. Recall that the eluder dimension is defined over the function class following
                           󰀋                󰀃            󰀄                  󰀌
                   XH := Xf,f ′ (s, a) = rf + Pf ′ Vf (s, a) : f, f ′ ∈ H ,
and for model-based problems, the discrepancy function is chosen as
                                    󰀃            󰀄
                  lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) = rg + Pg Vf ′ (st , at ) − r(st , at ) − Vf ′ (st+1 ).


                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 1: Bound over transferability coefficient.
Start with the transferability coefficient, the condition can be equivalently written as
             t−1
             󰁛                                               t−1
                                                             󰁛
                                                   2              󰀃                               󰀄
                      󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2 =             󰀂 rft + Pft Vft − rf ∗ + Pf ∗ Vft (si , ai )󰀂22
                i=1                                          i=1
                                                             t−1
                                                             󰁛     󰀃                     󰀄
                                                       =               Xft ,ft − Xft ,f ∗ (si , ai )2 ≤ β,      ∀t ∈ [T ].     (E.1)
                                                             i=1

Let X̆H = {f − f ′ : f, f ′ ∈ XH }, the generalized pigeon-hole principle (see Lemma 13) indicates
that if we take Γ = D∆ , φt = Xft ,ft − Xft ,f ∗ , Φ = X̆H , 󰀂φt 󰀂∞ ≤ sp(V ∗ ) + 2, then it holds that
         t
         󰁛                                             t
                                                       󰁛
                                             2           󰀃                      󰀄
                󰀂Eζi [lfi (fi , fi , ζi )]󰀂 =                 Xfi ,fi − Xfi ,f ∗ (si , ai )2
          i=1                                          i=1

            ≤ dimDE (X̆H , D∆ , 󰂃) · β log t + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2)2 min{dimDE (X̆H , D∆ , 󰂃), t} + t󰂃2
            = dimE (XH , 󰂃) · β log t + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2)2 min{dimE (XH , 󰂃), t} + t󰂃2 ,                                          (E.2)
given condition that (E.1) holds for all t ∈ [T ], where the last equation uses dimDE (X̆H , D∆ , 󰂃) =
dimE (XH , 󰂃). Denote dE = dimE (XH , 󰂃), then we have κG ≤ dE based on (E.2).

Step 2: Bound over dominance coefficient.
                                            󰀅                   󰀆
Based on Lemma 14 and E(ft )(st , at ) = Eζt lft (ft , ft , ζt ) based on definition, it holds that
 T
 󰁛                                    T
                                      󰁛
           󰀅                   󰀆        󰀅󰀃                   󰀄           󰀆2
       󰀂Eζt lft (ft , ft , ζt ) 󰀂22 =      Xft ,ft − Xft ,f ∗ (st , at )
 t=1                                         t=1
        󰀥                    T 󰁛
                               t−1
                                                                                         󰀦1/2
                             󰁛         󰀅󰀃                               󰀄           󰀆2
      ≤ 2dDE log T                          Xft ,ft − Xft ,f ∗ (si , ai )                       + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2) min{dDE , T } + T 󰂃
                             t=1 i=1
        󰀥         T 󰁛
                    t−1
                                                                            󰀦1/2
                  󰁛     󰀐                         󰀐
      = 2dE log T       󰀐Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀐2                               + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2) min{dE , T } + T 󰂃,        (E.3)
                                                    2
                          t=1 i=1

by taking Γ = D∆ , φt = Xft ,ft − Xft ,f ∗ , Φ = X̆H , 󰀂φt 󰀂∞ ≤ sp(V ∗ ) + 2, and 1 + log T ≤ 2 log T .
󵀓

E.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof of Lemma 2. Consider the Bellman discrepancy function, defined as
                              lf ′ (f, g, ζt ) = Qg (st , at ) − r(st , at ) − Vf (st+1 ) + Jg ,
and the expectation is taken over si+1 from P(·|si , ai ) such that Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )] = E(ft )(si , ai ).

Step 1: Bound over transferability coefficient.
First, we’re going to demonstrate the transferability. Note that the generalized pigeon-hole principle
(see Lemma 13) directly indicates that, given
                       t−1
                       󰁛                                     t−1
                                                             󰁛                                    2
                             󰀂E(ft )(si , ai )󰀂22 =                󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2 ≤ β,       ∀t ∈ [T ],
                       i=1                                   i=1

if we take φt = E(ft ), Φ = EH and Γ = D∆ , then for all t ∈ [T ] we have
                t
                󰁛
                      󰀂E(fi )(si , ai )󰀂22 ≤ dABE · β log t + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2)2 min{dABE , t} + t󰂃2 ,                            (E.4)
                i=1

and thus we upper bound κG ≤ dABE := dimABE (H, 󰂃).


                                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 2: Bound over dominance coefficient.
Based on Lemma 14 and Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )] = E(ft )(si , ai ), it holds that
 T
                     󰀥              T 󰁛  t−1
                                                                   󰀦1/2
󰁛                                 󰁛
   E(ft )(st , at ) ≤ 2dABE log T                                2
                                               󰀂E(ft )(si , ai )󰀂2      +(sp(V ∗ ) + 2) min{dABE , T } + T 󰂃,
t=1                                      t=1 i=1
where we take φt = E(ft ), Φ = EH , Γ = D∆ , 󰀂E(ft )󰀂∞ ≤ sp(V ∗ ) + 2, and 1 + log T ≤ 2 log T .󵀓

F     P ROOF OF R ESULTS FOR C ONCRETE E XAMPLES
In this section, we provide detailed proofs of results for concrete examples in Appendix C.

F.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5

Proof of Proposition 5. To show that linear FA has low AGEC, we first prove that it is captured by
ABE dimension dimABE (H, 󰂃), and then apply Lemma 2 (low ABE dim ⊆ low AGEC). Suppose
that there exists 󰂃′ ≥ 󰂃, {δsi ,ai }i∈[m] ⊆ D∆ , and {fi }i∈[m] ⊆ H with length m ∈ N, such that
                    󰁹
                    󰁸 t−1
                    󰁸󰁛 󰀅                   󰀆2        󰀏              󰀏
                    󰁷      E(ft )(si , ai ) ≤ 󰂃′ , 󰀏E(ft )(st , at )󰀏 > 󰂃′ , ∀t ∈ [m].           (F.1)
                        i=1

Based on Definitions 7-8, dimABE (H, 󰂃) is the largest m. Following this, we provide detailed dis-
cussion about linear AMDPs, AMDPs with linear Bellmen completion, and AMDPs with gener-
alized linear completion (see Definition 11-13). Denote Qt (s, a) = φ(s, a)⊤ ωt for all (s, a, t) ∈
S × A × [m].

(i). Linear AMDPs. As defined in Definition 11, for any ft ∈ H, it holds that
                                                                              󰁝
           E(ft )(si , ai ) = φ(si , ai )⊤ ωt − φ(si , ai )⊤ θ − φ(si , ai )⊤     Vt (s)dµ(s) + Jt
                                                                                S
                                            󰀕           󰁝                         󰀖
                                          ⊤
                            = φ(si , ai )     ωt − θ +      Vt (s)dµ(s) + Jt e1 .                           (F.2)
                                                           S

(ii). AMDPs with linear Bellmen completion. As a natural extension to the linear AMDPs, linear
Bellmen completeness (see Definition 12) suggests that the Bellman error follows
      E(ft )(si , ai ) = φ(si , ai )⊤ ωt − φ(si , ai )⊤ T (ωt , Jt ) = φ(si , ai )⊤ (ωt − T (ωt , Jt )) .   (F.3)
(iii). AMDPs with generalized linear completion. Moreover, AMDPs with generalized linear
completion further extends the standard linear FA by introducing link functions. Note that
                                           󰀃               󰀄     󰀃                        󰀄
                       E(ft )(si , ai ) = σ φ(si , ai )⊤ ωt − σ φ(si , ai )⊤ T (ωt , Jt )               (F.4)
and based on the α-bi-Lipschitz continuity condition in (C.3), it holds that
       1
         · φ(si , ai )⊤ (ωt − T (ωt , Jt )) ≤ E(ft )(si , ai ) ≤ α · φ(si , ai )⊤ (ωt − T (ωt , Jt )) . (F.5)
       α
Based on the Lemma 15 and arguments in (i), (ii) and(iii), we are ready to provide a unified proof
for linear FA. By substituting the arguments (F.2), (F.3) and (F.5) into (F.1), then
   󰁹
   󰁸 t−1
   󰁸󰁛                                                                                     󰂃′
   󰁷                                         2
           [〈φ(si , ai ), ωt − T (ωt , Jt )〉] ≤ α󰂃′ , |〈φ(st , at ), ωt − T (ωt , Jt )〉| > , ∀t ∈ [m].
       i=1
                                                                                          α
                                                                                                   (F.6)
Here, we take α = 1 for standard linear FA , and let α be the Lipschitz constant for generalized
                                                                                             √
linear FA.
        √  Based on Lemma 15, if we take φt = φ(st , at ), ψt = ω√    t − T (ωt , Jt ), Bφ =   2, Bψ =
                                                       󰀃                     󰀄
sp(V ∗ ) d, ε = 󰂃, c1 = α, c2 = α−1 , then m ≤ O d log(sp(V ∗ ) d/󰂃) . As the ABE dimension
is defined as the length of the longest sequence satisfying (F.6), thus
                                                 󰀃       󰀃        √ 󰀄󰀄
                              dimABE (H, 󰂃) ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) d/󰂃 .
                               󰀃     󰀃       √       󰀄      󰀄              󰀃       󰀃        √      󰀄󰀄
Based on Lemma 2, dG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) d󰂃−1 log T and κG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) d󰂃−1 .󵀓


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6

Proof of Proposition 6. For all ft ∈ H, the Bellman error can be written as

      E(ft )(si , ai ) = φ(si , ai )⊤ ωt − E[ψ(si+1 )]⊤ θt + Jt − r(si , ai )
                     = φ(si , ai )⊤ ωt − E[ψ(si+1 )]⊤ θt + Jt − (Q∗ (si , ai ) − E[V ∗ (si+1 )] − J ∗ )
                       󰀗              󰀘⊤ 󰀕󰀗          󰀘                   󰀖
                          φ(si , ai )       ωt − ω ∗
                     =                                 + (Jt − J ∗ ) · e1 ,                             (F.7)
                         E[ψ(si+1 )]         ∗
                                            θ − θt

where the second equation results from Bellman optimality equation in (2.1). Following a similar
argument in the proof of Proposition 5, we can show that the linear Q∗ /V ∗ AMDPs have a low ABE
dimension with an (d1 + d2 )-dimensional compound feature mapping equivalently based on (F.7).
Based on Lemma 2 and write d+ = d1 + d2 , then we have
                 󰀃       󰀃        √       󰀄      󰀄             󰀃        󰀃     √       󰀄󰀄
        dG ≤ O d+ log sp(V ∗ ) d+ 󰂃−1 log T , κG ≤ O d+ log sp(V ∗ ) d+ 󰂃−1 .                  󵀓

F.3    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 7

Proof of Proposition 7. Similar to linear FA, we will show that kernel FA is captured by by ABE
dimension dimABE (H, 󰂃), and then apply Lemma 2 (low ABE dim ⊆ low AGEC). Suppose that
there exists 󰂃′ ≥ 󰂃, {δsi ,ai }i∈[m] ⊆ D∆ , and {fi }i∈[m] ⊆ H with length m ∈ N, such that
                   󰁹
                   󰁸 t−1
                   󰁸󰁛 󰀅                     󰀆2       󰀏               󰀏
                   󰁷        E(ft )(si , ai ) ≤ 󰂃′ , 󰀏E(ft )(st , at )󰀏 > 󰂃′ , ∀t ∈ [m].     (F.8)
                       i=1

Suppose the kernel function class has a finite 󰂃-effective dimension concerning the feature mapping
φ. The existence of Bellman error E(ft ) is equivalent to the one of Wt ∈ (W − W):
              E(ft )(·, ·) = (Qft − TJt Qft )(·, ·) = 〈φ(·, ·), ωt − ωt′ 〉K := 〈φ(·, ·), Wt 〉K ,       (F.9)
where the second equation is based on the self-completeness assumption with kernel FA such that
G = H. Denote Xt = φ(st , at ), we can rewrite the condition in (F.8) as
                      󰁹
                      󰁸 t−1
                      󰁸󰁛
                      󰁷 (X ⊤ W )2 ≤ 󰂃′ , |X ⊤ W | > 󰂃′ , ∀t ∈ [m].                       (F.10)
                                i   t              t  t
                             i=1

           󰁓t−1                                                   √
Let Σt = i=1 Xi Xi⊤ + (󰂃′2 /4R2 · sp(V ∗ )2 ) · I, then 󰀂Wt 󰀂Σt ≤ 2󰂃′ and 󰂃′ ≤ 󰀂Wt 󰀂Σt 󰀂Xt 󰀂Σ−1
                                                                                              t
for all t ∈ [m] based on Cauchy-Swartz inequlity and 󰀂ωt 󰀂K ≤ sp(V ∗ )R. Thus, 󰀂Xt 󰀂2Σ−1 ≥ 0.5
                                                                                         t
and
  󰁛 m      󰀓             󰀔      󰀕            󰀖            󰀗                    m        󰀘
                     2            det Σm+1                      4R2 sp(V ∗ )2 󰁛       ⊤
       log 1 + 󰀂Xt 󰀂Σ−1 = log                   = log det I +                     Xt Xt , (F.11)
   t=1
                       t           det Σ1                            󰂃′2      t=1

based on the matrix determinant lemma. Therefore, (F.10) directly implies that
                                            󰀗                    m         󰀘
                     1       3     1             4R2 sp(V ∗ )2 󰁛         ⊤
                        ≤ log ≤      log det I +                    X t t ,
                                                                       X
                     e       2     m                  󰂃′2       t=1
                                󰀃                  󰀄
and then we have m ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R .Recall that the 󰂃-effective dimension is the min-
imum positive integer satisfying the condition. As ABE dimension is defined as the length of the
longest sequence satisfying (F.10), thus it holds that
                                                       󰀃          󰀄
                            dimABE (H, 󰂃) ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R .
                                  󰀃                  󰀄                  󰀃                󰀄
Based on Lemma 2, dG ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R log T and κG ≤ dimeﬀ X , 󰂃/2sp(V ∗ )R . 󵀓


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 8

Proof of Proposition 8. Note that expected discrepancy function follows: for any t ∈ [T ]
                                   󰀓             󰁝                                󰀔
                                 ⊤
 󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2 = θt ψ(si , ai ) +     φ(si , ai , s′ )Vfi (s′ )ds′ − r(si , ai ) − Eζi [Vfi (si+1 )]
                                                   S
                                           󰀓               󰁝                                󰀔
                                       ∗ ⊤
                              = (θt − θ ) ψ(si , ai ) +         φ(si , ai , s′ )Vfi (s′ )ds′ .               (F.12)
                                                                       S
                                      󰁕                                               󰁓t−1
Let Wt = θt − θ∗ , Xt = ψ(si , ai ) + S φ(si , ai , s′ )Vfi (s′ )ds′ , and Σt = 󰂃I + i=1 Xt Xt⊤ . Note
          󰀥               t−1
                                                              󰀦1/2         󰀥 t−1                               󰀦1/2
                          󰁛                                          √      󰁛
󰀂Wt 󰀂Σt = 󰂃󰀂θt − θ∗ 󰀂22 +       󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22      ≤2 󰂃+         󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22
                                    i=1                                                          i=1
                                                                                                                          (F.13)
where we use 󰀂θt 󰀂 ≤ 1. Based on the elliptical potential lemma (see Lemma 17), we have
        T                    T
                                         󰀣         T
                                                              󰀤
       󰁛   󰀐 󰀐              󰁛                   1 󰁛         󰀐
           󰀐Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1 ≤       2d · log 1 +          󰀂Xt 󰀐2
                  Σt                            d t=1
       t=1                  t=1
                                    󰀕                           󰀓√ 󰀔−1 󰀖
                         ≤ 2d · log 1 + (1 + sp(V ∗ )/2) · T       d󰂃     := d(󰂃),                                        (F.14)
                                             √                √
where the last inequality
                      󰀓 results from󰀔󰀂φ󰀂2,∞ ≤ d, 󰀂ψ󰀂2,∞ ≤ d and 󰀂Vf 󰀂∞ ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ).
                          󰀐                󰀐
Combine (F.13) and 1 󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ≥ 1 ≤ 󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1, it holds that
                                      Σt                       Σt
                              T
                              󰁛      󰀓    󰀐       󰀔 󰁛T
                                                       󰀐 󰀐
                                    1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ≥ 1 ≤   󰀐Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1 ≤ d(󰂃).
                                                            Σ
                                                                                                                          (F.15)
                                                 t                                  t
                              t=1                                  t=1
Step 1: Bound over dominance coefficient.
Note the sum of Bellman errors follows that
    󰁛 T                    T
                           󰁛 󰀃󰀃              󰀄            󰀃               󰀄           󰀄
        E(ft )(st , at ) =      rft + Pft Vft (st , at ) − rf ∗ + Pf ∗ Vft (st , at )
      t=1                      t=1
                               T
                               󰁛                󰀓              󰁝                              󰀔
                         =           (θt − θ∗ )⊤ ψ(st , at ) +   φ(st , at , s′ )Vft (s′ )ds′
                               t=1                                         S
                               T
                               󰁛             󰀓 󰀓    󰀐       󰀔   󰀓    󰀐       󰀔󰀔
                         =           Wt⊤ Xt · 1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ≤ 1 + 1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 > 1
                                                                   t                                 t
                               t=1
                               T
                               󰁛               󰀓    󰀐       󰀔
                         ≤           Wt⊤ Xt · 1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ≤ 1 + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2) · min{d(󰂃), T }
                                                               t
                               t=1
                               T
                               󰁛              󰀓    󰀐       󰀔
                         ≤           󰀂Wt 󰀂Σt · 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ∧ 1 + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2) · min{d(󰂃), T },                             (F.16)
                                                           t
                               t=1
where the first inequality results from (F.15) and the last inequality arises from the Cauchy-Swartz
inequality. Combine (F.13) and (F.14), we have
                                       󰀳         󰀥 t−1                         󰀦1/2 󰀴
 󰁛T            󰀓    󰀐         󰀔 󰁛    T
                                           √      󰁛                                    󰀓    󰀐       󰀔
    󰀂Wt 󰀂Σt · 󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1 ≤
                         Σt
                                       󰁃2 󰂃 +          󰀂lfi (ft , ft , ζi )󰀂22      󰁄 · 󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1
                                                                                                                   Σt
t=1                                        t=1                     i=1
       󰀥 T         󰀦1/2 󰀥 T                    󰀦1/2       󰀥 T t−1                                    󰀦1/2 󰀥 T                  󰀦1/2
        󰁛                󰁛        󰀐                        󰁛󰁛                                              󰁛        󰀐
   ≤          4󰂃              󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1
                                      Σt
                                                      +                    󰀂lfi (ft , ft , ζi )󰀂22              󰀂Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1
                                                                                                                    Σt
        t=1             t=1                                t=1 i=1                                        t=1
                            󰀥     T 󰁛
                                    t−1
                                                                󰀦1/2
      󰁳                           󰁛
   ≤ 2 T 󰂃 · min{d(󰂃), T } + d(󰂃)       󰀂lfi (ft , ft , ζi )󰀂22      ,                                                    (F.17)
                                              t=1 i=1


                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second inequality results from Cauchy-Swartz inequality and the last inequality follows
(F.14). Plugging the result back into the (F.16), we conclude that
  T
                       󰀥     T 󰁛t−1
                                                                 󰀦1/2
 󰁛                           󰁛
                                                               2
     E(ft )(st , at ) ≤ d(󰂃)        󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂2
t=1                           t=1 i=1
                           󰁳
                       + 2 T 󰂃 · min{d(󰂃), T } + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2) min{d(󰂃), T }
                     󰀥     T 󰁛
                             t−1
                                                                󰀦1/2
                           󰁛
                    ≤ d(󰂃)        󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22      + (sp(V ∗ ) + 3) min{d(󰂃), T } + T 󰂃,
                              t=1 i=1
                                                                                                       (F.18)
                                                                                √
where the last inequality follows AM-GM inequality. Thus, dG ≤ O(d log(sp(V )T / d󰂃)).    ∗


Step 2: Bound over transferability coefficient.
                         󰁓t−1
Given condition that i=1 󰀂E[lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂22 ≤ β for all t ∈ [T ], we have
  󰁛T                              T 󰀗
                                  󰁛               󰀓             󰁝                               󰀔󰀘 2
                              2              ∗ ⊤                                 ′       ′    ′
      󰀂E[lft (ft , ft , ζt )]󰀂2 =     (θi − θ ) ψ(st , at ) +       φ(st , at , s )Vfi (s )ds
   t=1                            t=1                               S
                                  T
                                  󰁛                   󰀓    󰀐2      󰀔
                              ≤         (Wt⊤ Xt )2 · 1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ≤ 1 + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2)2 min{d(󰂃), T }
                                                                t
                                  t=1
                                  T
                                  󰁛               󰀓    󰀐2      󰀔
                              ≤         (β + 4󰂃) · 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ∧ 1 + (sp(V ∗ ) + 2)2 min{d(󰂃), T }
                                                            t
                                  i=1
                           ≤ d(󰂃)β log T + (sp(V ∗ )2 + 4sp(V ∗ ) + 6) min{d(󰂃), T } + 2T 󰂃2 ,
                                                                                            (F.19)
where we use a variant of (F.14) and (F.15), following that
           󰁛 T    󰀓     󰀐2         󰀔 󰁛   T
                                            󰀐 󰀐2            T
                                                            󰁛  󰀐 󰀐
                1 󰀂Xt 󰀐Σ−1 ≥ 1 ≤            󰀐Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1 ≤
                                                  Σ
                                                               󰀐Xt 󰀐 −1 ∧ 1 ≤ d(󰂃),
                                                                     Σ
                              t                         t                       t
              t=1                            t=1                    t=1
and the last inequality results from a similar proof as (F.17) √
                                                               and (F.18) using Cauchy-Swartz and
AM-GM inequality. Thus, we have κG ≤ O(d log(sp(V ∗ )T / d󰂃)).                                  󵀓

F.5   D ISCUSSION ABOUT P ERFORMANCE ON C ONCRETE E XAMPLES
                                                                                                √
In this subsection, we show performance of L OOP for specific problems. L OOP achieves an Õ( T )
regret, which is nearly minimax optimal in T , in linear AMDP and linear mixture AMDP.
                                                                               󰀋
Linear AMDP Recall that linear function class is defined as H = (Q, J) : Q(·, ·) =
           󰀏                   √            󰀌
ω ⊤ φ(·, ·)󰀏 󰀂ω󰀂2 ≤ 12 sp(V ∗ ) d, J ∈ JH . Consider the ρ-covering number, note that
                                                                     √
                    |Q(s, a) − Q′ (s, a)| ≤ |(ω − ω ′ )⊤ φ(s, a)| ≤ 2 · 󰀂ω − ω ′ 󰀂1 .
Based on the Lemma 20, combine the fact that |JH | ≤ 2 and its ρ-covering number Nρ (JH ) is at
most 2ρ−1 , we can get the log covering number of the hypotheses class H is upper bounded by
                                                   󰀓           3  3
                                                                        󰀔
                                log NH (ρ) ≤ d log sp(V ∗ )2 2 d 2 ρ−2 ,                       (F.20)
                                          √
by taking α = w, P = d, B = sp(V ∗ ) d/2. Recall that Proposition 5 indicates that
                  󰀃      󰀃        √       󰀄      󰀄             󰀃      󰀃      √        󰀄󰀄
          dG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) dρ−1 log T , κG ≤ O d log sp(V ∗ ) dρ−1 .                      (F.21)
Combine (F.20), (F.21) and the regret guarantee in Theorem 3, we get
               󰀓                       󰁴                                   󰀔      󰀓               󰀔
                                                󰀃                   󰀄                      3  3√
 Reg(T ) ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) max{dG , κG } T log T NH∪G      2   (1/T )/δ sp(V ∗ ) ≤ Õ sp(V ∗ ) 2 d 2 T .
                                                        3 3√
For linear AMDPs, our method achieves Õ(sp(V ∗ ) 2 d 2 T ) regret for both linear and generalized
linear AMDPs.     In comparison, the F OPO algorithm (Wei et al., 2021) achieves the best-known
              3√                                                              1
Õ(sp(V ∗ )d 2 T ) regret. Our method incurs an additional constant sp(V ∗ ) 2 in the regret bound.


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Linear mixture √   Recall that the Proposition
                                    √          8 posits that AGEC of the linear mixture probelm
satisfies that max{ dG , κG } ≤ O(d log T ). Note that the hypotheses class is defined as
             H = {(P, r) : P(·|s, a) = θ⊤ φ(s, a, ·), r(s, a) = θ⊤ ψ(s, a)| 󰀂θ󰀂2 ≤ 1}.
Consider the covering number note that both transition function and reward can be written as
                                                                        √
                (i). |(P − P′ )(s′ |s, a)| = |(θ − θ′ )⊤ φ(s, a, s′ )| ≤ d · 󰀂θ − θ′ 󰀂1 ,
                                                                   √
                (ii). |(r − r′ )(s, a)| = |(θ − θ′ )⊤ ψ(s, a)| ≤ d · 󰀂θ − θ′ 󰀂1 .
Based on the Lemma 20, the log covering number of HLM is upper bounded by
                                                   󰀓 3     󰀔
                                log NH (ρ) ≤ 2d log d 2 ρ−1 ,

by taking α = θ, P = d, B = 1. Combine results above and Theorem 3, we get
               󰀓                     󰁴                                  󰀔      󰀓             󰀔
                                              󰀃                 󰀄                      3  3√
 Reg(T ) ≤ O sp(V ∗ ) max{dG , κG } T log T NH∪G   2  (1/T )/δ sp(V ∗ ) ≤ Õ sp(V ∗ ) 2 d 2 T .
                                                                                    √
At our best knowledge, the UCRL2-VTR (Wu et al., 2022) achieves the best Õ(Dd T ) regret for
linear mixture AMDP, where D is the diameter under communicating AMDP assumption and it is
provable that sp(V ∗ ) ≤ D (Wang et al., 2022). We remark that the two algorithms are
                                                                                  √ incomparable
under different assumptions and both achieve a near minimax optimal regret at Õ( T ).

G     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
In this section, we provide useful technical lemmas used in later theoretical analysis. Most are
directly borrowed from existing works and proof of modified lemmas is provided in Section G.1.
Lemma 12. Given function class Φ defined on X , and a family of probability measures Γ over X .
                                                                               󰁓k−1
Suppose sequence {φk }K k=1 ⊂ Φ and {µk }k=1 ⊂ Γ satisfy that for all k ∈ [K],
                                          K                                                    2
                                                                                t=1 (Eµt [φk ]) ≤
β. Then, for all k ∈ [K], we have
                       󰁛k   󰀓󰀏         󰀏    󰀔 󰀓β    󰀔
                           1 󰀏Eµt [φt ]󰀏 > 󰂃 ≤ 2 + 1 dimDE (Φ, Π, 󰂃).
                       t=1
                                               󰂃


Proof. See Lemma 43 of Jin et al. (2021) for detailed proof.
Lemma 13 (Pigeon-hole principle). Given function class Φ defined on X with |φ(x)| ≤ C for all
φ ∈ Φ and x ∈ X , and a family of probability measure over X . Suppose sequence {φk }K
                                                                                     k=1 ⊂
                                                             󰁓k−1
Φ and {µk }k=1 ⊂ Γ satisfy that for all k ∈ [K], it holds t=1 (Eµt [φk ]) ≤ β. Let dDE =
            K                                                                2

dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃) be the DE dimension, then for all k ∈ [K] and 󰂃 > 0, we have
                        k 󰀏
                        󰁛           󰀏    󰁳
                          󰀏         󰀏
                          󰀏Eµt [φt ]󰀏 ≤ 2 dDE βk + min{k, d}C + k󰂃,
                         t=1

and
                      k 󰁫
                      󰁛                 󰁬2
                            Eµt [φt ]        ≤ dDE β log k + min{k, d}C 2 + k󰂃2 .
                      t=1


Proof. See Section G.1.1.
Lemma 14. Given function class Φ defined on X with |φ(x)| ≤ C for all φ ∈ Φ and x ∈ X , and
a family of probability measure over X . Let dDE = dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃) be the DE dimension, then for
all k ∈ [K] and 󰂃 > 0, we have
         k 󰀏
                         󰀥                                       󰀦1/2
        󰁛             󰀏                    󰁛 K k−1
                                               󰁛
            󰀏         󰀏                                        2
            󰀏Eµk [φk ]󰀏 ≤ dDE (1 + log K)          (Eµt [φk ])        + min{dDE , k}C + k󰂃.
       t=1                                       k=1 t=1


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. See Section G.1.2.
Lemma 15 (d-upper bound). Let Φ and Ψ be sets of d-dimensional vectors and 󰀂φ󰀂2 ≤ Bφ , 󰀂ψ󰀂2 ≤
Bψ for any
         󰁴󰁓 φ ∈ Φ and ψ ∈ Ψ. If there exists set (φ1 , . . . , φm ) and (ψ1 , . . . , ψm )such that for all
             t−1
             k=1 〈φt , ψk 〉 ≤ c1 ε and |〈φt , ψt 〉| > c2 ε, where c1 ≥ c2 > 0 is a constant and ε > 0,
t ∈ [m],                   2
                                                             󰀃                󰀄
then the number of elements in set is bounded by m ≤ O d log(Bφ Bψ /ε) .

Proof. See Section G.1.3.
                                                                                     󰁓m         √
                                                                                          x
Lemma 16. For any sequence of positive reals x1 , . . . , xm , it holds that √󰁓i=1
                                                                                m
                                                                                   i
                                                                                     2
                                                                                       ≤            1 + log n.
                                                                                      i=1 ixi


Proof. See Lemma 6 in Dann et al. (2021) for detailed proof.
Lemma 17. Let {xi }i∈[t] be a sequence of vectors defined over Hilbert space X . Let Λ0 be a
                                      󰁓t−1
positive definite matrix and Λt = Λ0 + i=1 xt x⊤
                                               t . It holds that

                                t
                                󰁛                             󰀕              󰀖
                                                                  det Λt+1
                                      󰀂xt 󰀂2Λ−1 ∧ 1 ≤ 2 log                      .
                                i=1
                                             t                     det Λ0


Proof. See Elliptical Potential Lemma (EPL) in Dani et al. (2008) for a detailed proof.
Lemma 18 (Freedman’s inequality). Let X1 , . . . , XT be a real-valued martingale difference se-
quence adapted to filtration {Ft }Tt=1 . Assume for all t ∈ [T ] Xt ≤ R, then for any η ∈ (0, 1/R),
with probability greater than 1 − δ
                             T
                             󰁛         󰀓 󰁛 T
                                               󰀅       󰀆 log(1/δ) 󰀔
                                 Xt ≤ O η     E Xt2 |Ft +           ,
                             t=1          t=1
                                                             η


Proof. See Lemma 7 in Agarwal et al. (2014) for detailed proof.
Lemma 19 (Scaling lemma). Let φ : S × A 󰀁→ Rd be a d-dimensional feature mapping, there exists
an invertible linear transformation A ∈ Rd×d such that for any bounded function f : S × A 󰀁→ R
and z ∈ Rd defined by
                                       f (s, a) = φ(s, a)⊤ z,
                                                   √
we have 󰀂Aφ(s, a)󰀂 ≤ 1 and 󰀂A−1 z󰀂 ≤ sups,a |f | d for all (s, a) ∈ S × A.

Proof. See Lemma 8 in Wei et al. (2021) for detailed proof.

In Theorem 3, the proved regret contains the logarithmic term of the 1/T -covering number of the
function classes NH (1/T ), which can be regarded as a surrogate cardinality of the function class H.
Here, we provide a formal definition of ρ-covering and the upper bound of ρ-covering number.
Definition 17 (ρ-covering). The ρ-covering number of a function class F is the minimum integer
t satisfying that there exists subset F ′ ⊆ F with |F ′ | = t such that for any f ∈ F we can find a
correspondence f ′ ∈ F ′ that it holds 󰀂f − f ′ 󰀂∞ ≤ ρ.
Lemma 20 (ρ-covering number). Let F be a function defined over X that can be parametrized by
α = (α1 , . . . , αP ) ∈ RP with |αi | ≤ B for all i ∈ [P ]. Suppose that for any f, f ′ ∈ F it holds that
supx∈X |f (x) − f ′ (x)| ≤ L󰀂α − α′ 󰀂1 and let NF (ρ) be the ρ-covering number of F, then
                                                          󰀓 2BLP 󰀔
                                     log NF (ρ) ≤ P log             .
                                                               ρ

Proof. See Lemma 12 in Wei et al. (2021) for detailed proof.

G.1    P ROOF OF T ECHNICAL L EMMAS

In this subsection, we present the proofs of technical auxiliary lemmas with modifications.


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.1.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 13
Proof of Lemma 13. The first statement is directly from Lemma 41 in Jin et al. (2021), and the
second statement follows a similar procedure as below. Note that Lemma 12 suggests that
                              󰁛k   󰀓󰀅        󰀆2   󰀔 󰀓β    󰀔
                                  1 Eµt [φt ] > 󰂃2 ≤ 2 + 1 dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃),
                              t=1
                                                     󰂃

and note that the sum of squared expectation can be decomposed as
   k
   󰁛 󰀅               󰀆2       k
                              󰁛 󰀅            󰀆 2 󰀓󰀅      󰀆2   󰀔 󰁛k
                                                                   󰀅          󰀆 2 󰀓󰀅      󰀆2    󰀔
         Eµt [φt ]        =         Eµt [φt ] 1 Eµt [φt ] > 󰂃2 +     Eµt [φt ] 1 Eµt [φt ] ≤ 󰂃2
   t=1                        t=1                                   t=1
                              k
                              󰁛 󰀅            󰀆 2 󰀓󰀅      󰀆2   󰀔
                          ≤         Eµt [φt ] 1 Eµt [φt ] > 󰂃2 + k󰂃2 .                                                (G.1)
                              t=1
                    󰀅       󰀆2        󰀅         󰀆2
Assume sequence Eµ1 [φ1 ] , . . . , Eµk [φk ] are sorted in the decreasing order and consider t ∈
                        󰀆2                                                  󰀆2
[k] such that [Eµt [φt ] > 󰂃2 , there exists a constant α ∈ (󰂃2 , [Eµt [φt ] ) satisfying
          󰁛k   󰀓󰀅        󰀆2  󰀔 󰀓β    󰀔            √     󰀓β    󰀔
     t≤       1 Eµi [φi ] > α ≤   + 1 dimDE (Φ, Γ, α) ≤    + 1 dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃),
          i=1
                                α                        α

where the last inequality is based on the fact that the DE dimension is monotonically decreasing in
terms of 󰂃 as proposed in Jin et al. (2021). Denote dDE = dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃) and the inequality above
                                                  󰀅        󰀆2
implies that α ≤ dDE β/t − d. Thus, we have Eµt [φt ] ≤ dDE β/t − d. Beside, based on the
                        󰀅        󰀆2                  󰀅       󰀆2
definition we also have Eµt [φt ] ≤ C 2 and thus Eµt [φt ] ≤ min{dDE β/t − d, C 2 }, then
                                                                                            󰀕            󰀖
            k
            󰁛 󰀅               󰀆 2 󰀓󰀅      󰀆2   󰀔                    k
                                                                    󰁛                 dDE β
                     Eµt [φt ] 1 Eµt [φt ] > 󰂃2 ≤ min{dDE , k}C 2 +
            t=1
                                                                                    t − dDE
                                                                            t=d+1
                                                                                    󰁝 k
                                                                        2                1
                                                        ≤ min{dDE , k}C + dDE · β          dt
                                                                                      0 t
                                                        ≤ min{dDE , k}C 2 + dDE · β log k.                            (G.2)
Combine (G.1) and (G.2), then finishes the proof.                                                                         󵀓

G.1.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 14
We remark that the proof provided in this subsection follows the almost same procedure as Lemma
3.16 in Zhong et al. (2022) with adjustment, and we preserve it for comprehension.

Proof of Lemma 14. Denote dDE = dimDE (Φ, Γ, 󰂃), 󰁥      󰂃t,k = |Eµt [φk ]| and 󰂃t,k = 󰁥      󰂃t,k > 󰂃) for
                                                                                      󰂃t,k 1(󰁥
t, k ∈ [K], µt ∈ Γ and φk ∈ Φ. The proof follows the procedure below. Consider K empty buckets
B0 , . . . , BK−1 as initialization, and we examine 󰂃k,k one by one for all k ∈ [K] as below:

 Case 1 If 󰂃k,k = 0, i.e., 󰁥
                           󰂃k,k ≤ 󰂃, then discard it.
                                                                               󰁓
 Case 2 If 󰂃k,k > 0, i.e., 󰁥
                           󰂃k,k > 󰂃, at bucket j we add k into Bj if                 t≤k−1,t∈Bj (󰂃t,k )
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                 ≤ (󰂃k,k )2 ,
        otherwise we continue with the next bucket Bj+1 .

Denote by bk the index of bucket that at step k the non-zero 󰂃k,k falls in, i.e. k ∈ Bbk . Based on the
rule above, it holds that
              K k−1
              󰁛 󰁛                      K
                                       󰁛        󰁛            󰁛                       K
                                                                                     󰁛
                          (󰂃t,k )2 ≥                                    (󰂃t,k )2 ≥         bk · (󰂃k,k )2 ,
             k=1 t=1                   k=1 0≤j≤bk −1,bk ≥1 t≤k−1,t∈Bj                k=1

where the first inequality arises from {t ∈ Bj : t ≤ k − 1, 0 ≤ j ≤ bk − 1, bk ≥ 1} ⊆ [k − 1]
due to the discarding of the bk th bucket, and the second equality directly follows the allocation rule


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



           󰁓
such that t≤k−1,t∈Bj (󰂃t,k )2 ≥ (󰂃k,k )2 for any j ≤ bk − 1. Recall that based on the definition of
distributional eluder (DE) dimension, it is suggested the size |Bj | is no larger than dDE . Then,
    K
    󰁛                     K−1
                          󰁛          󰁛
          bk (󰂃k,k )2 =          j          (󰂃t,t )2                                                             (re-summation)
    k=1                   j=1        t∈Bj
                 󰀳      󰀴2           󰀳        󰀴2
        K−1
        󰁛                   K−1
           j 󰁃󰁛             󰁛 j        󰁛
    ≥              󰂃t,t 󰁄 ≥          󰁃   󰂃t,t 󰁄                                                                    (|Bj | ≤ dDE )
      j=1
          |B j |            j=1
                                d DE
                      t∈Bj                                        t∈Bj
                                      󰀳                          󰀴2                                 󰀳               󰀴2
                                        K−1
                                        󰁛 󰁛                                                              󰁛
                                 −1 󰁃                                                             −1 󰁃
    ≥ (dDE (1 + log K))                                  󰂃t,t 󰁄 = (dDE (1 + log K))                              󰂃t,t 󰁄 ,   (G.3)
                                            j=1 t∈Bj                                                  t∈[K]\B0

where the second inequality follows Lemma 16. Combine the (G.1.2) and (G.3) above, we have
              K
              󰁛              K
                             󰁛                                   󰁛
                    󰂃k,k ≤
                    󰁥                󰂃k,k + K󰂃 ≤                       󰂃t,t + min{dDE , K}󰀂φ󰀂∞ + K󰂃
              k=1            k=1                         t∈[K]\B0
                             󰀥                               K k−1
                                                                                     󰀦1/2
                                                             󰁛 󰁛
                                                                                 2
                          ≤ dDE (1 + log K)                            (󰂃t,k )              + min{dDE , K}C + K󰂃
                                                             k=1 t=1
                             󰀥                               K k−1
                                                                                     󰀦1/2
                                                             󰁛 󰁛
                                                                                 2
                          ≤ dDE (1 + log K)                            (󰁥
                                                                        󰂃t,k )              + min{dDE , K}C + K󰂃.
                                                             k=1 t=1
Substitute the definition 󰁥
                          󰂃t,k = |Eµt [φk ]| back into the inequality, then finishes the proof.                                󵀓

G.1.3      P ROOF OF L EMMA 15
                                                         󰁓t−1             2
Proof of Lemma 15. For notation simplicity, denote Λt = k=1 ψt ψt⊤ + Bε 2 · I, then for all t ∈ [m]
                  󰁴󰁓                                󰁳                     φ
                      t−1              ε2
we have 󰀂φt 󰀂Λt ≤            ⊤    2            2
                      k=1 (φt ψk ) + B 2 󰀂φt 󰀂2 =     c1 + 1 ε based on the given condition. Using
                                                       2
                                                             φ
the Cauchy-Swartz inequality and results above, then it holds 󰀂ψt 󰀂Λ−1 ≥ |〈φt , ψt 〉|/󰀂φt 󰀂Λt =
    󰁳                                                                  t

c2 / c21 + 1. On one hand, the matrix determinant lemma ensures that
                                m−1
                                󰁜󰀃                    󰀕               󰀖m−1 󰀣 2 󰀤d
                                               2
                                                   󰀄          c22           ε
             det Λm = det Λ0 ·        1 + 󰀂ψt 󰀂Λ−1 ≥ 1 +            2         2   .        (G.4)
                                t=1
                                                 t          1 +   c 1       B φ

On the other hand, according to the definition of Λt , we have
                 󰀕          󰀖d     󰀣 t−1                 󰀤d 󰀣                  󰀤d
                    Tr(Λm )          󰁛 󰀂ψk 󰀂2         ε2       Bψ2 (m − 1)  ε2
                                                2
      det Λm ≤                   ≤                + 2        ≤             + 2    .                                         (G.5)
                       d                     d        Bφ            d       Bφ
                                                       k=1
Combine (G.4) and (G.5), if we take logarithms at both sides, then we have
                                  󰀣                     󰀤󰀡 󰀕                  󰀖
                                    Bφ2 Bψ2 (m − 1)                     c22
                   m ≤ 1 + d log                     +1     log 1 +             .
                                           dε2                        1 + c21
                                                                      󰀃              󰀄
After simple calculations, we can obtain that m is upper bounded by O d log(Bφ Bψ /ε) .                                        󵀓

H     S UPPLEMENTARY D ISCUSSIONS

H.1     P ROOF S KETCH OF MLE- BASED R ESULTS

In this subsection, we provide the proof sketch of Theorem 4. We first introduce several useful lem-
mas, which is the variant of ones in Appendix D for MLE-based problems, and most have been fully
researched in Liu et al. (2022; 2023a); Xiong et al. (2023). As there’s no significant technical gap
between episodic and average-reward for model-based problems, we only provide a proof sketch.


                                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 21 (Akin to Lemma 9). Under Assumptions 1-2, M LE -L OOP is an optimistic algorithm
such that it ensures Jt ≥ J ∗ for all t ∈ [T ] with probability greater than 1 − δ.

Proof Sketch of Lemma 21. See Proposition 13 in Liu et al. (2022) with slight modifications.                       󵀓
Lemma󰀃 22 (Akin to Lemma
                       󰀄 10). For fixed ρ > 0 and a pre-determined optimistic parameter β =
c(log T BH (ρ)/δ) + T ρ where constant c > 0, it holds that
             t−1
             󰁛                                      t−1
                                                    󰁛                                                󰁳
                                                            󰀃                                   󰀄
                   󰀂Eζi [lfi (ft , ft , ζi )]󰀂1 =         TV Pft (·|si , ai ), Pf ∗ (·|si , ai ) ≤ O( βt),      (H.1)
             i=1                                    i=1

for all t ∈ [T ] with probability greater than 1 − δ.

Proof Sketch of Lemma 22. See Proposition 14 in Liu et al. (2022) with slight modifications.                       󵀓
Lemma 23 (Akin to Lemma 11). Let N (T ) be the switching cost with time   󰀃 horizon
                                                                               󰀃    T , given
                                                                                           󰀄 fixed󰀄
covering coefficient ρ > 0 and pre-determined optimistic parameter β = c log T BH (ρ)/δ + T ρ
where c is a large enough constant, with probability greater than 1 − 2δ we have
                                        󰀃                             󰀄
                            N (T ) ≤ O κG · poly(log T ) + β −1 T 󰂃2 ,
where κG is the transferability coefficient with respect to MLE-AGEC(H, {lf ′ }, 󰂃).

Proof Sketch of Lemma 23. The proof is almost the same as Lemma 11.

Step 1: Bound the difference of discrepancy between the minimizer and f ∗ .
                                                             󰁓t           󰀃                     󰀄2
As proposed in Proposition 14, Liu et al. (2022), 0 ≤ i=1 TV Pf ∗ (·|si , ai ), Pgi (·|si , ai ) ≤ β
holds with high probability if the update happens at t-th step. Based on the AM-GM inequlaity, we
have
                               󰁛t
                                      󰀃                                  󰀄 󰁳
                         0≤        TV Pf ∗ (·|si , ai ), Pgi (·|si , ai ) ≤ βt.                    (H.2)
                                      i=1


Step 2: Bound the expected discrepancy between updates.
Note that for all t + 1 ∈ [T ], the update happens only if
                                   t
                                   󰁛                                              󰁳
                                           󰀃                                  󰀄
                                         TV Pft (·|si , ai ), Pgi (·|si , ai ) > 3 βt.                          (H.3)
                                   i=1

Combine the (H.2) and (H.3) above, and apply the triangle inequality, we have
             t
             󰁛       󰀃                                    󰀄
                   TV Pft (·|si , ai ), Pf ∗ (·|si , ai )
             i=1
             󰁛 t                                                                                     󰁳
                     󰀃                                  󰀄    󰀃                                   󰀄
         ≥         TV Pft (·|si , ai ), Pgt (·|si , ai ) − TV Pf ∗ (·|si , ai ), Pgt (·|si , ai ) ≥ 2 βt.
             i=1
                                                      󰁓τt       󰀃                                 󰀄 √
and the construction of confidence set ensures that i=1     TV Pft (·|si , ai ), Pf ∗ (·|si , ai ) ≤ βτt
with high probability (Liu et al., 2022, Proposition 14). Recall the definition of MLE-transferability
coefficient, then the switching cost can be bounded following the same argument in Lemma 11. 󵀓

Proof Sketch of Theorem 4. Recall that
                              T
                              󰁛                           T 󰀓
                                                          󰁛                                                󰀔
              Reg(T ) ≤             E(ft )(st , at ) +          Est+1 ∼P(·|st ,at ) [Vt (st+1 )] − Vt (st ) ,   (H.4)
                              i=1                         t=1
                              󰁿        󰁾󰁽       󰂀         󰁿                    󰁾󰁽                         󰂀
                                  Bellman error                         Realization error
where the inequality follows the optimism in Lemma 21. Combine Lemma 22, Lemma 23 and the
definition of MLE-AGEC (see Definition 9), then we can finish the proof.               󵀓


                                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Extended Value Iteration (EVI)
Input: hypothesis f = (Pf , rf ), desired accuracy level 󰂃.
Initialize: V (0) (s) = 0 for all s ∈ S, J (0) = 0 and counter i = 0.
 1: repeat
 2:      for s ∈ S and a ∈ A do
 3:          Set Q(i) (s, a) ← rf (s, a) + Es′ ∼Pf (s,a) [V (i) (s′ )] − J (i)
 4:          Update V (i+1) (s) ← maxa∈A Q(i) (s, a)
 5:      Update counter i ← i + 1
 6: until maxs∈S {V (i+1) (s) − V (i) (s)} − mins∈S {V (i+1) (s) − V (i) (s)} ≤ 󰂃



H.2   E XTENDED VALUE I TERATION (EVI) FOR M ODEL -BASED H YPOTHESES

In model-based problems, the discrepancy function sometimes relies on the optimal state bias func-
tion Vf and optimal average-reward Jf (see linear mixture model in Section C). In this section,
we provide an algorithm, extended value iteration (EVI) proposed in Auer et al. (2008), to output
the optimal function and average-reward under given a model-based hypothesis f = (Pf , rf ). See
Algorithm 3 for complete pseudocode. The convergence of EVI is guaranteed by the theorem below.
Theorem 24. UnderAssumption 1, there exists a unique centralized solution pair (Q∗ , J ∗ ) to the
Bellman optimality equation for any AMDP Mf characterized by hypothesis f ∈ H. Then, if the
extended value iteration (EVI) is stopped under the condition that
                  max{V (i+1) (s) − V (i) (s)} − min{V (i+1) (s) − V (i) (s)} ≤ 󰂃,
                  s∈S                            s∈S
                                                              (i)
then the achieved greedy policy π (i) is 󰂃-optimal such that JM
                                                              π
                                                                f
                                                                     ∗
                                                                  ≥ JM f
                                                                         + 󰂃.

Proof Sketch: See Theorem 12 in Auer et al. (2008).


                                                 35
