Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ORMALLY S PECIFYING THE H IGH -L EVEL B EHAVIOR
OF LLM-BASED AGENTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         LLM-based agents have recently emerged as promising tools for solving chal-
         lenging problems without the need for task-specific finetuned models that can be
         expensive to procure. Currently, the design and implementation of such agents
         is ad hoc, as the wide variety of tasks that LLM-based agents may be applied
         to naturally means there can be no one-size-fits-all approach to agent design. In
         this work we aim to alleviate the difficulty of designing and implementing new
         agents by proposing a minimalistic, high-level generation framework that simpli-
         fies the process of building agents. The framework we introduce allows the user to
         specify desired agent behaviors in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL). The declarative
         LTL specification is then used to construct a constrained decoder that guarantees
         the LLM will produce an output exhibiting the desired behavior. By designing
         our framework in this way, we obtain several benefits, including the ability to en-
         force complex agent behavior, the ability to formally validate prompt examples,
         and the ability to seamlessly incorporate content-focused logical constraints into
         generation. In particular, our declarative approach, in which the desired behavior
         is simply described without concern for how it should be implemented or en-
         forced, enables rapid design, implementation and experimentation with different
         LLM-based agents. We demonstrate how the proposed framework can be used to
         implement recent LLM-based agents, and show how the guardrails our approach
         provides can lead to improvements in agent performance. In addition, we release
         our code for general use.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Many recent works (e.g., Brohan et al. (2023); Shen et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2022); Shinn et al.
(2023)) have explored the use of large language models (LLMs) to drive the decision-making of
intelligent, autonomous agents. Given a problem to solve, these LLM-based agents break the prob-
lem down into a sequence of steps, where each step involves either generating text or executing a
tool (e.g., an API call Schick et al. (2023a)) which can supply new context to the agent. Impor-
tantly, while the order of steps to take is dictated by a high-level, prespecified behavior implemented
by the user, the underlying LLM is still allowed a significant amount of flexibility in what it may
produce. At each individual step, the outputs (i.e., the specific text or tool) are entirely determined
by the LLM, thus allowing the agent to leverage the strong generative capabilities of LLMs while
ensuring there are some guardrails to prevent aberrant behavior. Figure 1 provides an example of
the popular ReACT Yao et al. (2022) agent framework, where an agent executes a loop that goes be-
tween generative steps (i.e., Thought, Action, Action Input) and tool execution steps (i.e.,
Observation).
Agent-based frameworks confer a number of benefits. First, these agent-based systems are signifi-
cantly more performant than simpler systems utilizing standard prompting-based approaches (e.g.,
chain-of-thought Wei et al. (2022)). Second, because they allow the LLM to seamlessly integrate
with external tools and incorporate the tool outputs into its context, agent-based approaches can
address a much broader range of datasets and tasks (e.g., those involving web search Yang et al.
(2018)). Lastly, by allowing end users to define an agent’s behavior, the users are given more
flexibility in tailoring very large language models to their particular needs than they would have
otherwise.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    (a) Text output by ReACT agent


                                (b) Diagram of ReACT agent architecture

Figure 1: ReACT agent Yao et al. (2022) that alternates between generative steps (e.g., Thought,
Action, Action Input) and tool execution steps (i.e., Observation)



Though LLM-based agents show much promise, there still remain challenges involved with their
practical application. For instance, as each agent has its own strengths and weaknesses, it can be
necessary to try a variety of different agents when approaching a problem. This can be a steep
barrier to entry, as the lack of a standard framework for defining agents means that the end user must
reimplement in code the exact behavior they wish for an agent to exhibit. In addition, even if a user
finds that a particular agent type is well suited to their target task, the surface-level integration of
current agent implementations with LLMs can mean running that agent will require several rounds of
costly reprompting Xu et al. (2023). To address the aforementioned challenges, inspired by previous
work on incorporating logic-based constraints into decoding Lu et al. (2021; 2022), we propose a
declarative framework for formally specifying the high-level behavior of an LLM-based agent. To
begin, our framework takes in an agent behavior specified in a simple fragment of linear temporal
logic (LTL). The LTL specification is then used to define a constrained decoder that ensures the
LLM-based agent executes steps in a way that conforms to the user’s expectation. The specification
thus serves as a type of contract for agent behavior, which provides straightforward opportunities
for optimizing the generation process.
Our contributions in this work are as follows: (a) we introduce a declarative framework for defining
LLM-based agents that is both lightweight and user-friendly, (b) we demonstrate the benefits of this
framework, which includes the ability to enforce complex agent behavior, perform formal validation
of prompt examples, and seamlessly incorporate content-focused logical constraints into generation,
and (c) provide an analysis using three standard datasets (Hotpot QA Yang et al. (2018), Fever
Thorne et al. (2018), and GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021)) that demonstrates when the hard constraints
imposed on LLM generation improve performance.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       R ELATED W ORK

2.1     LLM- BASED AGENTS

The quest to develop agents that are capable of exhibiting intelligent behavior in real-world settings,
without human intervention, has been a constant objective across the evaluation of AI Wooldridge &
Jennings (1995); Weiss (1999). The recent advancement of LLMs unrolls new avenues of research
to achieve this goal, where agents are backed with LLMs to perform complex tasks.
Various LLM-based agents targeting different tasks have been proposed, such as - WebAgent Gur
et al. (2023) demonstrates the potential to create language-based agents capable of executing tasks
on actual websites by adhering to natural language commands; Generative Agents Park et al. (2023)
simulates believable human behavior; MetaGPT Hong et al. (2023) incorporates efficient human
workflows as a meta-programming approach into LLM-based multi-agent collaboration; SayCan
Ahn et al. (2022) illustrates the capability to use LLMs in a embodied agents. The success of
these task-specific agents ignites the initiative to start open-source projects such as - AutoGPT 1 ,
SuperAGI 2 , and BabyAGI 3 that are focused on the objective of constructing self-sufficient agents
capable of fulfilling users’ requests.

2.2     T OOL AUGMENTED LLM S

In recent years, the development of large language models (LLMs) has made tremendous progress,
and continues to drive research in prompt-based learning Wei et al. (2022); Khot et al. (2022) and
instruction tuning Touvron et al. (2023); Gao et al. (2023b); Peng et al. (2023). While LLMs have
demonstrated impressive performance, they are constrained by inherent limitations, with one of the
primary drawbacks being their ability to utilize external tools. To address this limitation, there has
been an increasing focus on the exploration of incorporating external tools into LLMs or creating
tool-augmented LLMs.
Self-supervised or self-instructed learning is the leading methodology of augmenting tools into
LLMs and we have witnessed multiple works in this direction such as ToolFormer Schick et al.
(2023b); Gorilla Patil et al. (2023); TALM Parisi et al. (2022); etc. Through the integration of exter-
nal tools, these augmented LLMs can achieve precise mathematical reasoning Cobbe et al. (2021);
Thoppilan et al. (2022), access up-to-the-minute information with the assistance of web search en-
gines Nakano et al. (2021), and harness domain-specific knowledge from external resources Yu et al.
(2022). Additionally, some works use the Python interpreter to create complex programs, which
helps them perform logical reasoning tasks better by accessing powerful computational resources
Gao et al. (2023a); Chen et al. (2022).

2.3     C ONSTRAINED D ECODING

There has been a long line of constrained generation methods that modify the standard beam search
decoding procedure at inference time, to incorporate constraints in the output. Lu et al. (2021;
2022); Hokamp & Liu (2017); Post & Vilar (2018). Anderson et al. (2017) proposes a constrained
beam search algorithm that keeps track of constraints via a finite-state machine, and demonstrates
its benefits on several image captioning tasks. Their method forces the inclusion of selected tag
words in the output, and fixed, pre-trained word embeddings to facilitate vocabulary expansion to
previously unseen tag words. Lu et al. (2021) proposes NEUROLOGIC DECODING, which enforces
the satisfaction of lexical constraints (specified as any predicate logic formula having word inclusion
and exclusion constraints) via adding a penalty term for constraint violation in the beam search de-
coding algorithm. Lu et al. (2022) improves on this by incorporating the A∗ -search algorithm using
lookahead heuristics at each decoding step. Bastan et al. (2023) builds on top of NEUROLOGIC DE -
CODING by incorporating structural constraints that capture dependency parsing information. They
demonstrate that the use of search algorithms, as well as structural constraints, improve performance
over NEUROLOGIC on a variety of tasks such as lexical constrained generation, summarization, and
machine translation.
    1
      https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT
    2
      https://github.com/TransformerOptimus/SuperAGI
    3
      https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Figure 2: Examples of truth assignments over time with various LTL operators


Despite the significant progress in improving text generation using inference-type constraints, there
remains a significant gap in the literature for improving generation from large-language models
during inference, particularly for constraining the thought and action sequences as specified, for
language models as agents. Thus, in this work we take the first step toward this by constraining
agents to follow specifications for example, in ReACT Yao et al. (2022), Reflexion Shinn et al.
(2023), chain-of-thought Wei et al. (2022) and chat-bot agents.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce our framework for designing and implementing autonomous agents that
can interact with the environment to solve problems expressed in natural language. Our framework
is intended to be lightweight (i.e., add as little additional overhead to LLM operation as is possible)
and declarative (i.e., the user specifies the desired high-level behavior in terms of constraints without
concern for how they should be implemented or enforced). To begin, we introduce linear temporal
logic, which underpins our agent specification framework. Then, we provide a more formal defini-
tion of agents and how they are specified in our framework. Last, we describe how the specification
framework is used to define a constrained decoder that controls what an agent can generate.

3.1   L INEAR T EMPORAL L OGIC

In this section, we provide a light overview of linear temporal logic (LTL), which is the key com-
ponent to our agent specification framework. LTL is a modal temporal logic originally introduced
for formal verification Pnueli (1977) that extends propositional logic with the temporal operators
⃝ (next) and U (until). The two operators have intuitive definitions, with ⃝ (next) being a unary
operator that (informally) means a formula φ must hold in the next time step, and U (until) being a
binary operator that specifies a formula φi must be true until φj becomes true. LTL formulas are
defined over a set of atomic propositions P with their syntax given by
              φ ::= true     p    ¬φ     φ1 ∧ φ2       ⃝φ     φ1 U φ2       where p ∈ P
An LTL formula is evaluated over an infinite sequence of observations, where each observation
is a truth assignment over symbols in P. Letting φ be a LTL formula and σ be the sequence of


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observations σ = ⟨σ1 , σ2 , . . .⟩, where each σi can be considered the subset of P that is true at time
i, then we write σ |= φ (satisfies) when
        σ    |=    true
        σ    |=    p           iff   p ∈ σ0
        σ    |=    ¬φ          iff   σ ̸|= φ (i.e., σ |= φ does not hold)
        σ    |=    φ1 ∧ φ2     iff   σ |= φ1 and σ |= φ2
        σ    |=    ⃝φ          iff   σ[1 . . .] |= φ
        σ    |=    φ1 U φ2     iff   ∃j ≥ 0. σ[j . . .] |= φ2 and σ[i . . .] |= φ1 ,     for all 0 ≤ i < j

where σ[i . . .] = ⟨σi , . . .⟩ is the remaining sequence of observations following time step i. From the
operators listed above, we can define additional propositional logic operators ∨ (disjunction), and
→ (implication) as well as temporal operators ♢ (eventually) and □ (always)
                                       φ1 ∨ φ2       :=       ¬(¬φ1 ∧ ¬φ2 )
                                       φ1 → φ2       :=       ¬φ1 ∨ φ2
                                       ♢φ            :=       true U φ
                                       □φ            :=       ¬ ♢ ¬φ
In addition, we also define a convenient shorthand notation for a chained sequence of next operators
            ⃝ ⟨φ1 , φ2 , φ3 , . . .⟩ := φ1 ∧ (φ1 → ⃝(φ2 ∧ (φ2 → ⃝(φ3 ∧ (φ3 → ⃝(. . .))))))
with this having the straightforward informal interpretation of “φ1 then φ2 then φ3 ”. In Figure 2, we
provide a graphical depiction of the truth assignments over time for the above temporal operators.
In this work, we found that only allowing formulas to be those containing atomic propositions p, as
well as operators →, ⃝ , □, and U (i.e., we do not allow formulas to include ¬, ∧, etc.) was sufficient
to represent the range of existing agent architectures. We leave extending the set of operators (e.g.,
to include ♢, ∧, etc.) to future work. For more details regarding LTL and its numerous applications,
we direct the interested reader to Baier & Katoen (2008).

3.2      S PECIFYING AGENT B EHAVIOR

We model agents as generic transition systems, where a transition system is considered a tuple
⟨S, δ, s0 , send ⟩ consisting of a non-empty set of states S, a state transition function δ, an initial state
s0 , and a final state send . At each time step, the agent will receive a string from either an LLM or the
environment 4 , with the source of the string being determined by the particular state the agent is in.
To define an agent and its underlying transition system, the user provides a specification consisting
of 1) a list of states and their properties and 2) a desired behavior in the form of an LTL formula.
Figure 3 shows an example of a specification being provided in the format of a PDDL-style s-
expression. In the specification, the :states list contains all possible states for the agent. Each
state within the list must specify a prompt string (e.g., “Thought:” for the Thought state), which
will serve as both an initial prompt for when the agent is in that state and as a signal to detect when a
state transition occurs. By default it is assumed that the string received by an agent will be provided
by the LLM. A user may override this by indicating the environment as the intended provider instead
by using a special :env-input flag (e.g., shown in the Observation state).
The behavior of an agent is provided in the :behavior list. Referring back to the specification, we
see an LTL formulation of the ReACT architecture (shown in Figure 1). In the formula, LTL opera-
tors (i.e., next and until) maintain the expected semantics (i.e., next interpreted as ⃝ ⟨. . .⟩ and
until interpreted as U). The LTL specification provides a constraint on the state transition function
δ, where only transitions that abide by the LTL formula are allowed (e.g., from the Thought state,
the only possible transition is to the Action state). Lastly, unless otherwise specified, the initial
and final states (i.e., s0 and send , respectively) are always assumed to be the “first” and “last” states
to appear in the LTL formula (in this case being Thought and Answer). Beyond ReACT, we also
provide examples of how other prompting schemes are implemented in our framework, e.g., Shinn
et al. (2023); Wei et al. (2022), in the Appendix.
   4
       Here we refer to the “environment” as any provider of text that is not the LLM (e.g., external tools)


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (define react-agent
        (:states
          (Thought (:text "Thought:"))
          (Action (:text "Action:"))
          (Action-Input (:text "Action Input:"))
          (Observation (:text "Observation:") (:flags :env-input))
          (Final-Thought (:text "Final Thought:"))
          (Answer (:text "Answer:"))
        )
        (:behavior
          (next
            (until
              (next Thought Action Action-Input Observation)
              Final-Thought)
            Answer)
        )
      )


      Figure 3: Specification for ReACT agent for the ReACT architecture shown in Figure 1(b)



3.3    C ONSTRAINING AGENT B EHAVIOR

An LLM-based agent begins generation similarly to any other prompting-based approach. First, the
input prompt, consisting of instructions and (optionally) a small number of examples, is concate-
nated with the text of the target problem and fed to the agent. Next, the agent is provided with the
prompt text associated with the initial state s0 (e.g., “Thought:” for the agent defined in Figure 3).
At this point, the agent is considered to be in state s0 and must now operate according to the behav-
ior specified by its associated LTL formula. For the remainder of generation, the agent alternates
between state transitions and text generation, with the agent terminating when it finishes generating
text while in the final state, send .
State transitions are signaled when the underlying LLM produces the prompt text associated with
any of its specification’s states. Consider an agent in state si where the next valid states are {sj , . . .}.
We will refer to the text generated at this state as ti , where ti may originate from either the LLM
or the environment (e.g., the output of an API call). If ti ends with a prompt string associated with
a valid state sj , the agent has followed the specification successfully. Thus, the state transition is
executed (i.e., the agent’s state is set to be sj ) and the agent resumes generation from the next state.
Alternatively, if ti does not end with a prompt string associated with a valid state, the agent enacts
a state transition by picking a valid state sj arbitrarily and forcing its underlying LLM to decode to
its associated prompt string (this is done with a decoder-side mask). This is now the same situation
before, and so the state transition is executed and generation continues.
There are two nuances to consider for state transitions. First, when ti is produced by the envi-
ronment, we do not expect ti to end with a particular state’s prompt text, and thus the LLM is
immediately called upon to enact a state transition when the agent receives ti . Second, when ti
is generated by the LLM, it may end by decoding an invalid state’s prompt text (e.g., generating
“Thought:” when it should generate “Action:”). For these cases, the incorrect state’s prompt text is
removed from ti and a state transition to a valid state is forcibly executed.
Lastly, we remark that one advantage of our system is the ease in which content constraints can be
applied. In this work, we consider a content constraint to be a hard constraint on what the LLM
is allowed to output in a particular state. For instance, a restriction on the set of allowed outputs
in the tool-selection state to be only the names of valid tools (e.g., Action state in the ReACT
framework). By allowing a user to specify what strings are acceptable within a particular state, the
risk of certain types of hallucinations can be eliminated. Conveniently, the enforcement of a content
constraint uses the same mechanism that is used to constrain state transitions.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Example of text output by ablated ReACT agent. Text that the agent is forced to decode is highlighted in
green while text freely generated by the underlying LLM or the environment is highlighted in yellow


      (define react-ablation-agent
        (:states
          (Thought (:text "Thought:"))
          (Observation (:text "Observation:") (:flags :env-input))
          (Final-Thought (:text "Final Thought:"))
        )
        (:behavior
          (until
            (next Thought Observation)
            Final-Thought)
        )
      )

                                 (b) Specification for ablated ReACT agent

                Figure 4: ReACT agent with fewer constraints imposed on generation


4     E XPERIMENTS

We were interested to learn under what conditions the constraints imposed on generation were useful
for improving agent performance. To explore this, we ran evaluations using the well-known ReACT
Yao et al. (2022) architecture with a variety of different settings on three standard datasets: 1)
GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021), a mathematical reasoning dataset that tests the ability of a system to
solve grade school math word problems, 2) HotpotQA Yang et al. (2018), a multi-hop question-
answering dataset that requires reasoning over passages from Wikipedia, and 3) Fever Thorne et al.
(2018), a claim verification dataset that requires assessing the validity of a claim against Wikipedia
and predicting a label of “SUPPORTS”, “REFUTES”, or “NOT ENOUGH INFO”.
Like Yao et al. (2022), we do not use the annotated Wikipedia passages and instead have the agent
choose what terms to search in Wikipedia. Given the compute cost involved with running such a
large number of experiments with large models and the number of questions involved in each dataset,
for HotpotQA and Fever we selected a random subset of 500 questions from the development set for
evaluation (however, for GSM8K we kept the full test set for evaluation). In addition, to control the
generation size, we limited the number of ReACT loops to a maximum of 3 across all experiments.

4.1    S ETUP

We hypothesized that the additional structure provided by a specification would be most useful for
weaker LLMs. To determine if this was the case, we evaluated against an ablated version of the


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Model     Few-Shot k      HotpotQA Acc. (%)               Fever Acc. (%)          GSM8K Acc. (%)
                             ReACT Abl.        ReACT       ReACT Abl.       ReACT   ReACT Abl.       ReACT
    MPT-7b         0             0.2            1.6           10.2           29.8      2.6            3.9
    MPT-7b         1             2.8            10.0          44.8           45.0      5.6            6.4
    MPT-7b         2             5.8            8.8           53.4           53.0      5.1            6.1
    MPT-7b         3             7.8            12.4          44.2           43.4      3.5            6.6
    MPT-30b        0             3.8            7.2           34.0           36.4      12.1           14.4
    MPT-30b        1             12.0           13.8          48.4           49.2      19.0           24.2
    MPT-30b        2             14.4           15.2          45.0           45.2      23.4           28.1
    MPT-30b        3             15.4           16.8          49.8           50.8      25.5           29.9
    SOTA ♣         –                    67.5                         89.5                     97.0
    ReACT♢         –                    27.4                         60.9                     N/A

Table 1: HotpotQA Yang et al. (2018), Fever Thorne et al. (2018), and GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021)
results. “ReACT Abl.” and “ReACT” refer to the partially and fully constrained agents. For Hot-
potQA and Fever, evaluation was performed on 500 question subsets of the development sets, while
GSM8K evaluation was performed on the complete test set. For reference, we also provide the re-
sults for the supervised state-of-the-art ♣ (Zhu et al. (2021); Lewis et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2023))
on all three datasets, and the results from the original ReACT ♢ which utilized PaLM-540B Chowd-
hery et al. (2022) as its underlying LLM


ReACT framework in experiments where we varied two hyperparameters of our system: 1) the
number of examples k provided in our few-shot prompts, which ranged from 0 to 3, and 2) the size
of the underlying LLM in terms of number of parameters, where the model was an MPT instruction
fine-tuned model Team (2023) with either 7 billion or 30 billion parameters.
Our implementation for both agents was built for the Huggingface Wolf et al. (2019) library, with
state transitions being monitored and executed by a layer of code that lies on top of the built-in
transformer models. Both systems had access to the same tools: 1) Calculator for GSM8K,
which executes the formula provided as input and returns a number, 2) Search for HotpotQA and
Fever, which returns the first 5 sentences from the Wikipedia page for the entity if it exists, or returns
the 5 most similar entities with Wikipedia pages, 3) Lookup for HotpotQA and Fever, which returns
the next sentence containing the input string in the last Wikipedia page searched for. To assess the
utility of content constraints, we restricted the Action state to only output valid tools.
Our comparison system was a partially constrained agent (shown in Figure 4) without explicit state
definitions for Action, Action-Input, and Answer. When the ablated specification was used,
the agent was not forced to output the text associated with each of those states (i.e., in the Thought
state, it was not forced to next output actions and their inputs). Instead, the only signal that those
keywords should be part of the LLM output would come from the prompts given to the agent. For
both the fully constrained and partially constrained agents, we took the final answer to be the text
output after “Answer:”, which should be found in the Answer and Final-Thought states for the
standard and ablated agents, respectively. In the Appendix, we provide all prompts used to initialize
both models (the prompts were the same for both agents).

5     R ESULTS

In Table 1 we provide the results for all three datasets. The “ReACT Abl.” and “ReACT” columns
show results for the partially and fully constrained agents. In the tables, we see that the results
largely follow our predictions, with the weakest models (i.e., the smaller models with fewer prompt
examples) exhibiting the most significant differences between the normal and ablated agents. No-
tably, with only a few exceptions (i.e., k ∈ {1, 2} for Fever), the ablated agent was always worse,
which indicates the value of providing constraints during agent generation.
For both datasets, the most pronounced differences were observed in the zero-shot case (i.e., when
the agent was given only the instructions for how to solve a problem with no examples). The 7b
models had the widest gap on Fever, with the standard agent exhibiting a near 20% improvement


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 5: Example of an output where the ablated agent does not conform to the desired behavior


over the ablated agent. We attribute this to the smaller model’s inability to follow instructions
without an example, as the ablated agent made no prediction at all for 60% of all questions (i.e., did
not predict one of the three possible labels for Fever). However, this appeared to only be an issue
for the zero-shot case, as the ablated agent made predictions for all of Fever when a single prompt
example was added.
The relative differences in performance between the two agents were more significant and more
consistent for both HotpotQA and GSM8K than for Fever. We attribute this to Fever being a much
simpler dataset, where the answer is only one of three possible options. Thus, whether the model
got distracted or not, as long as it predicted one of the three answers it would have a good chance
of answering correctly. In contrast, in both HotpotQA and GSM8K, the set of possible answers are
almost entirely unconstrained. This helps to explain why the ablated agent marginally outperformed
the unablated agent for k ∈ {1, 2} for Fever.
Lastly, the number of parameters had a clear effect on the utility of constrained decoding. As
evidenced by their performances in the zero-shot case, the 30b models were much more capable
of following instructions. Still, that the 30b model in the ablated agent was outperformed uniformly
by the main agent across all three datasets demonstrates that the use of constrained decoding may
still be of some benefit as the datasets and instructions get more complex.
In Figure 5, we provide an example where the ablated agent does not follow the desired behav-
ior (i.e., the behavior exemplified in the prompts given to the agent). As can be seen, the agent
repeatedly skips the Action-Input step, which means the action (Search or Lookup) is
executed with null inputs. In addition, the model terminates decoding after outputting for the
Final-Thought state, which means there is no predicted answer.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduced a framework for defining agents using LTL in a task-agnostic, domain
general fashion. The LTL formulation of an agent can be used to construct a constrained decoder,
which controls the high-level behavior of an agent at runtime. We demonstrated the utility of our
framework with experiments on three datasets, where we found that the hard constraints imposed on
generation by our approach can lead to an increase in agent performance.
We discussed the several benefits and advantages of our approach. First and foremost, the introduc-
tion of a standard format for defining agents makes the process of implementing alternative agent
types extremely straightforward. Second, because the LTL specification is provided prior to gen-
eration, it is straightforward to implement the monitor on top of the LLM generation code. Thus,
many decoder-side optimizations are possible that can reduce the amount of redundant computation
observed by prior works Xu et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023). In addition, the logic-based approach
makes it trivial to incorporate content constraints into decoding (as in Lu et al. (2021)).


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. Guided open vocabulary
  image captioning with constrained beam search. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Em-
  pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 936–945, 2017.
Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of model checking. MIT press, 2008.
Mohaddeseh Bastan, Mihai Surdeanu, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. Neurostructural decoding:
 Neural text generation with structural constraints. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 9496–9510, 2023.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023.
Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.12588, 2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023a.
Peng Gao, Jiaming Han, Renrui Zhang, Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Aojun Zhou, Wei Zhang, Pan Lu,
  Conghui He, Xiangyu Yue, et al. Llama-adapter v2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15010, 2023b.
Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
   Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and pro-
   gram synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12856, 2023.
Chris Hokamp and Qun Liu. Lexically constrained decoding for sequence generation using grid
  beam search. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1535–1546, 2017.
Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
  Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for
  multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.02406, 2022.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Ximing Lu, Peter West, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi.
  Neurologic decoding:(un) supervised neural text generation with predicate logic constraints. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4288–4299, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras,
  Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neurologic a* esque decoding: Constrained text
  generation with lookahead heuristics. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-
  ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  pp. 780–799, 2022.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.

Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.

Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.

Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning
  with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.

Amir Pnueli. The temporal logic of programs. In 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
 Computer Science (sfcs 1977), pp. 46–57. ieee, 1977.

Matt Post and David Vilar. Fast lexically constrained decoding with dynamic beam allocation for
 neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
 ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
 (Long Papers), pp. 1314–1324, 2018.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023a.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023b.

Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
  Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.

Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.

MosaicML NLP Team. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open-source, commercially usable
 llms, 2023. URL www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-7b. Accessed: 2023-05-05.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.

James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. FEVER: a large-
  scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification. In NAACL-HLT, 2018.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng
  Lim. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large lan-
  guage models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2609–2634, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.147.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Gerhard Weiss. Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed artificial intelligence. MIT
  press, 1999.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The knowl-
 edge engineering review, 10(2):115–152, 1995.
Binfeng Xu, Zhiyuan Peng, Bowen Lei, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Yuchen Liu, and Dongkuan Xu.
  Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18323, 2023.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2369–2380, 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chenguang
 Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models are
 strong context generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10063, 2022.
Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Zimu Lu, Weikang Shi, Sichun Luo, Zipeng Qin, Shaoqing Lu, Anya Jia,
  Linqi Song, Mingjie Zhan, et al. Solving challenging math word problems using gpt-4 code
  interpreter with code-based self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07921, 2023.
Yunchang Zhu, Liang Pang, Yanyan Lan, Huawei Shen, and Xueqi Cheng. Adaptive information
  seeking for open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06747, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   H YPERPARAMETERS AND H ARDWARE

There were not many hyperparameters to our approach beyond those listed in the experiments sec-
tion, as our LLMs were only used for inference. The decoding strategy for our LLMs was set to
greedy. In terms of hardware, our experimental setup utilized a HPC cluster with CPU and GPU
machines running Red Hat Enterprise Linux release 8.7 (Ootpa). The GPU machines had 2 CPU
cores and 100GB of RAM, and ran an NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU with 80GB of GPU memory.

A.2   AGENT P ROMPTS

A.3   AGENT D EFINITIONS


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Determine if there is an observation that SUPPORTS or REFUTES
   a Claim, or if there is NOT ENOUGH INFORMATION. You have
   access to the following tools:
   {{tool descriptions}}
   Use the following format:
   Question: the input question you must answer
   Thought: you should always think about what to do
   Action: the action to take, should be one of {{tool labels}}
   Action Input: the input to the action
   Observation: the result of the action
   ... (this Thought/Action/Action Input/Observation can repeat
   N times)
   Final Thought: this is the last thought
   Answer: this should be one of [SUPPORTS, REFUTES, NOT ENOUGH
   INFORMATION]

   Here are some examples.

   Claim: Nikolaj Coster-Waldau worked with the Fox
   Broadcasting Company.
   Thought: I need to look up Nikolaj Coster-Waldau and find if
   he has worked with the Fox Broadcasting Company.
   Action: Lookup
   Action Input: Nikolaj Coster-Waldau
   Observation: Cannot use Lookup without using Search first!
   Thought: I need to search instead.
   Action: Search
   Action Input: Nikolaj Coster-Waldau
   Observation: Nikolaj William Coster-Waldau (born 27 July
   1970) is a Danish actor and producer. He graduated from
   the Danish National School of Performing Arts in Copenhagen
   in 1993,[1] and had his breakthrough role in Denmark with
   the film Nightwatch (1994). He played Jaime Lannister in
   the HBO fantasy drama series Game of Thrones, for which he
   received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding
   Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.. Coster-Waldau has
   appeared in numerous films in his native Denmark and
   Scandinavia, including Headhunters (2011) and A Thousand
   Times Good Night (2013). In the U.S, his debut film role
   was in the war film Black Hawk Down (2001), playing Medal of
   Honor recipient Gary Gordon.[2] He then played a detective in
   the short-lived Fox television series New Amsterdam (2008),
   and appeared in the 2009 Fox television film Virtuality,
   originally intended as a pilot. Final Thought: Because
   he äppeared in the 2009 Fox television film Virtuality,
                                                          ¨ he
   should have worked with the Fox Broadcasting Company.
   Answer: SUPPORTS

   Claim:



       Figure 6: Fever Thorne et al. (2018) ReACT prompt with k = 1 few-shot examples


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Answer the following questions as best you can. You have
   access to the following tools:
   {{tool descriptions}}
   Use the following format:
   Question: the input question you must answer
   Thought: you should always think about what to do
   Action: the action to take, should be one of {{tool labels}}
   Action Input: the input to the action
   Observation: the result of the action
   ... (this Thought/Action/Action Input/Observation can repeat
   N times)
   Final Thought: this is the last thought
   Answer: this should be one of [SUPPORTS, REFUTES, NOT ENOUGH
   INFORMATION]

   Here are some examples.

   Question: What is the elevation range for the area that the
   eastern sector of the Colorado orogeny extends into?
   Thought: I need to lookup Colorado orogeny, find the area
   that the eastern sector of the Colorado orogeny extends into,
   then find the elevation range of the area.
   Action: Lookup
   Action Input: Colorado orogeny
   Observation: Cannot use Lookup without using Search first!
   Thought: I need to search instead.
   Action: Search
   Action Input: Colorado orogeny
   Observation: The Colorado orogeny was an episode of mountain
   building (an orogeny) in Colorado and surrounding areas.
   Thought: It does not mention the eastern sector. So I need
   to look up eastern sector.
   Action: Lookup
   Action Input: eastern sector
   Observation: (Result 1 / 1) The eastern sector extends into
   the High Plains and is called the Central Plains orogeny.
   Thought: The eastern sector of Colorado orogeny extends into
   the High Plains. So I need to search High Plains and find
   its elevation range.
   Action: Search
   Action Input: High Plains
   Observation: High Plains refers to one of two distinct land
   regions:
   Thought: I need to instead search High Plains (United
   States).
   Action: Search
   Action Input: High Plains (United States)
   Observation: The High Plains are a subregion of the Great
   Plains. From east to west, the High Plains rise in elevation
   from around 1,800 to 7,000 ft (550 to 2,130 m).[3]
   Final Thought: High Plains rise in elevation from around
   1,800 to 7,000 ft, so the answer is 1,800 to 7,000 ft.
   Answer: 1,800 to 7,000 ft

   Question:



      Figure 7: HotpotQA Yang et al. (2018) ReACT prompt with k = 1 few-shot examples

                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Answer the following questions as best you can. You have
   access to the following tools:
   {{tool descriptions}}
   Use the following format:
   Question: the input question you must answer
   Thought: you should always think about what to do
   Action: the action to take, should be one of {{tool labels}}
   Action Input: the input to the action
   Observation: the result of the action
   ... (this Thought/Action/Action Input/Observation can repeat
   N times)
   Final Thought: this is the last thought
   Answer: this should be one of [SUPPORTS, REFUTES, NOT ENOUGH
   INFORMATION]

   Here are some examples.

   Question: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April,
   and then she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips
   did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
   Thought: I need to use the number of clips in April to
   determine the number of clips sold in May. In May, Natalia
   sold half of the amount of clips that she did in April.
   Action: Calculator
   Action Input: 48 / 2
   Observation: 24
   Thought: Now I need to add the number of clips I calculated
   for May with the number of clips she sold in April
   Action: Calculator
   Action Input: 24 + 48
   Observation: 72
   Final Thought: So Natalia sold 72 clips altogether in April
   and May.
   Answer: 72

   Question:



      Figure 8: GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021) ReACT prompt with k = 1 few-shot examples


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (define react-agent
     (:states
       (Thought (:text "Thought:"))
       (Action (:text "Action:"))
       (Action-Input (:text "Action Input:"))
       (Observation (:text "Observation:") (:flags :env-input))
       (Final-Thought (:text "Final Thought:"))
       (Answer (:text "Answer:"))
     )
     (:behavior
       (next
         (until
           (next Thought Action Action-Input Observation)
           Final-Thought)
         Answer)
     )
   )


                           Figure 9: Specification for ReACT agent


   (define chain-of-thought-agent
     (:states
       (Thought (:text "Let’s think step by step."))
       (Answer (:text "Answer:"))
     )
     (:behavior
       (next Thought Answer)
     )
   )


                     Figure 10: Specification for Chain-of-Thought agent


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (define reflexion-agent
     (:states
       (Thought (:text "Thought:"))
       (Action (:text "Action:"))
       (Action-Input (:text "Action Input:"))
       (Observation (:text "Observation:") (:flags :env-input))
       (Final-Thought (:text "Final Thought:"))
       (Answer (:text "Answer:"))
       (Evaluator (:text "Evaluation:") (:flags :env-input))
       (Reflection (:text "Reflection:"))
       (Finish (:text "Generation complete!"))
     )
     (:behavior
       (until
         (next
           (until
             (next Thought Action Action-Input Observation)
             Final-Thought)
           Answer
           Evaluator
           Reflection)
         Finish)
     )
   )


                         Figure 11: Specification for Reflexion agent


   (define chat-bot-agent
     (:states
       (Chat-Bot (:text "Chat Bot:"))
       (User (:text "User:") (:flags :env-input))
     )
     (:behavior
       (always
         (next Chat-Bot User)
       )
     )
   )


                          Figure 12: Specification for Chat-bot agent


                                              18
