Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T EXT-F REE F EDERATED T RANSFORMERS K NOWL -
EDGE D ISTILLATION W ITHOUT GAN

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning process designed to protect user
         privacy by avoiding the transmission of user data during communication while
         training a model. Many techniques aim to enhance the performance of models
         through knowledge distillation but lack data on the server side. To address this is-
         sue, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are commonly employed to gener-
         ate data for model distillation. The GANs approach faces numerous challenges in
         recent popular large-scale Transformer-based NLP tasks, such as structural mis-
         matches in models, high computational complexity, and concerns regarding the
         privacy of client-generated text. Prior research has sought to enhance the process
         using auxiliary data to avoid the above issues, however, the selection of suitable
         data tailored to diverse tasks remains a challenging endeavor. To address the chal-
         lenges posed by GANs and auxiliary data, this work proposes a lightweight ap-
         proach that samples from the embedding structure of Transformers and learns a
         set of pseudo data for the distillation process, which draws inspiration from the
         concept of soft prompts. This lightweight approach does not require GANs or
         auxiliary data, incurs no communication overhead, and yields improved model
         performance with relatively lower computational costs on the server side. Our ex-
         periments yield superior results compared to methods that rely on auxiliary data
         on complex NLP tasks such as the SuperGLUE Benchmark (Wang et al., 2019).


1   I NTRODUCTION

Federated Learning (FL), a privacy-preserving distributed learning technique, has gained popular-
ity amid growing concerns about data privacy and the rise of privacy protection laws in over 90
countries (Li et al., 2021). Applied in various fields, including Natural Language Processing (NLP)
(Venkateswaran et al., 2022), Computer Vision (CV) (Lin et al., 2020), Industrial Artificial Intel-
ligence (IAI) (Hao et al., 2019), and Medical Informatics (Xu et al., 2021), FL involves multi-
ple clients collaboratively training a shared model. Two main categories include Cross-device for
low-capacity clients like smartphones (Karimireddy et al., 2021) and Cross-silo for organizations
with substantial computational resources (Huang et al., 2021). Noteworthy players such as Google
(Bonawitz et al., 2019), Apple (Paulik et al., 2021), and Meta (Stojkovic et al., 2022) actively de-
velop FL to ensure user privacy.
Data-free distillation, a crucial technical pathway to solve the data heterogeneity, i.e., the data in
clients are non-identically and independently distributed (Non-IID) in federated learning, enhances
the overall performance of the global model. Previous Data-free distillation of FL research like
FedGEN (Zhang et al., 2022a) and FedFTG (Zhang et al., 2022a) based on GAN often relies on
image tasks as primary benchmarks, neglecting NLP tasks. Other studies involving NLP tasks, such
as FedAUX Sattler et al. (2021) and FedDF Lin et al. (2020), typically circumvent GANs or opt for
auxiliary data distillation. Given the substantial gap in research on text tasks within FL’s data-free
distillation frameworks, exploring this area is both valuable and meaningful.
A practical issue arises with GAN in text generation (Alvarez-Melis et al., 2022). It is widely
acknowledged that a notable obstacle in NLP is that GANs are unable to generate differentiable
outputs, given the discrete nature of language models. This lack of differentiability hampers main-
stream FL Data-Free distillation frameworks shown in Figure 1, such as FedGEN (Zhang et al.,
2022a) and FedFTG (Zhu et al., 2021). These frameworks utilize GANs for target learning func-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tions but are ineffective in transmitting errors back to the generator, rendering them unsuitable for
generating synthetic text in NLP FL distillation tasks.
Can alternative text generation models be employed aside from
GANs? Our response is that the proposed solution entails sub-


                                                                            Embedding
stantial costs in terms of privacy preservation and computa-
tional overhead. The current state-of-the-art in text generation,                       Transformer
such as large-scale Transformer models like GPT-4, neces-


                                                                      G
sitates self-supervised training, involving memorizing client-
                                                                                          Coders
side text data. However, this introduces privacy concerns,
requiring intricate training mechanisms (Ponomareva et al.,                                           D
2022) and defense mechanisms (Guo et al., 2022) to ensure
Transformer models remember the text while safeguarding pri-      Figure 1: Creating a suitable and
vacy. Besides, memorizing client-side text data raises the fol-   privacy-preserving generator for
lowing issues:                                                    Transformers poses a formidable
                                                                  and intricate challenge.
    • Concerning privacy complex training (Ponomareva et al., 2022) and defense mechanisms (Guo
      et al., 2022) are required to ensure the Transformer remembers the text while protecting privacy.
      Simultaneously, precautions must be taken to prevent attackers from reconstructing text through
      pre-trained models (Zhang et al., 2022b), introducing both computational and communication
      overhead.
    • Regarding computational overhead deeper generative models (e.g., BERT, GPT) capable of
      memorizing more client-side text may exceed the computational capacity of the original task
      model, imposing a greater computational burden on clients.
    • Concerning communication overhead, the baseline Transformer for the original task already
      consumes substantial communication, such as FedKD (Liu et al., 2019) using shallow Tiny-
      BERT resulting in 0.17-1.03GB per mobile client. Introducing language generation models
      like FedGEN would further amplify communication overhead.

Our contributions To tackle the distillation challenge in Federated Learning NLP tasks, partic-
ularly when dealing with Transformer models and limited auxiliary data, we present a text-free
solution inspired by soft prompts. Our approach leverages diverse sampling from embeddings to
effectively enhance model performance. We introduce three embedding sampling methods, each
targeting improved distillation by optimizing samples through various objectives. This lightweight
approach eliminates the need for GANs or auxiliary data, involves no communication overhead, and
achieves enhanced model performance at relatively lower computational costs on the server side.
In cross-silo Federated Learning experiments on SuperGLUE benchmark tasks, using two down-
stream task models (with or without decoder structures), our approach outperforms solutions relying
on auxiliary data. Ablation experiments highlight the unique advantages of models with embed-
dings, demonstrating the efficiency and quality of sampling in embedding-enhanced models.
2    R ELATED WORKS
Federated learning faces several fundamental challenges such as imbalanced, non-iid data distribu-
tion and communication constraints. To solve these issues, we summarize two main approaches from
previous works, namely the model optimization approach and the knowledge transfer approach.
Model optimization The model optimization approach, represented by neural network mod-
els, typically utilizes local optimization algorithms such as SGD and Adam on clients. The Fe-
dAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) algorithm, proposed with the concept of federated learning, is one
of the most widely applied algorithms. Numerous studies have pointed out that the inconsistency
between local and global optimization directions hinders achieving desirable results (Li et al., 2022).
To address this issue, algorithms such as SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020) and FedOpt (Reddi
et al., 2020) have been introduced, which incorporate regularization and local gradient corrections.
Knowledge distillation The knowledge distillation approach was originally used for model com-
pression. FedDF (Lin et al., 2020) is the first algorithm to aggregate knowledge in FL using distil-
lation techniques. FedDF uses GAN for image tasks and auxiliary data for NLP tasks. Later, in the
domain of image generation tasks, the FedGEN (Zhu et al., 2021) algorithm employs GAN to learn


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the local distribution and complement data on the server side. The FedFTG (Zhang et al., 2022a) al-
gorithm utilizes GAN to learn difficult samples for the global model. Although these solutions have
achieved good performance on classical image classification datasets, the instability of adversarial
networks raises questions about their practical applicability. In the field of NLP, FedAUX (Sattler
et al., 2021) is developed to enhance data distillation by leveraging classifier weights. However,
the challenge of selecting appropriate auxiliary data for specific tasks still persists and knowledge
distillation for generative models lacks auxiliary distillation schemes. Another distillation approach
FedKD (Wu et al., 2022) involves distilling knowledge from a local large model to a global small
model, effectively reducing communication cost while maintaining excellent performance. Re-
cently, the distillation technique has evolved into the dataset condensation approach, which uses
distillation techniques to compress data, such DOSF (Zhou et al., 2020) and FedDM (Xiong et al.,
2022).


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1   F EDERATED LEARNING

We consider the federated deep learning problem in cross-silo scenarios. There is a set of learning
tasks T = {T1 , T2 , · · · , TM }, and a dataset D = {(x, y)}, where data (x, y) is from a distribution
D and x ∈ X , y ∈ Y.To solve all of the tasks together, we aim to train a neural network as f (x, w),
and let ŷ = f (x, ω) represent the predicted label.The population loss of the training neural network
parameters ω is L(ω) = Ex∼D [l(f (x, ω), y)] . In the classification problems, we can take the loss
function as the cross-entropy (CE) between the network output distribution and true distribution.
For two discreteP  distributions P and Q with the same support Y, their cross-entropy is defined as
CE(P ||Q) = − y∈Y P (y) log Q(y).
For the cross-silo scenario, there are K clients collectively working on the tasks. We abuse the
notation ‘clients’ in this paper to denote the local servers with an input dataset. For each client,
k ∈ [K], the data of it is from the distribution Dk , and this client k could join in a subset of all tasks.
All clients collaborate to obtain a global model ω with objective
                                           K
                                           X
                                     min         Ex∼Dk [l(f (x, ω), y)] .                               (1)
                                      ω
                                           k=1

Knowledge Distillation For KD in federated learning, typically it needs a proxy dataset DP to
minimize the discrepancy between the outputs from the teacher model ωT and the student model ωS .
A representative choice is to use Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to measure such discrepancy, it
                             P               P (y)
is defined as DKL (P ||Q) = y∈Y P (y) log( Q(y)    ).
Consider in the neural network, let f (·) be the logits outputs and σ(·) be the softmax function.
We can treat each client model ωk as a teacher, then the information is aggregated into the student
(global) model ω by:
                                                       K
                                                   1 X
                     arg min Ex∼DP [DKL (σ(            f (x, ωT ))||σ(f (x, ωS )))] .                   (2)
                          ωS                       K
                                                      k=1


3.2   T RANSFORMERS

The parameter ω of a Transformer model consists of three main components: the word embedding
layer ω emb , the encoder layers ω enc , and the optional decoder layers ω dec . These components are
followed by a task-specific head ω lm , which outputs the corresponding labels for the given task T .
The parameters except the embedding process are collectively referred to as the task parameters, we
denote them as ω f = {ω enc , ω dec , ω lm }.
Two approaches can be considered for downstream tasks. The first approach is the classic discrim-
inative Transformer. The final prediction probability of x is obtained directly from the output at
the [CLS] token position, which is embedded at the beginning of the input sentence. This can be
represented as:


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                P (y|x, ω) = σ(f (h(x; ω emb ); ω f )) ,                            (3)

where h(·) embeds x into space E , σ is the softmax function.
The second approach is the generative text-to-text model, which does not provide direct probabilities
for the labels corresponding to the task. Instead, it generates a series of words corresponding to the
task labels. The probability of the word sequence q1:L with input x can be factorized as follows:
                                                   L
                                                   Y
                                P (q1:L |x, ω) =         P (ql |q1:L , x, ω) .                      (4)
                                                   l=1

Here, q1:L represents the actual words corresponding to the predicted label ŷ. Typically, greedy
search or beam search is used to determine the final word sequence q1:L .
Overall, to maintain consistency in the output format of the model, whether it is a discriminative or
generative model, the function for the discriminator of a Transformer-based model can be written
P (y|x, ω) = σ(f (h(x; ω emb ), ω f )).

4   D IVERSITY R ANDOMLY S AMPLE M ETHOD
This section will provide a more rational distillation objective and elucidate efficient methods for
sampling embeddings. The previous distillation method, such as FedDF, weights all outputs of neu-
ral networks to obtain the teacher distribution. In contrast, our approach aims to fully consider the
independent cross-silo by generating a new proxy dataset with both similar and different information
among all clients.
As for the distinctive architecture of the Transformer model, it is not possible to distill the discrete
embedding layer. Therefore, we directly obtain new embedding layer parameters of the student
                                   1
                                     PK emb
model ωS as averaging ωSemb = K         k ωk    , and accomplish the distillation for other parameters
 f
ωS with the objective

                                  K
                             1 X
                     arg min     Eθ∼DS [DKL (σ(f (θ; ωkf ))||σ(f (θ; ωSf )))] .                     (5)
                          ωS K
                                 k=1

Here, θ represents pseudo-embedding samples extracted from the proxy dataset DS which will be
constructed later. We demonstrate that only adjusting the parameters ω f of the transformer on the
server side is already effective. For some models like T5, we can keep the embedding layers fixed
after the first time of training and not updated in the following stages to ensure the embedding layers
of all clients are the same.
To achieve this goal, we need to design a scheme that allows for comprehensive sampling within
the sample space of various client models. The simplest approach is to generate pseudo-samples by
introducing noise that follows the same distribution as the data and embedding. However, randomly
sampled noise may not necessarily lie within the sample space of client models. Inspired by (Ma
et al., 2020), we adjust the noise parameters to align with the objective function of client models,
thereby constructing effective pseudo-samples within the sample space of the clients.
(1) Random sampling In intuition, the input data for training the parts of the encoder and decoder
is directly sourced from the embedding layer, so directly random sampling from the embedding
seems like a reasonable operation. In practice, we have found that this random sampling method
yields improvements in BERT models, but its effectiveness is limited in other models.
(2) Target sampling Randomly sampled data lacks purpose, making it challenging to guarantee
its quality. Inspired by soft prompts, pseudo-samples extracted from the embeddings layer are sub-
sequently optimized using the target loss to align with the distribution output by the teacher model
on γktr . That is, we construct a target loss function by the cross-entropy as
                                         K
                                         X
                                Ltar =        CE(σ(f (θktr ; ωkf )); γktr ) .                       (6)
                                          k


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     Clients Upload Local Model

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vector                     Optimizable vector
     Token vector                                                         Decoder                                Gradient Backward
                                    Optimizable vector    Gradient         Decoder                                                                                                                      …                                  …


                                                                                         Logits
   Random sampling initialization                         Backward
                                                                            Decoder                              Gradient Backward


                                                                                           Logits
                                              …


                                                                                                                                                  Target or Adversary Sampling (Eq 6 or 7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vector                     𝜽


                                                                                             Logits
                                     𝜃 𝑡𝑟 𝑘                               Encoder
                                                                           Encoder
                                                                             Encoder                                                                                                                 Matric                   Optimizable Parameters
                                        Gradient Backward              𝜔𝑆
                                                                        𝜔𝑆                                                                                                                         Decoder                           Decoder
                                                                          𝜔𝑘


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Logits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Logits
             …


                                                                                                                            Distillation (Eq 8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Encoder                           Encoder


                                                                                              𝜸𝒕𝒓 , 𝜸𝒂𝒅 𝒌 ~𝑫𝒌
                                                                     Sampled vector
   Random Sample                                                           …                                                                                                                 𝝎                                 𝝎𝑺

                                                                 𝜃 𝑟𝑑 𝑘                                                                                                                                                       Optimizable
                                                                                                                                                                                             Transformers Model               Transformers Model

                                                                                                                 Gradient                                                                                                           𝜸𝒕𝒓 , 𝜸𝒂𝒅 𝒌 ~𝑫𝒌
     Token vector                                                           Decoder                              Backward

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pseudo-label follow 𝑫𝒌
                                                                                                                                                                                             Input to next module


                                                                                              Logits
     Token vector                   Optimizable vector                                                                                                                                                                          label distribution

   Random sampling initialization             …                                Encoder                                                                                                                                               Gradient Backward
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Loss function
   Common                                                  Gradient
   Embedding Layer                  𝜃 𝑎𝑑 𝑘                 Backward
                                                                          𝜔𝑆                                    Gradient Backward                                                                                                Gradient of color-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Loss function              corresponding loss function
                                                                                         Updated global model


Figure 2: Logic flow of the Three Server-Side Sampling Methods in FedDRS. Following the upload
of the model by the client, the process proceeds from left to right as follows: In the first stage, the
forward phase (white arrows), samples three sets of initial sample parameters from the Embedding
layer. Two of these samples are then fed into the model of clients and the global model. The loss for
target sampling and adversarial sampling is computed (Eq 6 or 7). In the second stage, the backward
phase (shaded arrows), noise samples are updated based on the distinct sampling losses. In the third
stage, the distillation phase, the distributions derived from the three sets of samples are employed to
distill the global model within the client model (Eq 8). The entire adversarial sampling process is
iterated several times to obtain the most updated global model.


Here, γktr represents a set of randomly generated pseudo-labels from distribution γk . Then, we will
use the gradient descent method to optimize it. During this optimization process, we can get the
pseudo samples.

(3) Adversary sampling In order to further enhance the quality of samples and increase the diver-
sity of pseudo samples, we drew inspiration from the concept of FedFTG. Our objective is to obtain
pseudo samples that exhibit correct γkad labels on ωk while incurring a significant loss on ωS . A
sample that is correctly classified by the teacher model but misclassified by the student model can
be considered as high-quality for the student, and therefore, it is deemed worth learning from.
                                         K
                                         X
                           Ladv =                 CE(σ(f (θkad ; ωkf )); γkad ) − λ · CE(σ(f (θkad ; ωSf )); γkad ) .                                                                                                                                     (7)
                                              k

Here, the parameter λ controls the strength of the adversarial effect between the teachers (clients
model) and student (global model), γkad represents a set of randomly generated pseudo-labels from
distribution γk . We can also use the gradient descent method to optimize this adversary loss function
and get the pseudo samples.
Distillation Combining the aforementioned three sampling methods at the aggregate level re-
sults in a diversified set of pseudo-embeddings Dp = {θrd , θtr , θad }K         k=1 and pseudo-labels
{γ tr }K
       k=1 ,{γ ad K
                 }k=1 . This dataset  can be employed to facilitate  the distillation  process for the en-
coder and decoder layers, bypassing the need for embedding layer distillation. The fine-tuning loss
function is as                         XK
                   L({θ}Kk=1  , ωS ) =     DKL (σ(f ({θ}k ; ωkf ))||σ(f ({θ}k ; ωSf ))) .              (8)
                                       k
Finally, starting with the model obtained  after FedAvg, we fine-tune the model by minimizing the
loss function as Eq (8). By employing several iterations of adversary sampling methods, we are
able to gradually rectify the distributional discrepancies caused by FedAvg loss and enhance the
performance of the model.


                                                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 FedDRS: Diversity Randomly Sample
Input: communication round T, client number K, the datasets of clients {D}K         k=1 , parameters of
    student ωS , adversary sampling iterations I and I ∗ , update steps η, η ∗ and β.
Output: Global model parameters ωS .
 1: for t = 1 → T do
 2:     St ← select active clients uniformly at random
 3:     for k ∈ St do
 4:         ωk ← ClientUpdate(ωS ; Dk , ς)
 5:     end for
 6:     ωS ← FedDRS({ω}k∈St , I)
 7: end for
                                   ∗
 8: ωS ← FedDRS({ω}K       k=1 , I )    ▷ Post-processing
 9: return ωS
10: FedDRS({ω}M     m=1 , I):
                  1
                    PM
11:      ωS ← M       m ωm
12:      for i = 1 → I
13:          sample a proxy dataset {θrd , θtr , θad }M                          tr   ad M
                                                      m=1 , and pseudo labels {γ , γ }m=1
               tr    tr
14:          θk ← θk − β∇θk Ltar tr

15:          θkad ← θkad − β∇θkad Ladv
16:          ωS ← ωS − η ∗ ∇ωS L({θrd , θtr , θad }M  m=1 , ωS )
17:      end for
18: return ωS



We have placed the pseudocode for the timing of sampling and distillation in Algorithm 1, and we
summarize the detailed logic flow for sampling from Embeddings in Figure 2. As an expert in the
field of Federated Learning and Knowledge Distillation, I have overseen the integration of these
components to optimize model performance. During T rounds of communication, the server selects
a group of online trainable clients (often simulated using a random number in experiments). The
global model is then sent to the clients for updates. After one round of communication, we start with
an average parameter as the starting point for distillation. Through I rounds of sampling and fine-
tuning, we obtain the best model for that round. In the final round, we perform a post-processing
step by increasing the parameters I and the adversarial term λ, thereby enhancing the adversarial
strength to achieve the best performance in the last round.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we commence by conducting comparative baseline experiments on the effects of
FL with Cross-silo knowledge distillation on complex NLP understanding tasks SuperGLUE (Wang
et al., 2019). Subsequently, we proceed with ablation experiments to investigate the individual ef-
fects of various sampling methods, parameters, and other components within the experimental setup.
The SuperGLUE benchmark is a complex multi-task test set designed to evaluate the performance
of natural language understanding models, challenging them with more difficult language tasks.

5.1   EXPERIMENT CONDITION

We considered various text classification tasks and chose the SuperGLUE benchmark to construct
our experimental environment. The SuperGLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019) is a complex
multi-task test set designed to evaluate the performance of natural language understanding models,
challenging them with more difficult language tasks. It represents challenging NLP general tasks
and is suitable for the properties of imbalance and non-iid in FL.

SuperGLUE Benchmark The SuperGLUE Benchmark (Wang et al., 2019) is a natural language
understanding (NLU) task evaluation benchmark designed to test and advance the ability of ma-
chines to comprehend natural language. It consists of a set of more challenging tasks that encompass
semantic diversity, requiring models to possess higher levels of reasoning, inference, and contextual
understanding. In comparison to some simpler NLU benchmarks, SuperGLUE places a greater em-


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                           alpha → 0                                                                                     alpha = 0.05                                                                                                            alpha = 0.5
     :6&                                                               :6&                                                                                                                :6&
      :L&                                                               :L&                                                                                                                 :L&
      57(                                                               57(                                                                                                                 57(
5H&R                                                             5H&R                                                                                                              5H&R
          5'                                                                 5'                                                                                                                   5'
0XOW                                                             0XOW                                                                                                              0XOW
        L5&                                                               L5&                                                                                                               L5&
    &23$                                                             &23$                                                                                                              &23$
          &%                                                                 &%                                                                                                                &%
                                                                         %RRO4                                                                                                           %RRO4
   %RRO4


                                &OLHQWV                                                                                 &OLHQWV                                                                                                         &OLHQWV


Figure 3: Dirichlet Distribution of Tasks on Clients. The figure depicts the allocation of training
sets for various tasks in SuperGLUE, ranging from completely independent distributions to identical
distributions with respect to the parameter α, where α → 0, 0.05, 0.5.

phasis on evaluating the comprehensive understanding and generalization capabilities of models,
providing researchers with a more rigorous testing environment to foster advancements in the field
of natural language processing.

Data distribution We use the Dirichlet distribution with a parameter α to create varying degrees of
non-iid in our task dataset. In our work, we define the scenario where the parameter α of the Dirichlet
distribution approaches zero. In this case, the distribution generates the identity matrix, allocating all
samples of each category exclusively to a single client. As we increase the Dirichlet alpha parameter
to 0.05 and 0.5, the data becomes more independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), with a total
of twenty clients considered. The specific distributions of eight tasks with different alpha are shown
in Figure 3.

Experiment hyperparameter settings In the experiment, the learning rate for the fixed update of
the model is set to η = 1e − 3 and fine-tuning learning rate η ∗ = 1e − 5. The learning rate for
adjusting the sampling is set to β = 1e − 1, and the update is performed for 100 iterations. The size
of a batch pseudo samples θ is 64 × 64 × 768. As a conservative measure during communication,
we set adversary sampling iterations I = 1, I ∗ = 3. In the cross-silo scenario, we assume an 80%
participation rate for all clients. The parameter λ controls the strength of the adversarial is always
set by 0.1. Each model is trained 5 times within the client, with an echo value of 5. In each training
iteration, 250 samples are randomly selected from the client for training. Adafactor is used for
updating all models. All tests were conducted with a fixed random seed of 42.

Baselines We conducted a rigorous comparative analysis between the classical algorithm FedAvg
and the latest knowledge distillation-based algorithms FedDF, FedKD, and FedAUX. For FedDF and
FedAUX, we utilized the BookCorpus dataset as auxiliary data, extracting 16,000 random samples.
The distillation process involved a step size of 1e-5 and 1 epoch of fine-tuning. To ensure a fair
comparison, FedKD employed two equally sized RoBERTa models for local mutual distillation,
without utilizing SVD during communication. The differential privacy component was excluded
from FedAUX. Two representative Transformers were selected for the experiment: the classical
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) + MLP discriminative model (encoder only) and the T5-base text-to-
text generation model (with encoder and decoder both). In the context of all SuperGLUE tasks, a
model performs multiple tasks simultaneously. The specific data processing methods and labeling
approaches for the SuperGLUE dataset have been detailed in Appendix A.

5.2              M AIN E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS

The experimental results are shown in the Table 1. For the RoBERTa-Base model, our algorithm
FedDRS utilizes a mixed sampling approach including all three sampling schemes, so-called Fed-
DRS(mixed). FedDRS(mixed) exhibits a maximum improvement of up to 2 points and becomes the
best algorithm in extremely unbalanced data distribution when α approaches 0. As the parameter
α increases and the data distribution becomes close to iid, our FedDRS(mixed) still keeps at the
top although the scores of baselines also increase. Overall, we conclude that FedDRS gets the best
scores in this imbalanced and non-iid scenario, and it does not need auxiliary data like FedAUX or
FedDF.
For the T5-base model, we take FedAvg as the only baseline. Because the lack of labeled auxiliary
data as the inputs of the decoder part, it is challenging to conduct experiments using FedAUX and
FedDF approaches. Due to the minor improvement that can be neglected in target sampling, we


                                                                                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     Dirichlet
                 SuperGLUE
                                                         0               0.05               0.5
Model                 Algorithms                        C=8                      C=20
                      FedDRS(mixed)                  69.06±0.42      70.27±0.63         70.37±1.88
                      FedAUX                         67.07±0.29      69.93±1.01         70.37±0.75
                      FedDF                          66.55±1.25      67.11±0.96         69.40±0.78
RoBERTa-Base          FedAvg                         64.24±0.95      67.68±1.71         69.65±1.07
                      FedKD(2xRoBERTa)               66.97±0.41      64.34±0.98         68.30±0.42
                      FedDRS(AdOnly)                 72.95±0.95      70.82±0.85         72.50±0.51
T5-Base               FedDRS(PostOnly)               71.36±0.00      72.70±0.02         72.70±0.01
                      FedAvg                         70.17±0.75      71.65±0.76         71.51±0.35

Table 1: SuperGLUE Dev Scores for FedDRS and baselines which presents the performance of two
type of Transformers on three different data distributions using various FL algorithms for the last
five rounds of communication, measured by the average score ± standard deviation.

only employed adversary sampling (AdOnly). For some cases such as α = 0.05, the satisfactory
performance of FedAvg achieving balanced updates and adversarial sampling did not improve effec-
tively, we opted to perform post-processing only (PostOnly) based on FedAvg. This approach can
not only enhance the model’s effectiveness but also reduce computational costs. The Experiment
results show that our algorithms also work best on T5-Base.
A series of experiments demonstrate that diversity sampling techniques are better for the non-iid
distribution. FedDRS(mixed) can compensate for missing distributions to a greater extent. Fed-
DRS(AdOnly) is a stable approach to enhancing model performance. Post-processing offers higher
flexibility and can further enhance model performance. By effectively combining multiple strategies,
it is possible to maximize model performance.

Communication Cost Analysis FedAUX involves transmitting an initial auxiliary dataset and
score information matrix, resulting in higher communication overhead than FedAVG, which only
requires local client updates during communication. The overall communication overhead of Fed-
DRS and FedDF is comparable to FedAVG when considering only label distribution information,
with negligible model costs. For FedKD, which employs smaller models for communication, its loss
is expected to be smaller than FedAvg, but the model’s efficiency is comparatively lower.

5.3   A BLATION STUDY

The effects of different sampling
methods We compared the effects Sample Method                    Accuracy(%) Improvement(%)
of three data generation schemes:
random sampling, target sampling, FedAvg                            34.95                -
and adversary target sampling, along-      +random sample           35.94              0.99
side their combinations, on the per-       +target sample           35.54              0.59
formance of FedAvg. By evaluating          +adversary  sample       36.41              1.45
the first communication round with α     FedAvg+MixSample           38.25              3.30
approaches 0 and I = 1, we mea-
sured the improvements in model per- Table 2: Accuracy of RoBERTa Improvement by Diversity
formance obtained from each sam- Sampling Methods in the Initial Communication
pling method. Each algorithm underwent 10 rounds of sampling and testing, with average scores
calculated. The testing process was controlled using a fixed random seed to eliminate random value
influences. Results in Table 2 showed improvements from each method. Combining the three meth-
ods produced diverse synthetic samples, and the hybrid algorithm yielded a performance enhance-
ment compared to the sum of the individual effects of the method. Thus, the mixed samples enhanced
the benefits of all three sampling techniques.

The performance of FedDRS on models without embeddings In order to verify the applicability
of FedDRS(PostOnly) to models lacking an Embedding layer, we conducted experiments under con-


                                                 8
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                PostOnly                                                                                     Method                                                                  Accuracy                          RS                                       TS                                          AS                    TA                              RTA
                                                                                                                             FedAvg                                                                  39.38                             -0.07 ↓                                  0.04 ↑                                      0.09 ↑                0.10 ↑                          0.04 ↑
                                CIFAR 100 (ResNet18)
                                                                                                                             FedOpt                                                                  54.42                             -0.05 ↓                                  0.00                                        0.02 ↑                0.03 ↑                          0.02 ↑
                                                                                                                             FedAvg                                                                  84.61                             0.00                                     0.00                                        0.00                  0.00                            0.00
                                EMNISTCR(CNN)
                                                                                                                             FedOpt                                                                  84.88                             0.00                                     0.00                                        0.00                  0.00                            0.00

  Table 3: The enhancement effects of various sampling methods on top of other optimization tech-
  niques, including RS (Random Sampling), TS (Target Sampling), AS (Adversary Sampling), TA
  (TS&AS), and RTA (RS&TS&AS), are investigated.

  ditions consistent with the TFF Benchmark (Reddi et al., 2020), with subsequent post-processing.
  As indicated by the results in Table 3, the overall effect exhibits a marginal improvement with only
  slight decreases. Random sampling often leads to reduced performance, but alternative sampling
  strategies yield only minor enhancements. This experiment illustrates that FedDRS is better suited
  for distillation with models that possess an embedding layer.
  Choices of adversarial functions and suitable adversarial strength I In adversarial sampling,
  we introduce an adversarial strength coefficient I and compare the magnitudes of three different
  sampling strengths. Ultimately, we find that a strength of 0.1 can precisely yield a high-quality
  sample with a certain level of adversarial strength. We also evaluate the effect of replacing CE with
  KLD, as shown in the graph. The KLD curve abruptly decreases after a prolonged convergence,
  failing to produce a consistently high-quality sample. Therefore, CE outperforms KLD in terms of
  stability.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NOG ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOG ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOG ,

7HDFKHU PRGHO DFFXUDF\


                                                                                                                                             7HDFKHU PRGHO DFFXUDF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'HY VFRUH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           )HG$YJ %DODQFHG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )HG$YJ ,PEDODQFHG



                                                                                                              FH ,
                                                                                                              FH ,
                                                                                                           FH ,

                                                                3VHXGR VDPSOH LWHUDWLRQV                                                                                            3VHXGR VDPSOH LWHUDWLRQV                                                                          &RPPXQLFDWLRQ WLPHV
                                                (a) Adversarial Training Curve With CE                                                                                               (b) Adversarial Training Curve with KLD                                                                      (c) Dev Score of Using Balance Trick or not

  Figure 4: The quality curve (a,b) of samples obtained during sampling iterations varies with the
  change in sampling iterations, and the KLD, as an adversarial term, fails to stably sample high-
  quality data points. In general, using CE with I = 0.1 ensures both adversarial strength and sample
  quality. (c) shows the dev score of the global model with communication times by using the balance
  trick or not. The balance trick on different clients makes the dev score much higher.

  Data balance trick It is worth noting that data is often highly imbalanced in a cross-silo setting.
  Aggregating models with sample quantity as weights can lead to severe unfairness. In our experi-
  ments, we employed a simple balancing trick by constraining the training of each client not to exceed
  a certain threshold. For SuperGLUE, we controlled the number of training samples for each client
  not to exceed the count of the client with the fewest samples at the current iteration.

   6                                                    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK
  To address the challenges of transformer distillation in Federated Learning involving GANs and
  auxiliary text, we propose three methods for sampling from the embedding layer. Across various
  complex tasks constructed within the FL-supergule framework, our approach outperforms methods
  that utilize auxiliary data. This approach is lightweight, incurring no additional communication
  overhead, and exhibits the most significant performance gains in non-iid scenarios. However, it is
  worth noting that sampling from the model still raises privacy concerns. In our future work, we
  intend to incorporate privacy-preserving measures, such as differential privacy, to ensure the privacy
  of the pseudo-samples.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Alvarez-Melis, Vikas Garg, and Adam Kalai. Are gans overkill for nlp? Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:9072–9084, 2022.

Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex Ingerman, Vladimir
  Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub Konečnỳ, Stefano Mazzocchi, Brendan McMahan, et al. Towards
  federated learning at scale: System design. Proceedings of machine learning and systems, 1:
  374–388, 2019.

Shangwei Guo, Chunlong Xie, Jiwei Li, Lingjuan Lyu, and Tianwei Zhang. Threats to pre-trained
  language models: Survey and taxonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06862, 2022.

Meng Hao, Hongwei Li, Xizhao Luo, Guowen Xu, Haomiao Yang, and Sen Liu. Efficient and
 privacy-enhanced federated learning for industrial artificial intelligence. IEEE Transactions on
 Industrial Informatics, 16(10):6532–6542, 2019.

Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang.
  Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7865–7873, 2021.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian U
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Breaking the centralized barrier for cross-device federated
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:28663–28676, 2021.

Qinbin Li, Zeyi Wen, Zhaomin Wu, Sixu Hu, Naibo Wang, Yuan Li, Xu Liu, and Bingsheng He.
  A survey on federated learning systems: vision, hype and reality for data privacy and protection.
  IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2021.

Qinbin Li, Yiqun Diao, Quan Chen, and Bingsheng He. Federated learning on non-iid data silos: An
  experimental study. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE),
  pp. 965–978. IEEE, 2022.

Tao Lin, Lingjing Kong, Sebastian U Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Ensemble distillation for robust model
  fusion in federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2351–2363,
  2020.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.

Xinyin Ma, Yongliang Shen, Gongfan Fang, Chen Chen, Chenghao Jia, and Weiming Lu. Ad-
  versarial self-supervised data-free distillation for text classification. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6182–6192,
  2020.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.

Matthias Paulik, Matt Seigel, Henry Mason, Dominic Telaar, Joris Kluivers, Rogier van Dalen,
 Chi Wai Lau, Luke Carlson, Filip Granqvist, Chris Vandevelde, et al. Federated evalua-
 tion and tuning for on-device personalization: System design & applications. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2102.08503, 2021.

Natalia Ponomareva, Jasmijn Bastings, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Training text-to-text transformers
  with privacy guarantees. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022,
  pp. 2182–2193, 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečnỳ,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00295, 2020.
Felix Sattler, Tim Korjakow, Roman Rischke, and Wojciech Samek. Fedaux: Leveraging unla-
  beled auxiliary data in federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2021.
Branislav Stojkovic, Jonathan Woodbridge, Zhihan Fang, Jerry Cai, Andrey Petrov, Sathya Iyer,
  Daoyu Huang, Patrick Yau, Arvind Sastha Kumar, Hitesh Jawa, et al. Applied federated learning:
  Architectural design for robust and efficient learning in privacy aware settings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00807, 2022.
Praveen Venkateswaran, Vatche Isahagian, Vinod Muthusamy, and Nalini Venkatasubramanian.
  Fedgen: Generalizable federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01914, 2022.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. arXiv preprint 1905.00537, 2019.
Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Lingjuan Lyu, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie. Communication-
  efficient federated learning via knowledge distillation. Nature communications, 13(1):2032, 2022.
Yuanhao Xiong, Ruochen Wang, Minhao Cheng, Felix Yu, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Feddm: It-
  erative distribution matching for communication-efficient federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.09653, 2022.
Jie Xu, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker, Jiang Bian, and Fei Wang. Federated
   learning for healthcare informatics. Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research, 5:1–19, 2021.
Lin Zhang, Li Shen, Liang Ding, Dacheng Tao, and Ling-Yu Duan. Fine-tuning global model via
  data-free knowledge distillation for non-iid federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10174–10183, 2022a.
Ruisi Zhang, Seira Hidano, and Farinaz Koushanfar. Text revealer: Private text reconstruction via
  model inversion attacks against transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10505, 2022b.
Yanlin Zhou, George Pu, Xiyao Ma, Xiaolin Li, and Dapeng Wu. Distilled one-shot federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07999, 2020.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Junyuan Hong, and Jiayu Zhou. Data-free knowledge distillation for heterogeneous
  federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12878–12889. PMLR,
  2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     S UPER GLUE DATASET

The numbers of samples in each task of SuperGLUE are shown in Tabel.4.

                          Corpus    Train/Dev(Test) Cut Train Task type
                          BoolQ        9427/3270        9427       QA
                          CB              250/57         250       NLI
                          COPA           400/100         400       QA
                          MultiRC       5100/953         963       QA
                          ReCoRD        101k/10k        9000       QA
                          RTE           2500/278        2500       NLI
                          WiC           6000/638        6000      WSD
                          WSC            554/104         554      coref.
Table 4: (Cutted) SuperGLUE Dataset (Wang et al., 2019). To prevent a single task type from
dominating the allocation of all client cuts due to excessively large data volumes in our experiment
settings, we appropriately trimmed the training data. QA is a question-and-answer task.


A.2     P REPROCESSED E XAMPLES

In this section, we proposed our preprocessed examples of each task in the SuperGLUE dataset.

A.2.1    B OOL Q
Original Input
      Question: science begins with the premise that knowledge should first be acquired through
      observation
      Passage: A priori and a posteriori – These terms are used with respect to reasoning (epis-
      temology) to distinguish “necessary conclusions from first premises” (i.e., what must come
      before sense observation) from “conclusions based on sense observation” (which must follow
      it). Thus, the two kinds of knowledge, justification, or argument, may be glossed:
Processed Input
      boolq question: science begins with the premise that knowledge should first be acquired
      through observation. passage: A priori and a posteriori These terms are used with respect
      to reasoning epistemology to distinguish necessary conclusions from first premises ie what
      must come before sense observation from conclusions based on sense observation which must
      follow it Thus the two kinds of knowledge justification or argument may be glossed
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Yes

A.2.2    WIC
Original Input
      Word: place
      Sentence1: Do you want to come over to my place later?
      Sentence2: A political system with no place for the less prominent groups.
Processed Input
      wic word: place. sentence1: Do you want to come over to my place later. sentence2: A political
      system with no place for the less prominent groups
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Mismatch


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2.3   WSC
Original Input
     Text: Mark told Pete many lies about himself, which Pete included in his book. He should have
     been more skeptical.
     span1_text: Mark
     span2_text: He
Processed Input
     wsc: Mark told Pete many lies about himself which Pete included in his book * He * should
     have been more skeptical
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Difference

A.2.4   CB
Original Input
     Premise: It was a complex language. Not written down but handed down. One might say it was
     peeled down.
     Hypothesis: the language was peeled down
Processed Input
     cb hypothesis: the language was peeled down. premise: It was a complex language Not written
     down but handed down One might say it was peeled down
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Entailment

A.2.5   RTE
Original Input
     Premise: No Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq Yet.
     Hypothesis: Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq.
Processed Input
     rte hypothesis: Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq. premise: No Weapons of Mass
     Destruction Found in Iraq Yet
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Not_entailment

A.2.6   R E C O RD
Original Input
     Passage: The harrowing stories of women and children locked up for so-called ’moral crimes’
     in Afghanistan’s notorious female prison have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside.
     ... Crimes include leaving their husbands or refusing an arrange marriage 62 children live there
     and share cells with their mothers and five others
     Query: The baby she gave birth to is her husbands and he has even offered to have the courts
     set her free if she returns, but @placeholder has refused
     Entities: ’Mariam’, ’Badam Bagh’, ’Nuria’, ’Afghanistan’
Processed Input
     record answer: Mariam. query: The baby she gave birth to is her husbands and he has even
     offered to have the courts set her free if she returns but @placeholder has refused. passage: The
     harrowing stories of women and children locked up for socalled moral crimes in Afghanistans
     notorious female prison have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside ... Crimes in-
     clude leaving their husbands or refusing an arrange marriage 62 children live there and share
     cells with their mothers and five others


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     record answer: Badam Bagh. query: The baby she gave birth to is her husbands and he has
     even offered to have the courts set her free if she returns but @placeholder has refused. pas-
     sage: The harrowing stories of women and children locked up for socalled moral crimes in
     Afghanistans notorious female prison have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside ...
     Crimes include leaving their husbands or refusing an arrange marriage 62 children live there
     and share cells with their mothers and five others
     record answer: Nuria. query: The baby she gave birth to is her husbands and he has even of-
     fered to have the courts set her free if she returns but @placeholder has refused. passage: The
     harrowing stories of women and children locked up for socalled moral crimes in Afghanistans
     notorious female prison have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside ... Crimes in-
     clude leaving their husbands or refusing an arrange marriage 62 children live there and share
     cells with their mothers and five others
     record answer: Afghanistan. query: The baby she gave birth to is her husbands and he has even
     offered to have the courts set her free if she returns but @placeholder has refused. passage: The
     harrowing stories of women and children locked up for socalled moral crimes in Afghanistans
     notorious female prison have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside ... Crimes in-
     clude leaving their husbands or refusing an arrange marriage 62 children live there and share
     cells with their mothers and five others
Original Target: Nuria
Processed Target: ’Wrong’,’Wrong’,’Correct’,’Wrong’

A.2.7   COPA
Original Input
     Premise: My body cast a shadow over the grass.
     Choice1: The sun was rising.
     Choice2: The grass was cut.
     Question: Cause
Processed Input
     copa choice1: The sun was rising. choice2: The grass was cut. premise: My body cast a
     shadow over the grass. question: cause
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: Choice_one

A.2.8   M ULTI RC
Original Input
     Paragraph: While this process moved along, diplomacy continued its rounds. Direct pressure
     on the Taliban had proved unsuccessful. ... The U.S. effort continued.
     Question: What did the high-level effort to persuade Pakistan include?
     Answer: Children, Gerd, or Dorian Popa
Processed Input
     multirc question: What did the highlevel effort to persuade Pakistan include? answer: Children
     Gerd or Dorian Popa. paragraph: While this process moved along diplomacy continued its
     rounds Direct pressure on the Taliban had proved unsuccessful ...The US effort continued
Original Target: 0
Processed Target: False


                                                 14
