Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NHANCING F INE -T UNING P ERFORMANCE OF
L ARGE -S CALE T EXT- TO -I MAGE M ODELS ON S PE -
CIALIZED DATASETS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Fine-tuning pre-trained large-scale text-to-image models on specialized datasets
         has gained popularity for downstream image generation tasks. However, direct
         fine-tuning of Stable-Diffusion on such datasets often falls short of yielding sat-
         isfactory outcomes. To delve into the underlying reasons, we introduce a novel
         perspective to investigate the intrinsic factors impacting fine-tuning outcomes. We
         identify that the limitations in fine-tuning stem from an inability to effectively im-
         prove text-image alignment and reduce text-image alignment drift. To tackle this
         issue, we leverage the powerful optimization capabilities of contrastive learning
         for feature distribution. By explicitly refining text feature representations during
         generation, we enhance text-image alignment and minimize the alignment drift,
         thereby improving the fine-tuning performance on specialized datasets. Our ap-
         proach is plug-and-play, resource-efficient, and seamlessly integrates with existing
         controllable generation methods. Experimental results demonstrate a significant
         enhancement in fine-tuning performance achieved by our method.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, fine-tuning models pre-trained on large-scale datasets has become the research
paradigm for downstream tasks (Raffel et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022;
Hoffmann et al., 2022). Image generation is no exception, with newly developed large-scale text-to-
image models (e.g., Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), DALLE-
2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)) demonstrating impressive performance. Among these, Stable-Diffusion
stands out as a widely used, open-source, and arguably one of the most effective large-scale text-to-
image models.
When faced with a variety of text-to-image downstream scenarios, especially on specialized
datasets (Wah et al.; Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008) (e.g., buildings of distinct styles, unique sub-
species, specific individual faces), researchers often fine-tune Stable-Diffusion to achieve generation
effects that better capture the domain’s characteristics (Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022). However,
the performance in practical applications doesn’t always meet our expectations. In many cases,
even when optimizing the text encoder concurrently, directly fine-tuning the Stable-Diffusion on
these datasets fails to produce satisfactory results (see Figure 1). It cannot accurately generate data
distribution and sample features consistent with the target dataset.
A natural approach is to provide more detailed control information, such as refined textual descrip-
tions or more precise positional details. However, this strategy has inherent drawbacks. Using just
text or positional information such as coordinates, dimensions, or scales often fails to encapsulate
the full complexity and nuances of an image. Moreover, it escalates the annotation costs. As a
result, the need for a more universal, straightforward, and efficient fine-tuning method has become
pressing.
To address this, we delved deeply into the intrinsic factors affecting fine-tuning performance from
the perspective of feature distribution. We introduced two indicators, text-image alignment and text-
image alignment drift, and deeply analyzed them across different data and models. We found that
although direct fine-tuning enhanced text-image alignment and reduced text-image alignment drift,
the gains were relatively limited. This suboptimal performance can be attributed to the diffusion


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model’s indirect learning approach: rather than directly learning textual feature representations, it
learns indirectly through predictions in the image space.
In light of this, we employed a contrastive learning approach (Radford et al., 2021), leveraging its
powerful capability in feature distribution optimization. By directly optimizing textual feature repre-
sentations during generation, we substantially enhanced the text-to-image alignment and reduced the
text-to-image alignment drift. This improvement significantly boosted the fine-tuning performance
on specialized datasets.
Our contributions are as follows:

          • We conducted a quantitative analysis of the fine-tuning process in text-to-image generation
            models from a feature distribution perspective, uncovering the intrinsic factors affecting
            fine-tuning outcomes.

          • We introduced a universal fine-tuning approach for text-to-image generation models tai-
            lored to specialized datasets. For scenarios emphasizing a specific niche or those with
            minimal inter-class variances—which are prevalent in downstream tasks—our model of-
            fers significant performance improvements.

          • Our fine-tuning strategy is plug-and-play, demanding minimal additional resources and
            placing low requirements on the dataset.


                  Indigo Bunting                                   Red-winged Blackbird
GT
SD
FT-unet
FT
Ours


Figure 1: Images showcasing the Indigo Bunting and Red-winged Blackbird—two bird species from
the CUB dataset. ‘SD’ is short for Stable-Diffusion, ‘FT’ is short for fine-tuning. ‘FT-unet’ implies
that the text encoder is frozen, and only the unet is optimized. The generation results of pre-trained
large-scale text-to-image models on these specialized datasets are often lacking, underscoring the
need for fine-tuning. Traditional fine-tuning methods, whether focusing solely on the unet or jointly
with the text encoder, fail to yield satisfactory outcomes. For illustration, while the Indigo Bunting
is distinctively recognized by its vibrant blue hue, the produced image doesn’t accurately reflect
this characteristic color. Likewise, the emblematic red patches on the wings of the Red-winged
Blackbird are misrepresented in terms of their placement by the fine-tuned model.



                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   L ARGE - SCALE T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

Building upon the ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) architecture, GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021) incor-
porated a text encoder and established a 3.5 billion parameter text-conditional diffusion model using
classifier free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). Its performance significantly surpasses previous
diffusion models. Subsequently, Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) trains within the VAE’s
latent space and utilizes cross-attention to fuse text and image features, achieving highly realistic
image generation. While models like DALLE2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022) also achieve comparable results, Stable-Diffusion, as an open-source model, has been widely
adopted in downstream tasks and comes with a plethora of applications.

2.2   F INE - TUNING T EXT- TO -I MAGE M ODEL

Since Stable-Diffusion is an open source model, most applications of text-to-image models are
designed based on it. The Dreambooth method (Ruiz et al., 2023) has recently garnered signifi-
cant attention in few shot image generation. Innovatively, Dreambooth uses rare tokens as unique
identifiers, associates them with specific subjects, and fine-tunes the backbone and text encoder in
Stable-Diffusion to synthesize relevant, photorealistic images. Notably, the Dreambooth method
only addresses scenarios where the training set consists of a single object type. When the training
set encompasses multiple categories or objects (for instance, the CUB dataset contains 200 bird
species), Dreambooth requires training a separate generator for each category or object, which is
highly inefficient.
In addition, Guo et al. (2023) achieve zero-shot image generation by learning the feature represen-
tation of text. Furthermore, a series of studies have explored various fine-tuning techniques with
an emphasis on extending the model’s functionalities (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Mou et al., 2023).
These methods typically incorporate and optimize additional network structures while keeping the
original text-to-image model frozen. This adaptation allows the model to accept alternative input
forms, such as canny edge or user sketching.
Additionally, some research efforts have delved into fine-tuning diffusion models from the perspec-
tive of improving computational efficiency. For instance, the Low Rank Approximation (LORA)
approach aims to alleviate the computational demands of training large-scale models and has been
demonstrated to be effectively applied in the fine-tuning of text-to-image models.

3     I MPACT OF F INE - TUNING THE D IFFUSION M ODEL ON F EATURE
      R EPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we explore the impact of fine-tuning on Stable-Diffusion from the perspectives of
text-image alignment and text-image alignment drift, both grounded in feature distribution analysis.
Subsequently, leveraging these two indicators, we conducted a quantitative analysis on both real and
generated data to evaluate the impact of fine-tuning on feature distributions. We choose CLIP as
our multimodal feature extractor, which consists of a text encoder and an image encoder. Notably,
the CLIP text encoder happens to be a component of Stable-Diffusion, therefore, fine-tuning Stable-
Diffusion will also correspondingly alter the feature representation capability of the text encoder
within it.
Throughout this paper, ’fine-tuning Stable-Diffusion’ refers to jointly optimizing UNet and the text
encoder, as opposed to solely optimizing UNet. Prior works indicate that joint optimization yields
superior results, albeit with higher computational demands. This phenomenon is also illustrated in
Figure 1.

3.1   T EXT-I MAGE A LIGNMENT

For the pre-trained CLIP model, the features extracted by the text encoder and image encoder from
different modalities are aligned. The alignment of text and image features in the CLIP model enables
a deeper semantic understanding between visuals and text, facilitates cross-modal tasks, and ensures


                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


consistent and broad generalization across tasks. The contrastive loss function can be a indicator to
assess this alignment between image and text data.
We found that the alignment of text and image features also affects the quality of generation (See
Figure 2a). We used Stable-Diffusion to generate an image for each prompt on the CUB test set.
Afterward, we randomly selected multiple categories and calculated the clip contrastive loss and
FID for the generated results of each category. As can be observed from Figure2a, there is a clear
positive correlation between FID and clip contrastive loss.
Then, we examine if fine-tuning can enhance the alignment between image and text data. For both
the unfine-tuned and fine-tuned Stable-Diffusion, we extract the text encoder and pair it with the
image encoder from CLIP to form a multimodal feature extractor, then use the contrastive loss
function as a indicator to assess the alignment between text and image data. By randomly selecting
ten batches of data, we compute the intra-batch contrastive loss.
The results are shown in Figure 2b. Given CLIP’s extensive pre-trained on large datasets, there
remains room for optimizing its alignment on specific downstream datasets like CUB. However, the
decrease in fine-tuned Stable-Diffusion (green lines) is not significantly distinct from the unfine-
tuned model (yellow lines). It means that although fine-tuning in greupdated the weights of the text
encoder, there was no significant improvement in the text-image alignment.

      110                                                                           2.15

                                                                                    2.10
      100
                                                             Text-image alignment


                                                                                    2.05
       90
                                                                                    2.00
FID


       80                                                                           1.95

                                                                                    1.90
       70
                                                                                    1.85
              2.8   3.0   3.2    3.4     3.6     3.8   4.0                                 1   2    3    4   5    6    7   8   9   10
                          Text-image alignment                                                               Groups
               (a) Text-image alignment and FID                                                (b) Result on generated data.

Figure 2: Left: The relationship between text-image alignment and FID. The regression line was
obtained using the method of least squares. Right: ‘SD’ is short for unfine-tuned ‘Stable-Diffusion’,
‘SD-FT’ is short for ‘fine-tuned Stable-Diffusion’. For each model, we conducted an analysis based
on the real data and its generated data.

Conclusion: Fine-tuning Stable-Diffusion doesn’t significantly aid the text encoder in aligning text
and image data.

3.2         T EXT-I MAGE A LIGNMENT D RIFT

After examining the alignment between the text feature x and image feature y for each model, we
now turn our attention to the relationship between their respective changes, ∆x and ∆y. We refer
to this relationship as the text-image alignment drift. Consistent drift implies that altering the input
text would consistently modify the generated image, a property beneficial for semantic interpolation
(Song et al., 2020) and image editing (Hertz et al., 2022).
For each model, We still extract its text encoder and pair it with CLIP image encoder as a multi-
modal feature extractor. Then we randomly select two categories, and compute the Fréchet Distance
between the text feature of the two categories as ∆xi , and the Fréchet Distance between the image
feature of the two categories as ∆yi . After repeating the above process N times, we obtain the data
{(∆xi , ∆yi )}Ni=1 . We visualize the results using t-SNE and plot them in Figure 3.

To intuitively discern the data distribution across different models, we visualize each model’s data
separately using contour plots, as illustrated in Figure 4.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           6


                                           4


                                           2
                       t-SNE Component 2
                                           0


                                           2


                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD-Real
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD-FT
                                           6                                                                                                                                                           Ours
                                                             15                       10               5                  0                        5           10                      15                    20
                                                                                                                t-SNE Component 1

Figure 3: T-SNE result of feature alignment drift. SD-real: the unfine-tuned model on the real
data. SD: the unfine-tuned model on corresponding generated data. SD-FT: the fine-tuned model
on corresponding generated data. Ours: our model on corresponding generated data.

6                                                                  6                                                          6                                               6


4                                                                  4                                                          4                                               4


2                                                                  2                                                          2                                               2


0                                                                  0                                                          0                                               0


2                                                                  2                                                          2                                               2


4                                                                  4                                                          4                                               4


6                                                                  6                                                          6                                               6


    20   15   10   5              0            5   10   15    20       20   15   10        5   0   5       10   15   20           20   15     10   5   0   5   10   15   20       20        15    10     5        0   5   10   15   20


         (a) KDE of SD-Real                                                      (b) KDE of SD                                              (c) KDE of SD-FT                                     (d) KDE of Ours.

                                                                                      Figure 4: KDE of different models.


It’s evident that the data of unfine-tuned Stable-Diffusion (yellow) is predominantly in the top-right
corner, substantially deviating from the real data (blue). Even after fine-tuning, the data (green)
remains considerably off from real data. This partially explains the challenge in fine-tuning the gen-
erated images by merely adjusting the text since the correlation between text and image alterations
becomes disrupted. The red data points represent our method, elaborated in the subsequent section.
Conclusion: Fine-tuning struggles to capture the inherent alignment drift between text and image
features.


    4         C ONTRASTIVE G ENERATION

The analysis in the previous section revealed that direct fine-tuning on specialized datasets does
not significantly improve the two indicators related to feature distribution that influence the gener-
ation effect. Therefore, during the training of our generative model, we fully exploit the ability of
contrastive learning to optimize feature distributions, directly enhance the textual feature represen-
tation, rectify the two factors affecting the fine-tuning results, and thereby improve the fine-tuning
performance.
Multimodal contrastive learning often operates on a sample-level basis. For image-text pairs (xi , ci ),
we construct positive and negative samples (xi , cj ). When i = j, xi and cj are positive samples
for each other, otherwise, they are negative samples for each other. However, in real-world sce-
narios, specialized datasets might only have category names without captions. Thus, besides in-
tegrating sample-level contrastive learning with the generation process, we also emulate scenarios
with datasets lacking captions and introduce category-level contrastive learning where images and


                                                                                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


texts within the same category mutually serve as positive samples. The overview of our approach is
illustrated in Figure 5.

                                                                                                       ❆
                                                                                                          Image
                                                                                                         Encoder
                         Stable-Diffusion                        Sample-level   Category-level

                                        UNet
                                                                                                         Projector
              ❆
                VAE
               Encoder


                                                                                                 ❆   Frozen
                                                                                                     Skip Connection
                                                                                                     Cross Attention
   pro
  prompt
   pro          Text
                                Encoder Hidden States    Projector
    pro
     pro       Encoder                                                                               Postive Pair

                                                                                                     Negetive Pair


                                      Figure 5: Overview of our approach.


Prompt Design A well-structured prompt format lays the foundation for optimizing textual fea-
tures. Initially, the common prompt format for multimodal models was “a photo of [class].”(Radford
et al., 2021). Additionally, in the design of prompts for diffusion models, the concept of an indicator
has proven to be a successful approach (Ruiz et al., 2023). The primary idea is to utilize a specific
token as a hint for a batch of data, allowing the model to learn the specific data set through that hint.
However, for scenarios with numerous categories, it’s challenging to allocate a rare token for each
category simultaneously. Hence, we sought a more universal solution.
We turned our attention to the characteristics of the tokenizer’s vocabulary. Tokenizers are widely
recognized to exhibit three distinct characteristics: (i) Mapping low-frequency words to larger IDs;
(ii) Assigning newly encountered tokens to newly generated IDs; and (iii) Avoiding the splitting of
pure numbers. Given these insights, we adopted the strategy of using the category index incremented
by 50,000 as the hint. This approach resonates with the peculiarities of specific datasets (such as
face databases), wherein each entity or category is uniquely pinpointed by an index.
In summary, for datasets with captions, we employ the sample-level approach, and the prompt is
designed as “[id of class] + 50000, a photo of [class], [caption]”. for those without captions, we
employ the category-level approach, the prompt is designed as “[id of class] + 50000, a photo of
[class]”.

Sample-level Contrastive Generation We use the bidirectional contrastive loss in CLIP model,
which aimed at aligning image and text representations in a mutual embedding space. Given an
image representation v and a text representation t, the similarity between them is measured as:
                                                                v⊤ t
                                               sim(v, t) =               .                                           (1)
                                                             ∥v∥2 · ∥t∥2

The objective of the loss is to augment the similarity between matching image-text pairs and dimin-
ish the similarity with negative samples. Formally, for a given image vi and its corresponding text
description ti , the loss considering both directions is:
                                     exp(sim(vi , ti )/τ )            exp(sim(vi , ti )/τ )
           Lctr (vi , ti ) = − log PN                         − log PN                         ,                     (2)
                                    j=1 exp(sim(vi , tj )/τ )        j=1 exp(sim(vj , ti )/τ )

where τ is a temperature parameter and N is the batch size.

Category-level Contrastive Generation At this point, the matching relationship between positive
and negative samples has changed. Within the same category, images and texts are both considered
as positive samples for each other. Accordingly, the contrastive loss is modified as follows:


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    P                             P
                                    tr ∈Pi exp(sim(vi , tr )/τ ) + vs ∈Qi exp(sim(vi , tr )/τ )
          Lctr (vi , ti ) = − log                 PN
                                                    j=1 exp(sim(vi , tj )/τ )
                                    P                             P                                 (3)
                                    tr ∈Pi exp(sim(vs , ti )/τ ) + vs ∈Qi exp(sim(vs , ti )/τ )
                          − log                   PN                                            ,
                                                    i=1 exp(sim(vi , tj )/τ )
where Pi represents the set of texts in the batch that belong to the same category as the image vi ,
and Qi represents the set of images in the batch that belong to the same category as the text ti .

Overall Optimization The total loss is:
                                           L = Ldif f + λLctr ,                                     (4)

where where Ldif f is the diffusion loss. The structure of our model is shown in Figure 3, where the
image encoder is frozen and is used to guide the learning of the text encoder during the generation
process.

5     E XPERIMENTAL
Datasets Experiments are conducted on the CUB (Wah et al.) and Oxford Flowers (Nilsback &
Zisserman, 2008) datasets. We consider two types of experiments: in the first, the original cap-
tions of the datasets are preserved, while in the second, we remove these captions, relying solely
on category labels to mimic datasets used in downstream tasks without captions. The CUB dataset
comprises images of 200 bird species, while the Oxford Flowers dataset covers 102 flower cate-
gories.

Evaluation Metrics We report the widely-used Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al.,
2017) and Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) metrics. In addition, following (Sinha et al.,
2021) we report the linear classification accuracy (Acc., measured in percentage) to more intu-
itively quantify the model’s confusion regarding finer categorizations, which is an important metric
for datasets like CUB, where the class differences are subtle. FID measures the distributional dis-
crepancy between generated and real images, with a lower value indicating closer resemblance of
generated images to real ones. IS evaluates the quality and diversity of generated images; a higher
IS value typically signifies superior image quality and variety. Both metrics utilize the Inception net-
work as a feature extractor. Some literature (Ye et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2018) suggests that since
the Inception network is trained on ImageNet, its IS metric might not be optimal for evaluations on
other datasets. Therefore, for the CUB and Oxford Flowers datasets, we follow Zhang et al. (2018),
using an Inception model fine-tuned on these datasets for feature extraction.

Experimental Details We use Stable-Diffusion-2.1-base as our base model. The CLIP model we
adopt is CLIP-ViT-H-14. We replace the text encoder without projection layers in SD with a text
encoder that has projection layers. The image encoder also has a projection layer. Adam optimizer
is used to train the network with base learning rates of 1e-5 for the generator and 1e-6 for the text
encoder. We use a batch size of 24 and train the model for only 5 epochs, which approximately
takes 3 hours on a single A100 GPU for the CUB dataset. A contrast coefficient of 0.1 is employed.
During testing, we randomly select prompts from the test set and generate images from them. Each
image in test set might correspond to multiple text descriptions; in such cases, we randomly choose
one. For the fine-tuning of the Inception network, following the method in (Ye et al., 2023), we use
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4, only fine-tuning the last layer.

5.1   C OMPARISONS

Text-image Alignment and Text-image Alignment Drift As Figure 2b shows, our method (red)
directly enhances the alignment between text and image. As evident from Figure 2a, this improved
alignment facilitates the learning of the generator. Figure 3 and Figure 4 reveal that the text-image
alignment drift of our model closely resembles the alignment drift observed in the real data. This
could imply that when the text features change, the generation results from our model are more
stable and controllable.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quantitative Results For the captioned CUB and Oxford Flowers datasets, we utilize an instance-
level contrastive generation approach. Conversely, for the non-captioned CUB* and Oxford Flow-
ers* datasets, we employ a class-level contrastive generation technique. As seen in Table 2, we have
significantly enhanced the quality of generated images. Additionally, the observed improvement
in the Acc. metric is indicative of our model’s enhanced capability to capture the unique features
intrinsic to each subclass, allowing for more precise categorizations.

                        Table 1: Quantitative results on captioned datasets.

                   Model                   CUB                  Oxford Flowers
                                   FID      IS         Acc     FID     IS      Acc
                   SD             18.97    5.35    56.24      22.14   3.95   40.32
                   SD-FT-unet     13.64    5.75    59.71      16.88   4.27   42.81
                   SD-FT          12.83    5.82    60.02      16.12   4.31   42.99
                   Ours           10.51    5.98    63.91      14.02   4.42   46.07


                      Table 2: Quantitative results on non-captioned datasets.

                   Model                  CUB*                  Oxford Flowers*
                                   FID      IS         Acc    FID     IS       Acc
                   SD             18.16    5.47    57.81      21.50   4.10   41.08
                   SD-FT-unet     14.55    5.70    59.40      17.72   4.26   42.77
                   SD-FT          14.04    5.75    59.94      17.24   4.29   42.83
                   Ours           12.15    5.81    64.02      15.50   4.36   46.75


Qualitative Results As Figure 1 shows (the bottom row), for the class ‘Indigo Bunting’, it is
characterized by its blue hue, yet only the bird generated by our method match this coloration.
Similarly, for the class ‘Red-winged Blackbird’, only specific areas on its wings manifest in red.
Our model approximates the correct position of the red-wing, whereas other models do not.
In fact, we believe this result is notably significant, as we did not provide any additional detailed
annotations (e.g., the position of the red-wing). Yet, the generated outcome shows more refined im-
provements. This might be attributed to our model’s ability to better capture the feature distribution
of the text during fine-tuning, leveraging the contrastive approach, and fully harnessing the potent
capabilities of the pre-trained model.

5.2   A BLATION S TUDY

For the multi-objective loss function, we analyze the impact of the balancing coefficient λ on CUB
datasets.
                                   Table 3: Ablation study on λ.

                                   λ        FID         IS    Acc
                                   0.75    12.14       5.80   63.87
                                   0.1     12.15       5.81   64.02
                                   0.3     15.27       5.48   60.05
                                   1.0     20.72       4.88   45.45



6     C ONCLUSION
In order to investigate the factors affecting the fine-tuning performance of text-to-image models
on specialized datasets, we conducted quantitative experimental analysis from the perspective of


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


feature distribution. We identified text-image alignment and text-image alignment drift as indicators
influencing fine-tuning outcomes. Based on these findings, we employed contrastive learning to
directly optimize text features, leading to improvements in both text-image alignment and text-image
alignment drift, thereby enhancing fine-tuning quality.
Given that Stable-Diffusion is not only the sole open-source large-scale text-to-image model but
also arguably the most effective image generation model available, we conducted our experiments
exclusively on Stable-Diffusion. However, since the text encoder is an essential component of text-
to-image models, our method is also applicable to fine-tuning other architectures of text-to-image
models.

R EFERENCES
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Jiayi Guo, Chaofei Wang, You Wu, Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Humphrey Shi, Gao
   Huang, and Shiji Song. Zero-shot generative model adaptation via image-specific prompt learn-
   ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 11494–11503, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.              Classifier-free diffusion guidance.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian conference on computer vision, graphics & image processing, pp.
 722–729. IEEE, 2008.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.
Abhishek Sinha, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. D2c: Diffusion-decoding mod-
  els for few-shot conditional generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  12533–12548, 2021.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
C Wah, S Branson, P Welinder, P Perona, and S Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset.
  california institute of technology; pasadena, ca. Technical report, USA: 2011. Technical Report
  CNS-TR-2011-001.[Google Scholar].
Senmao Ye, Huan Wang, Mingkui Tan, and Fei Liu. Recurrent affine transformation for text-to-
  image synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2023.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dim-
  itris N Metaxas. Stackgan++: Realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial net-
  works. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 41(8):1947–1962, 2018.
Hanqing Zhang, Haolin Song, Shaoyu Li, Ming Zhou, and Dawei Song. A survey of controllable
  text generation using transformer-based pre-trained language models. ACM Computing Surveys,
  2022.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.


                                               10
