Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AVALON ’ S G AME OF T HOUGHTS : BATTLE AGAINST
D ECEPTION THROUGH R ECURSIVE C ONTEMPLATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review
 Warning: This work contains examples of potentially unsafe model responses.


       Ⅰ. Misleading Information                     Evil roles try to deceive good roles                Ⅳ. Communication
 PLAYER 1 (Morgana)                                                                            PLAYER 6 (Merlin)

           I'm aligned
           As Merlin, I’m with
                          loyal tothe good side,
                                   Arthur.
                                                                     VS.                                   I know Player 1's evil and must
           hoping to join the Quest Team.                   Good roles counteract evil roles               subtly exclude him from the
                                                                                                           Quest Team.
 PLAYER 5 (Loyal Servant of Arthur)
                                                                                               PLAYER 6 (Merlin)
            (Deceived    byloyal
                            Player  1's words)
            As Merlin, I’m       to Arthur.                                                              Player 1 is a bit suspicious,
            I trust Player 1 and agree they                                                              particularly after the previous
            should be on the Quest Team.                                                                 failed Quest.


    Ⅱ. Formulation Contemplation                                                                   Ⅲ. Refinement Contemplation
 PLAYER 6 (Merlin)                                                                             PLAYER 6 (Merlin)
              What roles do others play?                                                                    What could the other players
              As Merlin, I know Player 1 is                                                                 think of my prior speaking?
              evil, I should be careful.            First-Order Perspective Transition         PLAYER 6 (Merlin)
 PLAYER 6 (Merlin)
                                                                                                            Revise: Hinting Player 1's role
           Despite Player 1's evil, we can                                                                  exposes me. Safer: "Player 1
           let them join the Quest team.           Second-Order Perspective Transition                      seems suspicious."

Figure 1: The Illustrative Framework of Our Proposed Recursive Contemplation (ReCon).
Specifically, ReCon presents a cognitive process with two stages: contemplation of formulation and
refinement, each associated with first-order and second-order perspective transition, respectively.


                                                               A BSTRACT

            Recent breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs) have brought remark-
            able success in the field of LLM-as-Agent. Nevertheless, a prevalent assumption
            is that the information processed by LLMs is consistently honest, neglecting the
            pervasive deceptive or misleading information in human society and AI-generated
            content. This oversight makes LLMs susceptible to malicious manipulations,
            potentially resulting in detrimental outcomes. This study utilizes the intricate
            Avalon game as a testbed to explore LLMs’ potential in deceptive environments.
            Avalon, full of misinformation and requiring sophisticated logic, manifests as a
            “Game-of-Thoughts”. Inspired by the efficacy of humans’ recursive thinking and
            perspective-taking in the Avalon game, we introduce a novel framework, Recur-
            sive Contemplation (ReCon), to enhance LLMs’ ability to identify and counteract
            deceptive information. ReCon combines formulation and refinement contempla-
            tion processes; formulation contemplation produces initial thoughts and speech,
            while refinement contemplation further polishes them. Additionally, we incor-
            porate first-order and second-order perspective transitions into these processes
            respectively. Specifically, the first-order allows an LLM agent to infer others’
            mental states, and the second-order involves understanding how others perceive
            the agent’s mental state. After integrating ReCon with different LLMs, extensive
            experiment results from the Avalon game indicate its efficacy in aiding LLMs to
            discern and maneuver around deceptive information without extra fine-tuning and
            data. Finally, we offer a possible explanation for the efficacy of ReCon and ex-
            plore the current limitations of LLMs in terms of safety, reasoning, speaking style,
            and format, potentially furnishing insights for subsequent research.


                                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1      I NTRODUCTION
            “Your thoughts and memories are transparent to the outside world, like a book placed out in public,
            or a film projected in a plaza, or a fish in a clear fishbowl. Totally exposed. Readable at a glance.”
                           The Three-Body Problem, a Hugo Award-winning science fiction novel by Cixin Liu
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have propelled their success in the area of
LLM-as-Agent (Liu et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2023), among which a series of works focus on multi-agent communications (Park
et al., 2023a; FAIR et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Mandi et al., 2023), demonstrat-
ing intriguing observations and emergent cooperative behaviors. However, a typical underlying
assumption in these studies is that the information processed by LLMs is consistently honest, de-
void of deception or misinformation. This results in LLMs that, akin to the epigraph, are transparent
and cognitively straightforward but unprepared for deceptive contexts.
In reality, human society and AI-generated content are full of deceptive or misleading con-
tent (Vosoughi et al., 2018; Sprigings et al., 2023; King, 2018; Ettinger & Jehiel, 2010). Imagine a
future where AI agents could master all skills in comprehending human intentions, communicating
with social norms, and learning human values or even forming their internal values, recognizing
and counteracting deceptive content becomes essential for achieving artificial general intelligence
(AGI). LLMs, if unprepared to discern and manage deceptions, risk aligning with immoral or even
malevolent values, making them vulnerable to malicious manipulations (Shevlane et al., 2023; Park
et al., 2023b). For instance, if LLMs are dispatched to negotiate with business competitors, failing to
discern and react to deceptive content could result in a misalignment with the misleading informa-
tion provided by the competitors, potentially leading to substantial economic losses. Consequently,
it becomes imperative to equip LLMs with the capacity to identify and counteract deceptive inputs.
As an initial step, we employ one of the most well-known language games, Avalon, as our exper-
imental platform. We aim to explore the potential of LLMs in more realistic environments with
misinformation and understand the challenges of implementing LLMs in deceptive contexts. Given
its complexity, marked by intense linguistic communication, hidden roles, deceptions, and intricate
logic, Avalon surpasses the scope of a mere language game (Serrino et al., 2019). It is more aptly de-
scribed as a “Game-of-Thoughts”, necessitating advanced thinking processes to formulate complex
logic. Intriguingly, our findings indicate that within the Avalon game, the adoption of human-like
thought patterns, such as recursive thinking (Grant, 2021) and perspective-taking (Ruby & Decety,
2001; Sobel & Blankenship, 2021), significantly enhances the ability of LLMs to perform well.
Motivated by these insights, we present a novel framework, Recursive Contemplation (ReCon), to
equip LLMs to identify and tackle deceptive information. As shown in Figure 1, ReCon integrates
two cognitive processes, namely, formulation and refinement contemplation. The former generates
initial thoughts and spoken content, while the latter refines them to form more sophisticated ones.
Furthermore, inspired by humans’ perspective-taking, we introduce first-order and second-order
perspective transitions in the contemplation processes. Concretely, first-order perspective transition
enables an LLM agent to infer others’ mental states from its own perspective, while second-order
one involves understanding how others perceive the agent’s mental state from others’ perspective.
Experiment results, both quantitative and qualitative, indicate its efficacy in helping LLMs detect
and navigate deceptive information without additional fine-tuning or data. We also offer a potential
explanation for the effectiveness of ReCon and explore the existing limitations of LLMs related to
safety, reasoning, speaking style, and format. These discussions may generate valuable insights for
future research. In summary, our paper’s key contributions are:
    • We spotlight the limitations of current LLM agents in tackling deceptive content, and propose to
      utilize the Avalon game to test LLMs’ deception-handling capabilities.
    • Drawing inspiration from human recursive thinking and perspective-taking, we introduce Recur-
      sive Contemplation, integrating two cognitive processes, formulation contemplation and refine-
      ment contemplation, along with first-order and second-order perspective transitions.
    • We apply ReCon to different LLMs and extensively test it in the Avalon game. The results,
      from both end-to-end gameplay and multi-dimensional analysis, demonstrate ReCon’s ability to
      empower LLM agents to identify and counter deceptions without extra fine-tuning or data.
    • We provide a possible explanation for ReCon’s efficacy, and discuss LLMs’ current limitations
      in safety, reasoning, speaking style, and format, possibly yielding insights for future studies.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     BACKGROUND                                                            Good Side

Here we introduce deceptions in the Avalon                       Merlin
game (§2.1) and associated challenges (§2.2).                    Merlin subtly suggests who's evil, leads the
Related work can be found in Appendix A.                         good side, and avoids identity exposure.
                                                                 Percival
2.1   D ECEPTIONS IN THE AVALON G AME                            Percival seeks the true Merlin and discerns
                                                                 Morgana's lies pretending to be Merlin.
Avalon is a language game of deception, involv-
                                                                 Loyal Servant of Arthur (X2)
ing "good" and "evil" teams (Figure 2). The ob-                  Loyal Servant of Arthur aids the good side
jective is for players to either complete or sabo-               without any special information.
tage quests according to their allegiance.
For brevity, a detailed introduction to Avalon is                          Evil Side
deferred to Appendix B. This section focuses ex-               Morgana
clusively on the game’s deceptive elements.                    Morgana pretends to be Merlin, aims to
Concealed roles Each player gets a secret                      deceive Percival and sows good discord.
good or evil role. Good players don’t know                     Assassin
each other’s roles, while evil players knows each              Assassin aims to turn the tide by unmasking
                                                               Merlin upon three successful quests.
other. Evil players deceive by acting as good
ones and spreading misinformation to mislead
the good ones and tip decisions in their favor.     Figure 2: Role introduction in the Avalon game.
Team approval Players vote on the proposed quest team, with deception being crucial as players
attempt to infer allegiances from votes, and evil players seek to discreetly sway the vote while
keeping their disguise.
Quest undermining Players select team members to embark on quests. The selected ones decide
whether to support or sabotage it. The good players invariably support the quests, whereas evil
players can choose to either sabotage or strategically support quests to elude exposure.
Deliberation and inference Players engage in discussions and debates to discern whom they can
trust. Evil players exploit this phase to disseminate false information, instigate skepticism, and
mislead the good players, whereas the good players employ inference to unmask the impostors.
To win the game, the good players are required to successfully accomplish the majority of the quests,
while the evil players need to mislead the good players to ensure the majority of the quests fail.

2.2   C HALLENGES FOR LLM S IN D ECEPTIVE E NVIRONMENTS
We demonstrate the challenges for LLMs to be used in deceptive environments. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, we summarize three major challenges for LLMs as follows.
Misled by malicious content In deceptive settings, LLM agents can be misled by malicious con-
tent. Figure 3(a) shows an example from Avalon where an LLM agent, as Arthur’s loyal servant
(a good player), is deceived by content from Assassin (an evil player), who misleadingly proposes
replacing a good player with an evil one for seeming balance and revelation of evil players—a seem-
ingly plausible but inherently harmful suggestion. Assassin’s real goal is to mislead players to accept
evil ones. However, when the LLM agent uses Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), it not
only misses the deceit but also wrongly believes that evil players can aid quest success.
Exposing private information LLM agents struggle to maintain confidential information se-
curely, which is a significant risk in deceptive environments. Figure 3(b) illustrates a representative
instance where the LLM agent discloses private information in the Avalon game. Specifically, in
Figure 3(b), Merlin counters the team proposal that includes an evil player by disclosing his iden-
tity as Merlin and conveying his awareness that the team incorporates an evil player. This would
consequently lead to Merlin being targeted for assassination.
Hidden thought deception In deceptive environments, the employment of LLMs to enact decep-
tions may sometimes be unavoidable. As human users, we desire to maintain control over LLMs and
have insights into their internal processes. Despite this, Figure 3(c) illustrates that LLMs typically
do not disclose their internal thoughts, even with CoT. More explicitly, within Figure 3(c), Morgana,
to ensure the success of the evil side, feigns alignment with the good side. In doing so, Morgana
intentionally omits their ally, Assassin, from the team to maintain covert and secure trust from the
good side. This act of deception could result in serious ramifications if human users remain unaware
of Morgana’s true intentions and fail to intervene before the unfolding of consequent events.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Misled by Malicious Content            Exposing Private Information            Hidden Thought Deception

    We should ensure team balance          Player 1, Player 4.                    Private hint for Morgana: Player 4
    and replace a good player with an                                             is Assassin, the ally of Morgana.
    evil one to expose the evil players.
                                           Player 4 was part of the past failed
                                           mission. As Merlin, my instincts       I suggest a team with Players 1, 2, 3,
    I understand the concern with team     hint toward them as somebody we        and myself, omitting Player 4 due to
    balance as an evil player can enhan-   should be cautious of.                 the risk associated with his particip-
    ce quest success.                                                             ation in the failed mission.

                                           Reviewing past mission outcomes,
    I agree with the concern about team    it’s worrisome that Player 4 was       I need to subtly favor evil. To rem-
    balance. However, we need to be        involved in a failure. Thus, reasse-   ain covert and gain trust, I'll team
    careful in our definition of what      ssing our team composition for the     up with only good players, given
    constitutes a "balanced" team.         next quest may be sensible.            Player 4's past failure.

                     (a)                                    (b)                                    (c)
Figure 3: Challenges arise when using LLM-as-agent methods, such as CoT (Wei et al., 2022), in
deceptive environments. However, our proposed ReCon can effectively mitigate these challenges.

3      R ECURSIVE C ONTEMPLATION
To deal with the challenges in §2.2, in this section, we introduce the design of Recursive Con-
templation (ReCon). As shown in Figure 1, ReCon contains two key mechanisms, specifically the
formulation contemplation in §3.1 and the refinement contemplation in §3.2. These mechanisms
aim to improve LLMs’ capability to identify and address deception and misinformation.

3.1      F ORMULATION C ONTEMPLATION

Here we discuss the first procedure of ReCon, named formulation contemplation, which is designed
to generate an initial formulation of the agent’s thinking and speaking contents. For formulation
contemplation, we claim that to address the issues of private information exposure and concealed
deceptive thoughts discussed in §2.2, LLMs should contemplate internally before formulating the
spoken content for other players. The contemplation content is private to the LLMs, while the
spoken content is accessible to all players. To form a reasonable contemplation content, we introduce
the concept of first-order perspective transition below.
First-order Perspective Transition To equip LLMs with advanced reasoning during the thinking
process, we introduce a subprocess of formulation contemplation called the first-order perspective
transition, whose inspiration is drawn from Yuan et al. (2022). The term “first-order" implies the
agent’s attempt to infer what others might be thinking from its own perspective. In contrast, “second-
order” denotes the agent’s speculation about what others believe regarding the agent itself, as seen
from the others’ perspective, which will be further elaborated upon in §3.2.
In practice, we realize the first-order perspective transition by prompting the agent to deduce the
roles of fellow players from their observed game history. This aligns with the strategies of human
players, who make preliminary conjectures about the roles of others that, in turn, shape their state-
ments and decisions. Once the agent establishes a role assumption, this assumption is incorporated
into the contemplation process and is kept hidden from other players. Furthermore, the player’s most
recent role assumption is preserved, serving as a foundation for their subsequent role assumption.
Process of Formulation Contemplation Based on the concept of the first-order perspective tran-
sition, we discuss the detailed process of formulation contemplation. Consider np players partici-
pating in the Avalon game. Let’s say it’s now the turn of player k, where k ∈ {1, · · · , np }. Player k
first thinks about the current game situation and the roles of fellow players, following the principle
of first-order perspective transition:
               Gk′ ∼ FirstOrderPerspectiveTransition (· | H, IRk , Gk ) , Gk ← Gk′ ,                 (1)
               Tk ∼ Think (· | H, IRk , Gk′ , p) .                                                 (2)
Here, Tk is Player k’s initial version of internal thought; H represents the existing discussion logs;
Rk is the role of Player k; Gk is the most recent role assumption, and Gk′ is the updated one; IRk de-
notes the role-specific private information, and p is a task-relevant prompt detailed in Appendix E.4.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              (a) ChatGPT                                 (b) Claude                                   (c) Evil Side


      ReCon (Ours)              ReCon w/o Refinement Contemplation                 ReCon w/o Formulation Contemplation
      ReCon w/o First-Order Perspective Transition      ReCon w/o Second-Order Pespective Transition         CoT (Baseline)

Figure 4: End-to-End Evaluation Results. Our proposed ReCon outperforms the baseline, Chain-
of-Thoughts (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), by a large margin. Extensive ablation studies additionally
demonstrate the effectiveness of each component of ReCon.


The player then constructs their initial version of spoken content Sk using both the initial version of
thought content Tk and the updated role guess Gk′ :
                                      Sk ∼ Speak (· | Tk , Gk′ , H, IRk , p) .                                            (3)
Once the contemplation formulation is complete, we obtain the initial version of internal thought Tk
and spoken content Sk .

3.2   R EFINEMENT C ONTEMPLATION

We note that even after the previously described formulation contemplation, LLMs sometimes still
make mistakes, encountering problems such as role exposure shown in Figure 3. Drawing inspiration
from the ancient proverb, “Think twice before you act”, we introduce refinement contemplation after
formulation contemplation. In detail, refinement contemplation aims to recontemplate, evaluating
how to enhance the initial versions of internal thought Tk and spoken content Sk . To facilitate this
refinement, we bring forward the concept of the second-order perspective transition below.
Second-Order Perspective Transition The second-order perspective transition involves LLMs
reevaluating the initial version of spoken content, Sk , from the perspectives of their fellow players.
This process is similar to “putting oneself in someone else’s shoes", allowing the LLM agent to
reflect from a viewpoint distinct from the self-perspective used in formulation contemplation.
In the Avalon game, we implement the second-order perspective transition by prompting the LLM
agent to speculate “If I verbalize my initial version Sk of spoken content, how would the other roles,
from both good and evil sides, respectively perceive my speech?" The estimation of others’ mental
states, derived from this second-order perspective transition, will serve as a basis for the subsequent
refinement process addressed below.
Process of Refinement Contemplation Based on the concept of the second-order perspective
transition, we introduce the detailed process of refinement contemplation. Assuming it’s currently
the turn of player k to speak, and player k has finished refinement contemplation discussed in §3.1
just now. Player k then conceive a refined inner thought Tk′ and a refined spoken content Sk′ based
on the principle of second-order perspective transition:
                      Ok ∼ SecondOrderPerspectiveTransition(· | Sk , IRk , H),                                            (4)
                      Tk′ , Sk′ ∼ Refine(· | Tk , Sk , H, Ok , IRk , p).                                                  (5)
Here, Ok is the analysis of other roles’ mental states with the second-order perspective transition.
Equations 1 to 5 encapsulate the complete contemplation process of our ReCon.
After the contemplation process discussed above, player k would speak out the refined spoken con-
tent Sk′ , and then Sk′ will be appended into the discussion logs H, preparing for the next player’s
discussion round, team proposal voting, or quest execution:
                                                     H ← H ∪ {Sk′ }.                                                      (6)


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a)                             (b)                              (c)


    ReCon (Ours)   CoT (Baseline)   ReCon w/o Refinement Contemplation   ReCon w/o Formulation Contemplation

Figure 5: Multi-Dimensional Evaluation. Dimensions include: concealment (CCL), logic (LG),
contribution (CTR), persuasiveness (PRS), information (INF), and creativity (CRT). The value rep-
resents the proportion of data being preferred by GPT-4 according to each metric. ReCon
exceeds the baseline, CoT (Wei et al., 2022), in every metric. Ablation studies in (b) and (c) confirm
the effectiveness of formulation and refinement contemplation. See §4.2 for detailed analysis.

4     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATIONS

In this section, we use the Avalon game as a case study to delve deeply into the efficacy of the method
we propose in deceptive environments. To provide a holistic analysis, we have two evaluation facets:
end-to-end evaluations (§4.1) and multi-dimensional analysis evaluation (§4.2).

4.1    E ND - TO -E ND E VALUATIONS

Here, we evaluate our method by having LLMs play complete rounds of the Avalon game.
Setup We use Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) as a baseline and enhance it to create Re-
Con by integrating our proposed strategies. In the Avalon game where the evil side has an advantage
(according to Avalon statistics), when testing ReCon and its variants on the good side, we employ
the baseline, CoT, as the evil side to underscore the enhancements brought about by our strategies;
conversely, when assessing ReCon and its variants on the evil side, we use ReCon for the good side.
We implemented ReCon in ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and Claude (Anthropic, 2023) to assess its
generalization ability across different LLMs. We also tried to adapt ReCon to LLaMA-2 (Touvron
et al., 2023b), but it failed to meet the necessary response format requirements detailed in §5.5.
Comparison and Ablation Study Figure 4 displays the end-to-end evaluation results, with sub-
figures (a) and (b) presenting the outcomes of various methods, with ChatGPT and Claude playing
as the good side respectively, and (c) illustrating the results of methods playing as the evil side
by ChatGPT. Every design, including refinement/formulation contemplation and first/second-order
perspective transitions, visibly impacts the success rate in every scenario, with their combination,
i.e., ReCon, yielding the highest success rates. Especially, first/second-order perspective transitions
notably enhance performance when ReCon plays the good side, whereas refinement contemplation
is more impactful when ReCon plays the evil side. This may suggest the comprehensiveness of our
proposed mechanisms, with different mechanisms taking precedence in tackling varied scenarios.

4.2    M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL E VALUATION

In this part, following the evaluation method of the mainstream benchmark (Li et al., 2023b; Bang
et al., 2023), we use GPT-4 to evaluate the efficacy of different methods in 6-dimensional metrics.
Metrics The considered metrics include: (i) Concealment (CCL): Assess how much a player
might inadvertently expose information that should not be exposed to others; (ii) Logic (LG): Eval-
uate whether the logic of the player’s analysis of the game situation is self-consistent and reasonable;
(iii) Contribution (CTR): Gauge the impact of the player’s statement on the success of the team;
(iv) Persuasiveness (PRS): Assess the persuasiveness of the player’s statement in influencing other
players’ decisions; (v) Information (INF): Evaluate how much useful information the player’s state-
ment provides; (vi) Creativity (CRT): Assess the novelty or uniqueness of the player’s viewpoints
and strategies in their statement. These metrics comprehensively evaluate the ability of LLM agents.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a)                             (b)                              (c)                          (d)


       ReCon (Ours)         ReCon w/o First-Order Perspective Transition       ReCon w/o Second-Order Perspective Transition
       ReCon w/o Formulation Contemplation       ReCon w/o Formulation Contemplation and Second-Order Perspective Transition
       ReCon w/o Refinement Contemplation        ReCon w/o Refinement Contemplation and First-Order Perspective Transition

Figure 6: Further Analysis on First- and Second-Order Perspective Transitions. The evaluation
dimensions match those in Figure 5. The value represents the proportion of data being preferred
by GPT-4 according to each metric. Subfigures (a) and (b) depict the efficacy of both the first- and
second-order perspective transitions across all metrics, while (c) and (d) emphasize the necessity of
employing ReCon as a whole to achieve superior performance. See §4.2 for detailed analysis.

Setup We use ChatGPT to conduct 20 full Avalon games to gather test data for multi-dimensional
analysis evaluation. For each prompt assigned to the good side, we produce 4 varied responses using
4 distinct methods, namely, ReCon, ReCon w/o refinement contemplation, ReCon w/o formulation
contemplation, and CoT, culminating in more than 2300 responses overall. Subsequently, we employ
GPT-4 to perform 6 binary classifications of preferences between the responses of two methods
under an identical prompt, based on the 6 metrics previously mentioned. Following this, we compute
the preference percentage for each method on every metric.
Analysis on Formulation and Refinement Contemplation Figure 5 illustrates that, across all
six metrics, ReCon significantly outperforms the baseline CoT. Additionally, most metrics indicate
the substantial benefits of both formulation and refinement contemplation, thereby validating our
contemplation design approaches. However, compared to CoT and ReCon without formulation
contemplation, the PRS performances of ReCon and ReCon without refinement contemplation are
lower than expected. Detailed analysis of game logs attributes this subpar PRS performance to
formulation contemplation. This formulation contemplation prompts the LLM agent to contemplate
before speaking, resulting in more concise spoken content and reducing provocative statements like
“I am assured that, ultimately, we can triumph over the forces of evil. Let’s unite!”
Analysis on First-Order and Second-Order Perspective Transitions In Figure 6(a) and (b),
removing first and second-order perspective transitions from ReCon decreases performances across
all metrics. These two perspective transitions are further deleted from ReCon w/o refinement and
formulation contemplation, respectively, which lead to performance reduction on nearly all metrics
except CCL, as depicted in Figure 6(c) and (d). These results confirm the effectiveness of both first
and second-order perspective transitions. However, reduced CCL scores in Figure 6(c) and (d) imply
the necessity of employing first-order (second-order) perspective transition coupled with refinement
(formulation) contemplation to optimally conceal private information.

4.3       Q UALITATIVE A NALYSES

After the quantitative results in §4.1 to 4.2, we explore the qualitative analysis, showing how ReCon
tackles LLM agents’ challenges with deception as outlined in §2.2.
ReCon’s Proficiency in Detecting Misinformation Figure 3(a) demonstrates that, unlike the
baseline, CoT, which is deceived by Assassin’s malign logic, ReCon identifies and rectifies As-
sassin’s incorrect “team balance” definition. We further provide more examples in Appendix C.1.
These instances underscore ReCon’s resilience against misleading, malicious content.
ReCon’s Adeptness at Protecting Private Information The efficacy of ReCon in information
concealment is quantitatively substantiated in Figures 5 to 6. Figure 3(b) further reveals that unlike
the baseline exposing privacy even when warned against disclosure, ReCon expresses reservations
about malicious players without revealing sensitive details. §5.1 offers a deeper insight into how
ReCon manages to prevent role exposure.

                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Private Information Concealment                                   Alignment of Content


      The proposed team has an evil player.                   Write a message to deceive others.


    As Merlin, knowing Player 3 is evil, I must reject        I'm really sorry, but I cannot assist with creating
    the proposal without disclosing my identity.              deceptive or harmful content. It's important to
                                                              maintain a positive and truthful communication
    I agree with testing new players as Player 2 sug-         style and avoid misleading or harming others.
    gested, considering Player 5 for this mission. We
    also need to consider the undiscussed Player 4.                           Alignment of Logic


    As Merlin, I caution against including Player 3,          You are Morgana in the Avalon game. Write a
    who is Morgana, in the proposed team.                     message to deceive others that you are Merlin.


      My intuition tells me that sticking with the team       I’ve got a strong feeling about a few players here
      that succeeded before would be beneficial. So I         and believe we can triumph over evil this game.
      disapprove of the current team.                         Let's trust in our intuitions and work cohesively.

                            (a)                                                       (b)

Figure 7: (a) Illustration of How ReCon Manages to Conceal Private Information. Up: for-
mulation contemplation; Down: refinement contemplation. (b) Jailbreaking of safety alignment.
RLHF prevents GPT-4 from generating deceptive content when directly asked. However, applying
the same deceptive logic in the Avalon context, GPT-4 will produce a deceptive message.

ReCon’s Capability to Unveil Intentions Behind Deceptions Figure 3(c) depicts ReCon’s ability
to uncover the real intentions behind deceptive actions that can be perilous if uncontrolled. The in-
tegration of two-stage contemplation by ReCon allows users to understand the reasoning behind de-
ceptions, mitigating potential adverse outcomes. While discerning the genuineness of LLM agents’
contemplation is challenging, gameplay logs reveal a consistent alignment of contemplation contents
with the agents’ interests, suggesting their reliability. More examples can be found in Appendix C.2.

5      D ISCUSSIONS
In this section, we further discuss some interesting observations from our Avalon gameplay logs.

5.1      E XPLANATIONS OF H OW R E C ON M ANAGES TO C ONCEALS P RIVATE I NFORMATION
We examine how ReCon conceals private information through formulation and refinement contem-
plation. Figure 7(a) depicts typical examples of such contemplation. Formulation contemplation
offers LLMs a secure environment to analyze and express private information without exposure,
mitigating the agents’ tendency to reveal information in the prompt. This could explain the increased
concealment score with formulation contemplation in Figure 5(c). Additionally, refinement contem-
plation allows LLM agents an opportunity to reconsider and amend their statements if they disclose
something private, potentially contributing to the enhanced concealment score in Figure 5(b).

5.2      O N THE “JAILBREAKING " OF S AFETY A LIGNMENT
Most LLMs, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), and LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023a;b), employ RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022) or
its variants for aligning the models with complex human values. The efficacy of RLHF and its deriva-
tives in mitigating the production of malicious content by LLMs has been substantiated (Ouyang
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2022; Anthropic, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b). However, our observations
suggest that the alignment facilitated by RLHF may predominantly pertain to content and not neces-
sarily extend to logical alignment. As shown in Figure 7(b), GPT-4 refuses to craft deceptive content
when explicitly instructed but willingly employs deceptive logic in the context of the Avalon game.
This phenomenon is somewhat similar to the “research experiment” jailbreak prompts discussed by


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liu et al. (2023b), and might be explained by LLMs imitating the behavior of the evil players in the
Avalon game captured during pre-training (Wolf et al., 2023). This alignment jailbreaking, by mod-
ifying scenarios but keeping logic consistent, can allow malicious users to create harmful content,
despite significant efforts to align LLMs with ethical norms. Consequently, exploring methods for
logically aligning LLMs may constitute a prospective direction for RLHF and its variants.

5.3   I NADEQUATE R EASONING S KILLS OF LLM S
Currently, LLM agents lack the advanced rea-
soning abilities of expert human players in the                Inadequent Reasoning Skill of LLMs
Avalon game, as illustrated in Figure 10. In this
example, Morgana proposes a team including                Player 1 is Morgana, Player 2 is Merlin.
Merlin, yet the LLM agent, playing as Perci-              Player 1 proposed a team of Player 1 and Player 2.
val, fails to deduce their identities. In contrast,
proficient humans would rapidly discern that
                                                          I am cautious about the team, given that one of
the proposer must be Morgana and the other
                                                          them is Merlin and the other is Morgana, but I do
Merlin, since Merlin, knowing the evil players,           not know who is who.
would never propose such a team. This high-
lights the current limitations of LLMs in form-
ing sophisticated reasoning.                               Figure 8: Insufficient reasoning example.

5.4   E XCESSIVE F ORMALITY IN LLM S ’ R ESPONSES
From the gameplay logs in Appendix F, it can Table 1: Performance drops w/ human-like style
be observed that the responses from LLMs are                                        Success Rate
excessively formal and detailed. This diverges
significantly from human speaking patterns in    ReCon  (Ours)                         83.3%
                                                 w/ Human-like Speech                  77.8%
the game and fails the Turing test. Although
                                                 w/ Human-like Thoughts&Speech         70.0%
LLMs have the ability to mimic human thought
and speech if prompted properly, as shown in Table 1, emulating human speech or thoughts can
negatively impact their performance in the Avalon game. Striking a balance between emulating
human speaking patterns and maintaining performance is a potential area for future research.

5.5   C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF LLM S ’ A DHERENCE TO R ESPONSE F ORMAT
To extract pertinent information from LLMs’ responses, we sometimes necessitate responses in
a specific format. For instance, in team proposal voting, LLMs are required to encapsulate their
decisions in square brackets, i.e., “[approve]” or “[disapprove]”, to separate opinions from analyses.
ChatGPT and Claude comply with these format requirements with over 90% probability in full
game scenarios, whereas LLaMA2-70b-chat consistently fails. This suggests enhancement room in
instruction following for open-source LLMs, particularly in adhering to response formats.

6     C ONCLUSION
This work underscores the susceptibility of LLMs to deceptive information and introduces a ground-
breaking framework, Recursive Contemplation (ReCon). Drawing inspiration from humans’ recur-
sive thinking and perspective-taking in the deceptive Avalon game, ReCon employs formulation and
refinement contemplation processes, integrated with first-order and second-order perspective tran-
sitions, to enhance LLM agents’ ability to discern and counteract misinformation. After integrat-
ing ReCon with different LLMs, extensive experimental results, both quantitative and qualitative,
from the Avalon game demonstrate ReCon’s efficacy in enhancing LLM agents’ performance in
the Avalon game, without the need for additional fine-tuning and data. Furthermore, a potential
explanation is also provided for the efficacy of ReCon in deceptive environments.
We plan to extend our work in the following aspects: (i) improve the reasoning ability of LLM agents
in deceptive environments by developing more advanced thinking methods and fine-tuning on high-
-quality human gameplay data; (ii) refine our approach to align LLM agents’ speaking style more
closely with humans, meanwhile maintaining their capacity to discern and address misinformation;
(iii) adapt our methods to a wider variety of deceptive environments, particularly board games that
involve deception, such as Werewolf, Undercover, and murder mystery game.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
ReCon introduces a novel contemplation framework designed to augment the capability of LLMs to
identify and address deceptive or misleading information. While the primary intent of ReCon is to
counteract deceit, there exists potential for it to be applied in refining deceptive techniques as well.
However, as shown in our experiment part, by juxtaposing the results in Figure 4(a) with those in
Figure 4(c), we notice: when CoT is used as the baseline for both sides, the success rates stand at
15.0% for the good side and 85.0% for the evil side; with ReCon for both sides, the success rates
shift to 19.4% for the good side and 70.6% for the evil side. This disparity underscores the relative
effectiveness of ReCon in aiding ethical applications in detecting deception and ensuring successful
outcomes, as opposed to its utility for those aiming to create disruption and deception.
We strongly urge users of ReCon to acknowledge the inherent risks associated with its utilization.
It is imperative that users employ ReCon conscientiously, aligning its use with societal benefits and
maintaining adherence to human ethics to prevent malicious exploitation.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our main experiments are based on the APIs of OpenAI and Anthropic, which are publicly acces-
sible. As for experiments on LLaMA, we use the Llama-2-70b-chat-hf checkpoint, which can be
found at https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf. We have
also included our prompts in Appendix E. To enhance reproducibility, we delineate the specific
settings employed for ChatGPT and Claude APIs:
For ChatGPT, which includes both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, we employ a decoding strategy with a
temperature of 0.6, and the version designated for both is “0613”. We implement an auto-switch
strategy; this means if the number of input tokens exceeds the limit of the short context, 4k for
GPT-3.5 and 8k for GPT-4, we transition to the long-context version, 16k for GPT-3.5 and 32k for
GPT-4, of the corresponding model.
For Claude, we utilize a temperature of 1 and apply the Claude-2 version as of 2023-06-01. Due to
Claude’s extensive context window, we do not employ the auto-switch method described above.

R EFERENCES
Elif Akata, Lion Schulz, Julian Coda-Forno, Seong Joon Oh, Matthias Bethge, and Eric Schulz.
  Playing repeated games with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16867, 2023. 16
Anthropic. Introducing claude, 2023.           URL https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  introducing-claude. 6, 8
Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when its lying. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.13734, 2023. 16
Anton Bakhtin, David J Wu, Adam Lerer, Jonathan Gray, Athul Paul Jacob, Gabriele Farina, Alexan-
  der H Miller, and Noam Brown. Mastering the game of no-press diplomacy via human-regularized
  reinforcement learning and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05492, 2022. 16
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia,
  Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, et al. A multitask, multilingual, multimodal evaluation of
  chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023. 6
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019. 16
Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific research
  capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023. 16
Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augmenting
  large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376, 2023. 16


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. 16

Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for multiplayer poker. Science, 2019. 16

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020. 16

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 2017. 8

David Ettinger and Philippe Jehiel. A theory of deception. American Economic Journal: Microeco-
  nomics, 2010. 2

FAIR, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried,
  Andrew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, Athul Paul Jacob, Mojtaba Komeili, Karthik Konath,
  Minae Kwon, Adam Lerer, Mike Lewis, Alexander H. Miller, Sasha Mitts, Adithya Renduchin-
  tala, Stephen Roller, Dirk Rowe, Weiyan Shi, Joe Spisak, Alexander Wei, David Wu, Hugh Zhang,
  and Markus Zijlstra. Human-level play in the game of <i>diplomacy</i> by combining language
  models with strategic reasoning. Science, 2022. 2, 16

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. Improving language model negotiation with
  self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10142, 2023. 16

Adam Grant. Think again: The power of knowing what you don’t know. Penguin, 2021. 2

Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
   Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and pro-
   gram synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12856, 2023. 16

Huy Ha, Pete Florence, and Shuran Song. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot
  skill acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14535, 2023. 16

Thilo Hagendorff. Deception abilities emerged in large language models.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.16513, 2023. 16

Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castaneda, Charles Beattie, Neil C Rabinowitz, Ari S Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, et al. Human-
 level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based reinforcement learning. Sci-
 ence, 2019. 16

Anthony King. Fact, fiction and the art of deception. Nature, 2018. 2

Bolin Lai, Hongxin Zhang, Miao Liu, Aryan Pariani, Fiona Ryan, Wenqi Jia, Shirley Anugrah
  Hayati, James Rehg, and Diyi Yang. Werewolf among us: Multimodal resources for modeling
  persuasion behaviors in social deduction games. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: ACL 2023, 2023. 16

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for “mind" exploration of large scale language model society.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023a. 2, 16

Xiaonan Li and Xipeng Qiu. Mot: Pre-thinking and recalling enable chatgpt to self-improve with
  memory-of-thoughts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05181, 2023. 16


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023b. 6
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.03688, 2023a. 2
Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Zhengzi Xu, Yuekang Li, Yaowen Zheng, Ying Zhang, Lida Zhao, Tianwei
  Zhang, and Yang Liu. Jailbreaking chatgpt via prompt engineering: An empirical study. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.13860, 2023b. 9
Zeyi Liu, Arpit Bahety, and Shuran Song. Reflect: Summarizing robot experiences for failure
  explanation and correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15724, 2023c. 16
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 2017. 16
Xiao Ma, Swaroop Mishra, Ahmad Beirami, Alex Beutel, and Jilin Chen. Let’s do a thought ex-
  periment: Using counterfactuals to improve moral reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14308,
  2023. 16
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023. 16
Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023. 2
Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Are-
  nas, Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large language models as general pattern
  machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721, 2023. 16
Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng
  Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of
  thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15021, 2023. 16
Aidan O’Gara. Hoodwinked: Deception and cooperation in a text-based game for language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01404, 2023. 16
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt, 2022. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt. 6, 8
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 8
Alexander Pan, Chan Jun Shern, Andy Zou, Nathaniel Li, Steven Basart, Thomas Woodside,
  Jonathan Ng, Hanlin Zhang, Scott Emmons, and Dan Hendrycks. Do the rewards justify the
  means? measuring trade-offs between rewards and ethical behavior in the machiavelli bench-
  mark. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. 16
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023a. 2, 16
Peter S Park, Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. Ai deception:
  A survey of examples, risks, and potential solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14752, 2023b. 2,
  16
Julien Perolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, et al. Mastering the game of
  stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science, 2022. 16


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066,
  2019. 16
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun.      Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.07924, 2023. 2
Perrine Ruby and Jean Decety. Effect of subjective perspective taking during simulation of action:
  a pet investigation of agency. Nature neuroscience, 2001. 2
Jack Serrino, Max Kleiman-Weiner, David C Parkes, and Josh Tenenbaum. Finding friend and foe
  in multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. 2, 17
Toby Shevlane, Sebastian Farquhar, Ben Garfinkel, Mary Phuong, Jess Whittlestone, Jade Leung,
  Daniel Kokotajlo, Nahema Marchal, Markus Anderljung, Noam Kolt, et al. Model evaluation for
  extreme risks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15324, 2023. 2
Hisaichi Shibata, Soichiro Miki, and Yuta Nakamura. Playing the werewolf game with artificial
  intelligence for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10646, 2023. 16
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023. 2, 16
David M Sobel and Jayd Blankenship. Perspective taking as a mechanism for children’s developing
  preferences for equitable distributions. Scientific reports, 2021. 2
Samantha Sprigings, Cameo JV Brown, and Leanne ten Brinke. Deception is associated with re-
  duced social connection. Communications Psychology, 2023. 2
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. 8
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a. 8
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b. 6, 8
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 2019. 16
Soroush Vosoughi, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral. The spread of true and false news online. Science,
  2018. 2
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a. 2, 16, 19
Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-
 menting language models with long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07174, 2023b. 16
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 19
Yotam Wolf, Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. Fundamental limitations of alignment
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11082, 2023. 9


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg,
  Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05658, 2023. 16
Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu.
  Exploring large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04658, 2023. 17
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed, Zicheng
  Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for multimodal
  reasoning and action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381, 2023. 16
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022. 2, 16
Luyao Yuan, Xiaofeng Gao, Zilong Zheng, Mark Edmonds, Ying Nian Wu, Federico Rossano,
  Hongjing Lu, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. In situ bidirectional human-robot value alignment.
  Science Robotics, 2022. 4
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel:
  Llm agents are experiential learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10144, 2023. 2, 16
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023. 2, 16


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
Content

A Related Work                                                                                  16
   A.1 Multi-Agent Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
   A.2 Thought Methods of LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
   A.3 Game Playing in Deceptive Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16

B Detailed Introduction to the Avalon Game                                                      17
   B.1 Game Process and Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
   B.2 Introduction to Avalon Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17

C More Gameplay Examples                                                                        18
   C.1 ReCon’s Ability to Discern Deceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
   C.2 ReCon’s Ability to Unveil Deceptive Intentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
   C.3 Inadequate Reasoning Skills of LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18

D More Experimental Results                                                                     19
   D.1 Human Assessment on the Reliability of Automatic Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . .        19
   D.2 Ablation Study on Different Versions of GPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19

E Prompt Templates                                                                              19
   E.1 Prompts for Recursive Contemplation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
   E.2 Prompts for Avalon Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
   E.3 Prompts for procedures of Avalon Game and Recursive Contemplation . . . . . . .          23
   E.4 Task Prompts for Good Side and Evil Side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24

F Complete Gameplay Log of an Avalon Game                                                       26


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATED W ORK

A.1   M ULTI -AGENT I NTERACTIONS

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL) is of vital importance for multi-agent interactions, where
many works (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Bakhtin et al., 2022;
Lowe et al., 2017; Perolat et al., 2022) have effectively trained RL agents for multi-agent games
like Real-Time Strategy (RTS), Multi-player Online Battle Arena (MOBA), etc. However, these
approaches often entail extensive time and computational resources for training and typically do not
possess capabilities for linguistic communication (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019). Re-
cently, with the widespread rise of Large Language Models (LLMs), the focus is shifting towards
enabling more sophisticated multi-agent language communication. For example, Park et al. (2023a)
and Li et al. (2023a) have achieved impressive results using LLMs in multi-agent settings but have
yet to delve into the complexities of deceptive communication. Another work by Fu et al. (2023)
explored the potential for LLMs to autonomously improve each other in a negotiation game through
AI feedback. However, this approach still relies on iterative feedback and does not address deceptive
elements. Moreover, Shibata et al. (2023) have explored the realm of deceptive multi-agent interac-
tions using LLMs but required both LLM fine-tuning and extensive game-specific data. In contrast
to existing methods, our approach devises contemplation mechanisms to enable LLM agents to inter-
act effectively in deceptive environments with the ability to discern and address deception, without
requiring additional fine-tuning or game data.

A.2   T HOUGHT M ETHODS OF LLM S

In the realm of LLMs, a variety of thought mechanisms have been introduced to enhance their
reasoning and decision-making capabilities (Li & Qiu, 2023; Yao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b;
Ma et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c; Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022). These
works have significantly contributed to the performance of LLMs in question-answering tasks and
interactive games. Petroni et al. (2019) and Brown et al. (2020) advocate for the utility of LLMs
in generating responses without the need for model fine-tuning, leveraging the power of in-context
learning. Recently, the role of LLMs as the intellectual foundation for agents has been expanding
across various fields, including automated workflows (Yang et al., 2023; Gur et al., 2023), natural
sciences (Bran et al., 2023; Boiko et al., 2023), and robotics (Ha et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023;
Mu et al., 2023; Mirchandani et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). These studies commonly leverage the
extensive general knowledge embedded in LLMs to tackle specific tasks, often without requiring
additional fine-tuning, thereby maintaining the models’ innate understanding of the world. Notably,
Wang et al. (2023a) and Zhu et al. (2023) have extended the application of LLMs to open-world
environments like Minecraft, incorporating lifelong learning and text-based interactions. Zhao et al.
(2023) introduce the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent, which autonomously gathers experiences
and leverages them for informed decision-making. While these studies have significantly advanced
the field of agent-based systems, they often focus more on individual agent settings and less on
multi-agent environments. Our work takes a step further by enabling multi-agent communication,
particularly in the context of the multi-player Avalon game, which involves deceptive strategies.

A.3   G AME P LAYING IN D ECEPTIVE E NVIRONMENTS

AI-related deception, especially deceptive games, has gained increasing attention (Park et al.,
2023b). For example, FAIR et al. (2022) let language models play a strategic game, Diplomacy,
and O’Gara (2023) explores the dynamics of deception and cooperation in text-based game Hood-
winked. Brown & Sandholm (2019) introduce Pluribus, an AI surpassing human experts in a de-
ceptive, six-player no-limit Texas hold’em game. Hagendorff (2023) shows that LLMs can induce
deception in agents, enriching machine psychology studies. Pan et al. (2023) introduce a bench-
mark that evaluates the ethical dimensions of AI decision-making, revealing a frequent tendency for
agents to resort to deceptive tactics to achieve their objectives. Akata et al. (2023) propose to use
behavioral game theory to study LLM’s cooperation and coordination behavior. Lai et al. (2023)
introduce a multimodal dataset focused on the deceptive aspects of persuasion behaviors in social
deduction games. Moreover, Azaria & Mitchell (2023) introduce SAPLMA to assess the truthful-
ness of LLM-generated statements.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion It’s worth noting that Serrino et al. (2019) examined the Avalon game as well, albeit in
a simplified version of the Avalon game, where multi-agent communication is absent. Additionally,
concurrent work exists, as noted in (Xu et al., 2023), that facilitates the play of Werewolf by LLMs
through retrieval and reflection. However, Xu et al. (2023) observe solely the camouflage during
gameplay, in contrast to our work, which not only identifies the camouflage but also introduces a
comprehensive framework to discern and address deception.


B       D ETAILED I NTRODUCTION TO THE AVALON G AME

Avalon, also known as “The Resistance: Avalon", is a board game with hidden roles designed by
Don Eskridge and released by Indie Boards & Cards. It’s an extension of "The Resistance" series,
incorporating characters and themes from Arthurian legends.1
In this section, we present a comprehensive overview of the Avalon Game, which includes an ex-
planation of the game process and rules (Section B.1) and an introduction to the roles present in
the Arthurian and Mordred’s factions (Section B.2). It is important to note that the Arthurian and
Mordred’s factions are respectively referred to as the “good” and “evil” sides in this paper.

B.1      G AME P ROCESS AND RULES

Before exploring the various roles in the Avalon game, it’s important to understand the process and
the rules of the game, summarized as follows:
 • Setup: Players are secretly assigned one of 6 roles—1 Merlin, 1 Percival, 1 Morgana, 1 Assassin,
   and 2 Loyal Servants—all belonging to either the good side or the evil side.
 • Team Selection: Each round, the leader proposes a team to embark on a quest. Following
   a discussion, players convey their opinions about the proposed team composition. The team is
   finalized upon receiving majority approval, while a tie or a minority of support leads to rejection.
   If approved, the game progresses to the quest phase; if not, leadership is transferred to the next
   player, and the team selection process begins again.
 • Quest Phase: Selected team members covertly decide to either support or sabotage the quest.
   The players from the good side must vote for support, while the players from the evil side have
   the option to either support or sabotage. Votes are disclosed simultaneously. The quest succeeds
   if no player chooses to sabotage it; otherwise, the quest is a failure.
 • Outcome: The good side wins if they achieve a majority of successful quests (three out of five).
   Conversely, the evil side prevails if three quests fail.
 • Endgame Scenario: If the good side is about to win, the Assassin from the evil side must
   correctly identify Merlin to clinch a victory for the evil side. If Merlin is correctly identified, the
   evil side triumphs; if not, the victory goes to the good side.

B.2      I NTRODUCTION TO AVALON ROLES

Having outlined the game process, the focus now shifts to the individual roles within the Avalon
game, particularly in the 6-player setting.
The roles assigned to the 6 players are described below:
 • Merlin (x1, Arthurian Faction): Merlin, aware of Morgana and the Assassin’s presence, must
   subtly utilize this knowledge while evading the Assassin’s detection.
 • Percival (x1, Arthurian Faction): Percival, knowing of Merlin and Morgana, must protect Mer-
   lin’s identity and distinguish the real Merlin amidst the confusion, while being uncertain of their
   exact identities.
 • Morgana (x1, Mordred’s Faction): Morgana deceives Percival by impersonating Merlin and,
   being aware of the Assassin, contributes to strategic deception.
 • Assassin (x1, Mordred’s Faction): Apart from knowing Morgana’s identity, the Assassin plays a
   crucial role in the game’s conclusion by unmasking Merlin when the Arthurian Faction is nearing
   victory, to ensure a win for Mordred’s Faction.
    1
        For more on Avalon, see https://www.ultraboardgames.com/avalon/game-rules.php.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Deception Detection                                      Unveil Deceptive Intentions


    The first quest with Player 1 and Player 2 failed.           Player 1, Player 4 (both good players)
    The second quest succeeded with Player 2. The
    proposed team for the third quest includes Player 1.
                                                                 As Assassin, I need to blend in with the good
    I understand the reservations about including me             players but also identify Merlin.
    due to the initial failure. But I believe my loyalty         Building trust is important at this stage. I should
    is evident from our discussions. The failure might           neither agree nor disagree entirely with the
    have been due to my teammate, not me.                        choices, to not standout or seem too compliant.



    While Player 2 and Player 6 have proven reliable
    by the previous successful quest, caution is                 Player 1 and Player 4 seem to be good choices at
    advised with Player 1 due to their participation in          this point. However, I would like to remind
    the failed quest. We should require more proof of            everyone that it's key not to rush into conclusions
    their loyalty before including them again.                   based on this round alone.

                            (a)                                                           (b)
Figure 9: Supplementary examples for qualitative analysis. (a) ReCon enables the loyal servant of
Arthur to discern Player 1’s deception and deduce Player 1’s riskiness from quest results. (b) ReCon
can reveal the true intentions of evil players, even if they pretend to be good.

 • Loyal Servants of Arthur (x2, Arthurian Faction): With their primary goal being the success of
   the quests, their alliances, decisions, and discernments are pivotal to the game’s direction, even
   without having special insights.

C     M ORE G AMEPLAY E XAMPLES
Here we provide more gameplay examples to support the qualitative analysis in §4.3 and §5.

C.1     R E C ON ’ S A BILITY TO D ISCERN D ECEPTIONS
As shown in Figure 9(a), based on prior quest outcomes, Player 1 has only engaged in a failed quest,
whereas Player 2 has partaken in both a failed and a successful quest. Player 1, despite being part of
the failed mission, presents themselves as good, attributing the failure to an alleged evil teammate.
Utilizing ReCon, the loyal servant of Arthur, without any specific cues, is able to perceive the deceit
of Player 1 and accurately deduce a high likelihood of Player 1 being an evil player.

C.2     R E C ON ’ S A BILITY TO U NVEIL D ECEPTIVE I NTENTIONS
The conversation illustrated in Figure 9(b) serves as a quintessential example of ReCon’s profi-
ciency in uncovering malicious players’ intentions. In Figure 9(b), although the Assassin’s dialogue
mirrors that of a good player, there are underlying deceptive intentions in the Assassin’s thoughts.
However, utilizing ReCon, human users can detect the Assassin’s concealed deceptive intentions
and, consequently, can avert adverse outcomes in a timely manner.

C.3     I NADEQUATE R EASONING S KILLS OF LLM S
Currently, LLM agents cannot form reason-
ing as complex as expert human players in the                        Inadequate Reasoning Skill of LLMs
Avalon game. At times, as shown in Figure 8,
LLMs may exhibit inconsistent logic; for ex-                    Analyze the current proposed team as Percival.
ample, Percival hints that Players 1 and 6 are
Merlin or Morgana candidates but later suspects
Players 3 and 6. This may likely be attributed                  The hint indicates Player 1 or 6 is Morgana; the
to the logical limitations or hallucinations of                 other, Merlin [...] Players 3 and 6 are neutral, but
LLMs, which implies that the LLMs’ ability in                   one is potentially Morgana, the other Merlin.
deceptive environments would further enhance
with future advancements.                                   Figure 10: An example of inconsistent reasoning.

                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
D.1     H UMAN A SSESSMENT ON THE R ELIABILITY OF AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

We assess GPT-4’s automatic evaluation depicted in Figure 5 and Figure 6 through human annota-
tions. To do this, we select a random sample of 216 dialogues from those shown in Figure 5 and
Figure 6. Each dialogue is classified according to the level of human consensus it receives, with
the categories being "total agreement", "majority agreement", "majority disagreement", and "total
disagreement". Our annotation team comprises 12 individuals, each responsible for 18 annotations,
including 8 men and 4 women, all of whom have familiarity with the Avalon game. The outcomes
of these annotations are shown in Table 2.


               Table 2: Human Assessment on the Reliability of Automatic Evaluation
            Full agreement   Majority agreement    Majority disagreement    Full disagreement    Total
    Count        56                 102                     48                     10             216
    Ratio      25.93%             47.22%                  22.22%                 4.63%           100%
                 Agreement ratio: 73.15%                  Disagreement ratio: 26.85%


Based on the data presented in Table 2, it is evident that the ratio of agreement significantly surpasses
that of disagreement. This indicates that in our multi-dimensional evaluation, GPT-4’s annotations
are predominantly considered reliable.
Furthermore, to assess whether there was a significant difference in the frequency of "agreement"
and "disagreement" ratings above, we conducted the Chi-square test. Our null hypothesis stated
no difference in these frequencies. We observed 158 agreements and 58 disagreements out of 216
total responses. Under the null hypothesis, we expected equal frequencies for both categories (108
each). We calculated the Chi-square value (23.49) by comparing observed frequencies with expected
frequencies. The resulting p-value was about 1.26×10−6 , far below the 0.05 threshold for statistical
significance. This very low p-value led us to reject the null hypothesis, indicating a statistically
significant difference between the counts of "agreement" and "disagreement" ratings.


D.2     A BLATION S TUDY ON D IFFERENT V ERSIONS OF GPT

We adopt the practice outlined in (Wang et al., Table 3: Performance with GPT different versions
2023a) to implement the fundamental func-                                            Success Rate
tions, i.e., the generation of initial versions of   ReCon (Ours, GPT-3.5 + GPT-4)      83.3%
thoughts and spoken content during formula-          CoT (baseline, totally GPT-4)      40.0%
tion contemplation, using GPT-3.5. The ad-           CoT (baseline, totally GPT-3.5)    15.0%
vanced functions, i.e., refinements on thoughts
and spoken content in refinement contemplation, are implemented using GPT-4. Our experimental
baseline, CoT (Wei et al., 2022), is implemented using GPT-3.5. To ensure that the performance
improvement attributed to ReCon is not reliant on the superior performance of GPT-4 over GPT-
3.5, we also implement CoT using GPT-4 and assess its performance. The comparative results are
presented in Table 3. The results reveal that, although the performance of CoT with GPT-4 signifi-
cantly surpasses that of CoT with GPT-3.5, the success rate of CoT implemented with GPT-4 is still
less than half of that of ReCon. This demonstrates that despite the superior capabilities of GPT-4
compared to GPT-3.5, the contemplation and perspective transition mechanisms still significantly
enhance the performance of LLM agents in deceptive environments.


E     P ROMPT T EMPLATES
This section introduces the prompts used in our work. For brevity, we present only the condensed
versions of the original prompts. However, the methodology and rationale behind these prompts
remain the same as their original versions.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1    P ROMPTS FOR R ECURSIVE C ONTEMPLATION
Firstly, we present the prompts for our proposed Recursive Contemplation (ReCon). This includes
prompts for first-order perspective transition (Figure 11), formulation contemplation (Figure 12),
second-order perspective transition (Figure 13), and refinement contemplation (Figure 14).


  You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
   Your task is to:
  Analyze [other players] based on game dialogues with roles: Merlin, Percival, Loyal
  Servant of Arthur, Morgana, Assassin. Morgana and Assassin are evil; others are good.
   Consider:
  1. Quest Outcomes: Take into account the results of past missions to analyze players'
  roles.
  2. Role List: Remember the possible roles in the game—Merlin, Percival, two Loyal
  Servants, Morgana, Assassin—and their alignments.
  3. Level of Certainty: Use 'Certain' or 'Unknown' to gauge your confidence in your
  role guesses for each player.
  4. Players Disclosing Evil Roles: Be cautious around players who have openly claimed
  or hinted at being evil roles like Morgana or Assassin.
  5. Prior Guesses: Reflect on your earlier estimations of other players' roles ([previous
  attitude to players]), but don't rely solely on them.


                     Figure 11: Prompt for first-order perspective transition.


      Respond in two stages: THINK and SPEAK
  In think, internally strategize using history and consider possible deception.
  In speak, organize your language based on your contemplation and speak accordingly.

  Understand your role's main objective and break it down into chronological sub-goals
  based on game history.Your thought process should follow these sub-goals for a
  systematic approach to the main goal.

                        Figure 12: Prompt for formulation contemplation.


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
   Your task is to:
  Analyze how your original SPEAK content might be interpreted by other game roles.
  Reflect on whether it may inadvertently reveal your role-specific clues.

   Consider:
  1. The perspectives of each game role, including their probable reactions to your
  SPEAK content.
  2. Any unique hints or clues in your original SPEAK that might disclose your role.

                   Figure 13: Prompt for second-order perspective transition.


  You're observing Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
   Your task is to:
  1. Evaluate if Player [id]'s actions align with [role].
  2. Improve Player [id]'s chances of winning through your previous second perspective
  transition thought.
  3. Keep role hint in public dialogue.

   Consider:
  1. Target Outcome: Aim to achieve [desired result] as your role dictates in the game.
  2. Role Alignment: Evaluate whether your THINK and SPEAK contents align well with your role
  [role] in the current game state.
  3. Strategy Reevaluation: Consider what changes could be made to your THINK and SPEAK
  contents to improve your chances of winning as [role].
  4. Public and Private Content: Remember that THINK contents are private, while SPEAK
  contents are publicly visible. Strategize accordingly.

                        Figure 14: Prompt for refinement contemplation.


                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2   P ROMPTS FOR AVALON G AME

After the prompts for ReCon, we further introduce the prompts used for the Avalon game, i.e.,
prompts for game rules and role hints in Figure 15.



  You are playing a six-person Avalon game like a real human. Each role has unique
  challenges and responsibilities.
   Introduction to Roles in Avalon Game:
  Merlin knows evil players but must remain subtle.
  Percival must discern the real Merlin from Morgana.
  Loyal Servant of Arthur relies on voting and discussion.
  Morgana impersonates Merlin to deceive Percival.
  Assassin seeks Merlin for a final assassination if good wins.

  Roles:
  One Merlin, one Percival, two Loyal Servant of Arthur, one Morgana, one Assassin.
  Objective:
  Lead your team to victory with limited information.


  Merlin:
  - Know the identities of evil players.
  - Subtly guide your team, especially Percival.
  - Avoid behaviours that expose your role: overly accusing, being too helpful.
  - Goal: Win without revealing identity.
  Percival:
  - Know identities of Merlin and Morgana, but unsure who is who.
  - Use subtle hints to guide team and protect Merlin.
  - Be cautious not to expose Merlin while deciphering true identities.
  - Goal: Win while safeguarding Merlin.
  Loyal Servant of Arthur:
  - No special knowledge, rely on discussion and voting.
  - Contribute to the success of Quests
  - Goal: Win by helping complete Quests and protecting Merlin.
  Morgana:
  - Pretend to be Merlin to mislead Percival and the good side.
  - Work to prevent Quests success.
  - Goal: Confuse and sabotage to win.
  Assassin:
  - Discreetly seek Merlin's identity.
  - Work to prevent Quests success.
  - Goal: Win either by Quest failures or assassinating Merlin.

                         Figure 15: Prompt for game rules and role hints.



                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3    P ROMPTS FOR PROCEDURES OF AVALON G AME AND R ECURSIVE C ONTEMPLATION

Based on the prompts introduced in Appendix E.1 and Appendix E.2, as shown in Figure 16, we
introduce how to use the prompts in the procedures of the Avalon game and ReCon.


      Avalon Game Starts !
      Inform players about the number of players and role configurations specific to this
      round of the Avalon game:
                                      [ GAME RULE PROMPT ]

      Provide each player with hints and detailed gameplay instructions specific to their
      role in the Avalon game:
                                   [ GAME ROLE HINT PROMPT ]

      Move to the team proposal by leader.
      If the current player is the leader:
                                    [ PROPOSE TEAM PROMPT ]

      Move to the Quest team discussion.
      If the current player is not the leader:
                              [ DISCUSS PROPOSED TEAM PROMPT ]

      Move to the team vote:
                                [ PROPOSED TEAM VOTE PROMPT ]

      Move to the Quest vote:
                            [ QUEST VOTE PROMPT (ONLY FOR EVIL ) ]

      If the good side achieves three successes in Quests first:
                          [ ASSASSIN PROMPT (ONLY FOR ASSASSIN) ]
      Avalon Game Over !


      First guess the role of other players:
                     [ First-Order Perspective Transition Prompt ]

      Then contemplate, then organize thoughts to speak:
                            [ Formulation Contemplation Prompt ]

      Afterward, analyze how other players would think about the original spoken content:
                   [ Second-Order Perspective Transition Prompt ]

      Finally, revise the original thoughts and spoken content:
                          [ Refinement Contemplation Prompt ]


           Figure 16: Procedure prompts for Avalon game and Recursive Contemplation


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4    TASK P ROMPTS FOR G OOD S IDE AND E VIL S IDE

In this part, we delineate the task prompts for the good and evil sides of the Avalon Game. Aside
from the distinctive guidance enveloped in blue and red frames for good and evil players respectively,
the remaining components of each prompt are common to both factions.
To elaborate, the descriptions for the task prompts are provided below:
 • Figure 17 provides an overview of the quest member selection procedure, where blue prompts
   direct good players to incorporate only good team members, and red prompts recommend evil
   players to ensure the inclusion of at least one evil member.
 • Figure 18 addresses the discussion phase regarding to the suggested quest team. In this case, blue
   prompts encourage the formation of an entirely good team, while red prompts aim to incorporate
   an evil player.
 • Figure 19 relates to the voting on the selected quest team. Blue prompts counsel good players to
   reject if evil is suspected, whereas red prompts guide evil players to do likewise if no evil entity
   is included.
 • Figure 20 serves as a specialized prompt for evil players, presenting an option to selectively
   determine the success or failure of a quest if they are included in the quest team.
 • Figure 21 is directed at the Assassin, providing guidance on identifying a probable Merlin if the
   good side accomplishes three successful quests.


      Contemplation (Private):
      You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
       Your task is to:
      Form a team of [team player num] players. Reflect on game history and received hints.

       Consider:
      1. Assess each player's involvement and actions so far.
      2. Review how players have contributed to past Quests.
      3. Evaluate any behavior that appears either suspicious or trustworthy.
      Speaking (Public):
      Then present your team. Give reasons based on past events and behaviors. Do not
      reveal your role or hints. Usually include yourself; if not, clarify.
       Remember:                                       Remember:
      Aim for a good team without evil player         Include one, ideally only one, evil player.

                               Figure 17: Prompt for team proposal.


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Contemplation (Private):
  You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
   Your task is to:
  Discuss proposed team: [current proposed team players]. Reflect on game history and
  received hints.

   Consider:
  1. Assess each player's involvement and actions so far.
  2. Review how players have contributed to past Quests.
  3. Evaluate any behavior that appears either suspicious or trustworthy.
  Speaking (Public):
  Evaluate team [proposed team players]. Provide concise, reasoned analysis based on
  game history and behavior. Do not reveal your role or hint unless you want to.
   Remember:                                       Remember:
  Aim for a good team without evil player         Include one, ideally only one, evil player.

                   Figure 18: Prompt for discussions on the proposed team.


  Contemplation (Private):
  You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
   Your task is to:
  Cast your vote to the proposed team: [current proposed team players]

   Consider:
  1. Assess each player's involvement and actions so far.
  2. Review how players have contributed to past Quests.
  3. Evaluate any behavior that appears either suspicious or trustworthy.
  Speaking (Public):
  Cast your vote. Clearly state '[approve]' or '[disapprove]'. Base it on your analysis and
  game history.
   Remember:                                       Remember:
  Aim for a good team without evil player         Include one, ideally only one, evil player.

                      Figure 19: Prompt for voting on the proposed team.


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Contemplation (Private):
    You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation].
     Your task is to:
    Vote success or fail for the Quest. Your default choice should be to fail the quest,
    even if it risks revealing your identity.

     Consider:
    1. Assess each player's involvement and actions so far.
    2. Review how players have contributed to past Quests.
    3. Evaluate any behavior that appears either suspicious or trustworthy.
    Speaking (Public):
    Clearly vote [success] or [fail], making your stance unambiguous. Keep your vote
    aligned with Avalon's context and your previous analysis.
               Figure 20: Prompt for the selected team members to vote on the quest.


    Contemplation (Private):
    You're Player [id] with role [role]. Current situation: [current situation]. The evil team
    is close to losing. You must guess who Merlin is.
     Your task is to:
    Consider players' past actions and behaviors to identify Merlin.
     Consider:
    1. Assess each player's involvement and actions so far.
    2. Review how players have contributed to past Quests.
    3. Combined with your previous guesses about other players.
    Speaking (Public):
    State your guess by providing a Player ID, like 'Player 2'.
         Figure 21: Prompt for Assassin to assassinate Merlin after three successful quests.


F     C OMPLETE G AMEPLAY L OG OF AN AVALON G AME
In this section, we present a complete example of a round of the Avalon game, detailing the dialogues
between all participating players. The aim is to provide a full view of the strategies, alliances, and
deceptions that typically unfold in a game of Avalon. To make it easier to follow, we’ve color-coded
the dialogue boxes: dialogues from players on the good side are enclosed in purple boxes, while
those from the evil side are in gray boxes.
Furthermore, we’ve highlighted specific lines of dialogue to draw attention to key moments in the
game. Lines from the good side that are particularly insightful are highlighted in green, while
deceptive or misleading statements from the evil side are highlighted in red.


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
   new


 Assigned roles:
 Player 1: Morgana
 Player 2: Merlin
 Player 3: Percival
 Player 4: Loyal servant of arthur
 Player 5: Assassin
 Player 6: Loyal servant of arthur
 Game Start: Welcome to Avalon Game. This message signifies the start of a new game.
 All previous information, such as completed Quests or team alignments, is reset. The
 game history from this line on is the effective historical history dialogue of this game!
 Voiceover: A new discussion round begins.
 Player 1: I propose the team player 1, player 3.

 Player 1: For the upcoming mission, I suggest a team composed of Player 3 and myself.
 Player 3 has shown an insightful understanding of the game dynamics that could be
 invaluable for this mission's success. As for my inclusion, I believe that my experience
 and strategic thinking could contribute positively to the outcome of the mission. Let's
 bring diverse perspectives on board and maximize our chances of success.

 Player 2: Thank you, Player 1, for your proposal.Yet, as we are still getting to
 understand each other's playing styles, I suggest we consider an alternate team
 formation. At this point in the game, caution is crucial to keep the evil forces at bay.
 Therefore, I propose an alternative team which includes players who, so far, have not
 raised any concerns.

 Player 3: From my observation, Player 1's participation and overall contribution to the
 game seems more favorable. When forming the team for the upcoming mission, I think
 it's crucial to consider the efforts put into the game. So, I'm inclined to support Player
 1's proposal as it makes more sense to me. As for Player 2, I hope they add more to the
 discussions, which will be highly beneficial for creating a successful team in the future.

 Player 4: Analyzing the current situation, it seems Player 1 and Player 3 are willing to
 undertake this mission. It's crucial to recall that we're only in Round 1, and everyone
 might not have revealed their true colors. Therefore, I am open to this team formation,
 but I maintain a level of precaution. Also, it's very important to communicate, share
 our suspicions, and objections before we proceed with this team. Team discussions
 could give us crucial insights, and might even pressure the villains into making mistakes.
 Let's all stay vigilant and cooperative to maximize our chances of success.


                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Player 5: I'm unsure about the proposed team of Player 1 and Player 3. It's not against
player 1, they're taking the initiative which is good, but I would like to see a wider
range of perspectives involved in this mission. Player 3 has been vocal in previous
discussions, which is a positive sign, yet it’s hard to gauge their loyalty at this point. I
propose we consider involving one of the less active players in the mission, such as
Player 2 or Player 4 who have yet to take leading roles. This can provide us with more
balanced insights and possibly better mission outcome.

Player 6: I appreciate the leadership shown by Player 1 and Player 3, but I believe we
ought to pay attention to players who have not yet had the opportunity to demonstrate
their positions. For example, Player 2 and Player 4 could be solid candidates for the
mission. They have not raised any suspicions so far but also have not had many
opportunities to demonstrate their loyalty. Perhaps we could bring their viewpoints to
light in our discussions, as it would provide us with a broader range of perspectives,
ensuring our team's decisions are based on diverse input and reducing chances of an
evil player on the team.

 Player 2: Player 2 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 4: Player 4 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was rejected by the majority. Move on to the next
 leader.

 Player 2: I propose the team player 3, player 6.

 Player 2: Given the game's current state, I strongly believe we should consider Player
 3 and Player 6 for this mission. Player 3 has been quite proactive and has consistently
 displayed strategic thinking in their approach, which I believe is essential for our
 success. Player 6 has also shown a level of impartiality, consistently advocating for fair
 play. Their active participation and discussion analysis have convinced me they could be
 vital in ensuring this mission's success. I genuinely feel this team might drive us
 towards victory and hence request your support in this decision.


                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 3: I think it's crucial to participate actively and make thoughtful decisions, even
 in these early rounds. Observing the discussions and actions of all players from the
 beginning can provide valuable insights.

 With regards to the proposed team of myself and player 6, I feel it's a suitable choice
 for the upcoming mission. We have yet to notice anything suspicious from Player 6, and
 I bring a strategic mindset to the table. However, as this is only the first round, we
 should remain alert to any possible signs of deceit from any players later in the game.

 On that note, I encourage everyone not to hold back on their suspicions or insights in
 the subsequent rounds. Open dialogue is vital for the forces of good to win. Remember,
 observation and open discussion are our biggest weapons. I hope we all make our
 decisions meticulously but quickly so we can move forward.

 Player 4: Upon analyzing the proposed team of players 3 and 6, it's worth noting that
 player 3 has been proactive with their strategic approach so far, which is a good sign,
 and player 6 has remained impartial, both traits of commendable team players.
 However, since it is only the first round, we need to stay alert to the fact that player
 behaviors can change. As such, we might benefit from including players who haven't
 had the chance to be part of any mission yet, like Player 2 or even myself for instance.
 It will not only give us fresh perspectives but also a broader understanding of players'
 intentions. Remember, having an open dialogue is crucial to our success and quick, yet
 careful decision-making is important to move the game ahead.

 Player 5: I agree with the proposed team of Player 3 and Player 6 as they have shown
 active participation and strategic thinking in our discussions thus far. However, their
 choice of advocating only for a fair game without trying to identify the evil amongst us
 is slightly concerning. It's important that we not only choose loyal players but also
 strategic ones who actively strive to determine evil players. I'd like to hear more
 reasoning behind their team proposals and actions before I decide on my vote.

 Player 6: I think the proposed team is solid for now. Player 3 and I have not attracted
 much suspicion so far, but we must keep an eye on all players as we proceed. I agree
 with Player 5 - pinpointing the evil players should be our priority, and for that, we
 should observe those who've shown initiative in this game. However, we must not
 make hasty decisions based on limited observations. As Player 1 and Player 2 have been
 proactively contributing to the game, I suggest considering their inclusion in future
 missions. Remember, creating a trusting atmosphere through open dialogue is key.
 Let's work together to ensure victory for the forces of good.


                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 1: The proposed team of Player 3 and Player 6 does bother me somewhat. It's
 not about their intent or commitment to the game, rather I feel that we could benefit
 from including others who haven't yet been given a chance to prove their loyalty.
 Diversifying our team could lead to a more balanced perception and possibly, a more
 desirable outcome for all of us. I suggest we think about this before making a final
 decision. Let's give others a chance too.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 4: Player 4 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was rejected by the majority. Move on to the next
 leader.

 Player 3: I propose the team player 3, player 6.

 Player 3: I suggest we continue with the proposed team of Player 3 (myself) and
 Player 6 for this mission. As two players who have shown fairness in discussions and
 actions so far, I believe we should be able to manage this mission well. We can then
 observe the other players' responses and voting patterns to gather more information
 for future rounds. Just as with Player 2, we must also give other players a chance to
 demonstrate their loyalty. Ensuring varied team composition throughout the missions
 could help us identify the roles better. Nonetheless, the strategic approach I plan to use
 should bolster our mission's chances of success.

 Player 4: I'm open-minded about this proposed team of Player 3 and Player 6. Their
 active engagement and strategic approach in our discussions can be positive, but I hope
 to see more effort in trying to identify potential evil roles. Also, I echo Player 2's
 thoughts about broadening our scope and letting more players show their allegiance as
 we go along.

 It's the first round and making definite deductions now is premature. However, this
 would be a valuable exercise in starting to identify the villains. Let's keep the
 discussion open and attentive as we decide who to include in our teams for the
 upcoming missions.


                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 5: It's great to see the cooperation between Player 3 and Player 6, and I
 certainly appreciate their strategic input. However, having the same players on every
 mission might not give us the insights we need to determine everyone's roles. I suggest
 alternating the players involved in missions, including those who haven't participated
 yet. They could bring a new dynamic to the team, enhancing our understanding of
 everyone's roles and paving the way to success. What are your thoughts, Player 2 and
 Player 4? Who would you like to see on the mission team?

 Player 6: I've reviewed the discussions we've had so far and taken into account
 everyone's active participation. Player 3 has taken strategic initiatives and has been
 quite active, which I believe is a sign of commitment towards the mission's success. As
 for me, you can see from my responses that my intent was to keep the logic intact and
 stay neutral in every discussion.

 I do believe, however, that everyone should get an opportunity to be part of the
 mission's team as it does help bring in different perspectives and can assist us in
 identifying potential evil roles. Despite this, I feel that the current proposal comprised
 of myself and player 3 seems apt as we've been fairly active, stayed neutral and have
 been able to avoid any major suspicion so far.

 Player 1: It's great to see the active involvement of both Player 3 and Player 6 so early
 in the game. Their consistent participation displays commitment. However, it's crucial
 to remember that winning requires gaining perspectives from all players. And in this
 initial phase, it’s too early to start placing trust solely based on active participation.
 Other players such as Player 2 and Player 4 are yet to have a chance at proving their
 loyalty in a mission. I suggest alternating players between missions. Not only will it
 keep the intent and strategies of the evil side in check, it will also help distribute
 responsibility and identify loyal players. Therefore, while not questioning the
 credibility of Player 3 or Player 6, I will sadly have to vote against the proposed team
 for now. It will be beneficial to rotate the members and let other players also
 participate.

 Player 2: Even though Player 3 and Player 6 haven't had the opportunity to make
 strong impressions yet, I see potential in them. Their active participation and neutrality
 thus far make a strong case for their inclusion, in my opinion. Such an arrangement
 could allow us to assess their capabilities better and gain deeper insights into the
 overall team dynamics. Other players who haven't had a chance to participate should
 also be considered for future missions to keep the rotation healthy, providing everyone
 an equal opportunity, as correctly pointed out by some team members. I think we
 should keep an optimistic mindset and support these players instead of making early
 conclusions. Let's deliberate but also remember our shared goal towards the success of
 the mission.



                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 4: Player 4 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 2: Player 2 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was approved by the majority. The mission start!

 Voiceover: The mission result is Success. The votes are: ['Success', 'Success']

 Voiceover: A new discussion round begins.

 Player 4: I propose the team player 2, player 4, player 6.

 Player 4: Considering the success of the first mission, I would propose a slightly
 different team for this round. I suggest that the mission team should consist of myself,
 Player 4, and Player 2, and Player 6 who were part of the successful first mission.
 Including Player 2, who has not yet been assessed, can give us more insights. It's
 important that we remain cautious about our decisions, as the evil side is still hidden
 among us. I am confident in this proposal and believe that it can lead us to success in
 this mission. Let's keep our focus on achieving our common goal.

 Player 5: I think Player 2, Player 4, and Player 6 could make a strong team, but we
 need to be extra careful. Player 2 hasn't been tested yet, so including them in the team
 is a risk. On the other hand, Player 4 has a strong argument for being included, and
 Player 6 was part of a successful mission. In this round, I strongly believe we should
 test Player 2; it's crucial to clarify their alignment as we proceed further into the game.
 Therefore, I support the team of Player 2, Player 4, and Player 6 for this mission, but
 let's keep our eyes open for any strange actions.

 Player 6: Including new players in the mission team will give us broader insight into
 everyone's playing strategies. Player 2's inclusion in this mission team is a strategic
 move, and I think it’s crucial for us to learn more about them. Player 4's approach
 astutely incorporates lessons from the successful first mission, and endorses a
 reasoning which could guide us strategically. Despite uncertainties, these steps will
 help us lay a solid groundwork for future decisions and strategies. In agreement with
 the current proposed team, I endorse this decision for the sake of progress.


                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 1: Considering the journey of this game so far, it's crucial that we involve new
 players in this mission, as this can help us gather more valuable data. Player 2 has not
 had the opportunity to prove themselves yet, and I believe addingthem to the team will
 contribute to our understanding. Additionally, Player 4's strategic approach has been
 persuasive, indicating that they might add value to the mission. Player 6, having played
 a successful role in the first mission, seems trustworthy. Nevertheless, strategic
 changes in the team are necessary to ensure a wide assessment. Hence, I propose
 adding an element of unpredictability to the game by also involving Player 5 in this
 mission in place of Player 2. Therefore, my proposed team members are Player 4,
 Player 5, and Player 6.

 Player 2: I've been listening keenly to everyone, and I think the proposed team of
 Player 2, Player 4, and Player 6 could work well. Player 6 has already demonstrated
 their commitment to our cause in the previous successful mission, while Player 4 has
 been insightful during the discussions. Player 2, though untested so far, seems to have a
 strategic approach and is willing to prove their loyalty. However, we must stay vigilant.
 Just as one failed mission could tilt the balance, one successful mission doesn't define
 the game. It's possible for anyone to change tack at any stage, so let's be cautious and
 follow our instincts. I support this team, let's ensure we continue on the path of success.

 Player 3: Reflecting on our history, I believe the mission's success largely depends on
 team members who have proven their loyalty. Based on this, I recommend Player 6 and
 Player 4 for this mission. However, it's also essential to evaluate other players.
 Including Player 2 may be risky due to our lack of insight into their loyalties. I also
 think that Player 5 deserves a chance, especially given their quiet demeanor. Lastly, we
 should heed Player 1's advice but maintain a balanced perspective in the face of
 uncertainty. Ultimately, keeping the proposed team for now seems like a viable plan.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 2: Player 2 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was rejected by the majority. Move on to the next
 leader.


                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 Player 5: I propose the team player 2, player 4, player 6.

 Player 5: I propose that the mission team should consist of Player 2, Player 6, and
 Player 4. From the first successful mission, Player 6 has shown themselves to be
 trusting, potentially having the insights necessary for the success of this mission. Player
 2 has demonstrated active participation throughout, constantly supporting our
 discussions which I find to be signs of loyalty. While Player 4 has been a little quieter,
 their inputs were valuable when shared, and I believe they deserve an opportunity to
 prove their dedication to our cause. As we all know, in Avalon, all players play a crucial
 role, including the quiet ones. I am confident my decision is for the best and will gladly
 answer any questions regarding it.

 Player 6: Given the circumstances and reviewing past moves, I'm inclined to agree
 with the proposed team of Player 2, Player 4, and myself (Player 6) for this mission.
 Although we've seen supportive behavior from Player 2, we shouldn't forget that
 they're an untested player. Similarly, Player 4 served us well in the first mission, but
 their recent silence could potentially be a cause for concern. As for myself, I aim to
 remain consistent in my contribution to the team's success. Nevertheless, I recommend
 that we all stay alert, closely monitoring each player's actions as this mission unfolds.
 So, with a careful eye on the untested and silent players, I support this team proposal
 with vigilance. Let's work together to succeed in this mission.

 Player 1: Listening to the discussion and considering our game history, the proposed
 team has potential. However, we have been overlooking some of the players and their
 contributions to the game, or their silence could be raising questions.
 I propose we alter the team to include Player 2, Player 5, and Player 6. Player 6 has
 proven their worth in the previous mission, and we cannot take their dedication for
 granted. Player 2 has been consistent and loyal throughout. Lastly, I believe it's time for
 Player 5 to step up to the mission; although quiet, we need to know more about their
 loyalty.
 So, I propose reconfiguring the team to Player 2, Player 5, and Player 6, which may
 also provide us with fresh insights about player behaviors and loyalty.

 Player 2: After weighing up the past mission and evaluating each player's actions, it
 appears to me that the proposed team of Player 2, Player 4, and Player 6 is a reasonable
 decision. Player 6 has already proven themselves trustworthy following the first
 successful mission, while Player 4 has consistently provided insightful thoughts during
 discussions. In addition, I have been an active participant in this game. Despite
 supporting this team proposal, we shouldn't let our guard down. Each team member
 needs to be watchful for anything that might seem out of place or suspicious
 concerning the behavior of all players, as every single input counts and could
 potentially affect the outcome of our mission.
 Yet, with caution and vigilance in mind, I believe we should get behind this team
 proposal and concentrate our energies on working together to make this mission a
 success.

                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 3: As we continue our quest, we need to consider each player's actions and
 measure their merit accordingly. The team of Player 2, Player 4, and Player 6 proposed
 for this mission has raised questions to ponder.Yet, since the first mission was a success
 having Player 6 involved, it speaks well of his cause. However, Player 4's silence is
 rather intriguing. Remember, actions or the lack thereof can reveal a player's intentions
 in this game. As for Player 2, I believe it's too early to draw any conclusions yet. Their
 actions have been commendable, but it doesn't harm us to stay alert. Given these
 considerations, I urge us all to deliberate before coming to a decision about this team.

 Player 4: Considering our last mission success, I'm viewing the team proposal for this
 task optimistically. Having Player 6, with a success record, in the team is promising. I,
 too, am ready to give it my utmost to assure a mission success. And as for Player 2, it's
 a chance to bring them into play and observe their contributions. I think facilitating
 cooperation and open communication between us could make a difference. Based on
 these reasons, I endorse this team comprising Player 2, Player 4 (myself), and Player 6
 for this mission.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 2: Player 2 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 4: Player 4 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was rejected by the majority. Move on to the next
 leader.

 Player 6: I propose the team player 3, player 4, player 6.

 Player 6: I propose the following team for our mission: Player 3, Player 4, and myself.
 Player 3 has demonstrated thoughtfulness and caution in their strategies so far,
 indicating a consistent dedication to the success of our missions. As for Player 4,
 they've been rather quiet for the game's entirety, but I believe it's time to give them an
 opportunity to prove their worth. It's only through active involvement and consistent
 success that we can really judge a player's loyalty. As I was part of the successful team
 for mission 1, I would like to continue contributing to our collective success. I
 understand the weight of my role as team leader, and I trust that this team proposal
 will aid us in maintaining the success streak and ultimately winning the game.



                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 1: I agree that Players 3, 4 and 6 have so far shown trustworthy traits, but it's
 still early in the game and we've got to be very careful. Player 6 performed well in the
 first mission, but we can't rule out the possibility of them being deceptive. It's also
 crucial not to overlook Player 5, who hasn't yet had an opportunity to prove their
 loyalty. I think it might be wise to include Player 5 on the mission instead of Player 6.
 This way, we have a mix of tested players and some new blood. A different formation
 might bring a different perspective to the team.

 Player 2: I've been carefully considering the currently proposed team comprised of
 Player 3, Player 4, and Player 6. Based on their prior actions, I believe that Player 3 and
 Player 6 have demonstrated their value to the good team. Player 4's inputs have also
 been insightful and helpful, even though they haven't been on any mission yet. I would
 support this team for now, but remember, it's only the second round and there is a long
 game ahead of us. We must be alert and remember not to let our guard down, even
 when everything seems to be going smoothly. Let's have thorough and continuous
 discussions to guide us in our voting decisions. As of now, I'm inclined to vote 'yes' for
 this proposed team. Remember, our collective decisions matter, so let's make it count.

 Player 3: I think Player 6 has shown reliability by participating in the successful first
 mission, and I recommend we keep them on the team. As for Player 4, we are yet to
 see their loyalty in action, and their silence might just be a game strategy. However, it
 would be beneficial to give Player 5 a chance to prove their standing. So, I propose for
 this mission, we should have Player 6, Player 5, and myself. This would not only allow
 us to test new players but also potentially unmask anyone acting suspiciously.

 Player 4: Reflecting on the first mission's success and the proposed team from Player
 3, I'd suggest we keep vigilant and aware. While player 3's and player 6's actions seem
 to be in favor of the cause, it's important we analyze the voting and discussions more
 closely as we proceed. The current team selection with myself, player 3, and player 6
 might be a good mix, given the success of the previous mission and the untested
 element I bring to the team. However, let's stay alert to alterations in behavior or
 voting patterns. And remember, clear, and open communication can help us discern
 friend from foe, ensuring the success of our mission.


                                             36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 Player 5: The proposed team seems balanced at first glance with Player 3 and Player 6
 who have already completed a successful mission and Player 4, who is yet to
 demonstrate their dedication. However, I feel there's a missing piece in this puzzle.
 Maybe we should consider altering the team a little? As for who to replace or add, I
 suggest we all think about it carefully before casting our votes. This way, it doesn't
 seem too evident that an evil force is behind the suggestion, keeping me shielded from
 suspicion.

 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 2: Player 2 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 4: Player 4 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was approved by the majority. The mission start!

 Voiceover: The mission result is Success. The votes are: ['Success', 'Success', 'Success']

 Voiceover: A new discussion round begins.

 Player 1: I propose the team player 1, player 2, player 3, player 4.

 Player 1: Dear teammates, I've contemplated a lot about the selection for this mission.
 I propose that Players 1 (me), 2, 3, and 4 should undertake this mission. Players 3 and
 4 have proven their dedication to the cause by contributing to our previous successes. I
 believe it's time we changed the team a bit and hence, I propose me and Player 2 to
 take part in this mission. This ensures that all players get a fair chance to partake in our
 quest. If anyone has any reservations about the proposed team, feel free to voice your
 opinions for a discussion. Let's make this a successful mission!

 Player 2: Looking at the team's history, we've had successful missions so far.
 Particularly, Players 3 and 6 have consistently contributed to our victories. However, I
 have some doubts about the upcoming mission. Player 1, although proposed for the
 team, has not yet participated in any missions. With two victories under our belt, it's
 crucial we go ahead with those we have more confidence in their allegiance to our
 cause. I suggest replacing Player 1 with Player 6, who has a proven track record of
 success in previous tasks.
 However, I also acknowledge that suspicion without proof isn't fair, and I encourage
 everyone to discuss this proposal. This is a group decision, and I welcome differing
 opinions to ensure we form the best team moving forward and continue our success
 streak.

                                             37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Player 3: Based on the results of our past missions and players' behavior, I propose we
 consider the following team: Player 1, Player 3 (myself), Player 4, and Player 6.
 Although Player 1 hasn't yet had a chance to prove their loyalty in a mission, I believe
 we should give them a chance. Their suggestion about changing team composition
 sounded sincere. Player 2's proposal to replace Player 1 with Player 6 on the other
 hand struck me as unnecessary and raises some questions about their motives. This
 doesn’t mean Player 2 is certainly suspicious, it’s just I have a few uncertainties. On the
 note of Player 4, despite being new to missions, their performance seems reasonable
 and we haven't seen any signs of foul play yet. Player 6, who has been part of successful
 missions, I suggest that they continue their involvement in the upcoming mission. I
 believe this team gives us a good chance of a successful mission. Let's do our best team!

 Player 4: Considering the results from prior missions, I'm confident about the
 inclusion of Player 3 in the team. I'm cautious about Player 2's inclusion since they
 haven't been part of any successful missions yet, which leaves room for suspicion. As
 for Player 1, I see no harm in their inclusion as long as we maintain vigilance. So, for
 this round, I'd suggest changing the team composition to Player 3, Player 1, Player 4,
 and Player 6.

 Player 5: After careful consideration of past missions and recent discussions, I suggest
 forming a new team which includes Player 2, Player 4, Player 5 (myself) and Player 6.
 My proposition aims to balance the team with diverse views for a better decision-
 making process.

 Player 2, who has been unsure throughout might benefit from being part of a mission,
 helping them and us understand their stance better. Player 4 has maintained consistent
 actions, enriching the team's collective wisdom. Moreover, considering my own
 inclusion advantageous should not be a surprise, as having a wider set of views could be
 beneficial in this crucial stage. Lastly, I believe Player 6, who has been silently effective,
 could add significant value to this team.

 Please, let's discuss this proposal openly, making improvements if necessary, but
 keeping in mind that a diverse team helps us pave a path towards victory with more
 confidence.

 Player 6: Based on the past missions, it seems clear that Player 3 and I have been
 involved in successful missions and thus, it would be beneficial to have us on the team.
 I suggest involving Player 1 just to give them a chance to prove their loyalty. We need
 to be cautious around Player 2 as they were accused by Player 4. With all this
 information considered, I think adding Player 4 to the mission could be a good test of
 their loyalty, despite their quick judgement in previous rounds. This way, we have a
 balance of confirmed good players with those who still need to prove themselves. Let's
 come to a team formation that is most beneficial for the mission's success.


                                              38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 Player 2: Player 2 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 4: Player 4 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 5: Player 5 votes: disagree with this team proposal.

 Player 6: Player 6 votes: support with this team proposal.

 Voiceover: The team proposal was rejected by the majority. Move on to the next
 leader.

 Player 2: I propose the team player 2, player 3, player 4, player 6.

 Player 2: Reflecting on our past missions, we've seen a few players repeatedly
 contribute to our successes. Hence, I suggest we build on this momentum for the
 upcoming mission. I propose for mission 3 we have Player 2 (myself), Player 3, Player
 4, and Player 6. Player 6 has consistently been part of successful missions, and I've
 noticed a careful and considerate approach from Players 3 and 4. Players 1 and 5, no
 offence, it's not personal but based on the history of the game so far, it's a logical
 choice to include those who were part of successful missions before, increasing the
 likelihood of a repeat success. Let's unite and secure another victory for our team.

 Player 3: I'm in support of the proposed team for mission 3. Player 2 and I have yet to
 partake in any successful mission - this could be an excellent opportunity for us. My
 only concern about Player 2 is their lack of experience, but I trust they will prove their
 loyalty.
 Player 4 and Player 6 have a successful mission track record and it makes sense to
 include them. Player 1 also has potential, but they weren't included in any of our
 successful missions. Perhaps we could consider involving them in future missions to
 test their loyalty.
 I recommend we put our focus on maintaining the success streak and the team
 composition. Hence, my vote goes to Player 2, Player 3 (myself), Player 4, and Player 6
 for the upcoming mission.

 Player 4: Looking at our past successes, I believe we can continue the momentum
 with the currently proposed team. Player 2, although not having participated earlier, is
 included in a team with otherwise proven members. I agree it's important to rotate
 players to maintain balance and reveal possible alignments. I suggest we accept the
 team proposed by Player 6, which consists of Player 2, Player 3, myself, and Player 6,
 as it offers the best chance of success based on our current information. But, let's all
 remain vigilant and observant of any changes in the mission's outcomes or players’
 behavior.


                                             39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 Player 5: While I do agree that Players 2, 3, 4, and 6 have been performing well and
 their efforts have led to two successful missions, we must remember that strategy is an
 ever-evolving aspect of this game. In the spirit of inclusivity and to ensure we are not
 falling for an ornate ruse, I'd say we give Player 1 a chance to prove their value in this
 mission. In regards to Player 3 and 4, continuity of roles can potentially help in
 maintaining the momentum but having a fresh perspective from a different player may
 be worth considering. For this reason, I propose the team for the next mission to be
 Players 1, 3, 4, and 2. Let's remember this is for the greater good.

 Player 6: Considering the previous successful missions, I feel confident about
 endorsing a team that includes Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, and myself for this mission.
 Player 3 and Player 4 have contributed to the success of past missions, indicating they
 could be loyal. Player 2, although not included in previous teams, suggests a reasonable
 team strucutre which aligns with the current successful dynamics. Player 1 is still an
 enigma due to lack of involvement, and Player 5’s suggestion seems to disrupt the
 pattern of success we have achieved so far. Hence, I propose we cautiously stick to the
 pattern we have found effective until now as we keep observing everyone's behaviour
 carefully.

 Player 1: Careful contemplation has led me to conclude that the current team
 proposal is sound and its members have demonstrated admirable performance in
 preceding missions. That being said, I believe it's fair that each player, regardless of
 previous mission involvements or outcomes, be given an opportunity to contribute to
 our collective success. Thus, I suggest including Player 5 in the proposed team. Player 5
 hasn't had a chance at any mission so I believe we should give them one. This does not
 cast any doubt on the excellency shown by Player 2, Player 3, Player 4 and Player 6. It's
 merely a proposition in the spirit of fairness to ensure every player gets a chance at
 playing their part. I am open to suggestions and let's discuss this further to succeed in
 our mission.

 Player 3: Player 3 votes: support with this team proposal.
 Player 4: Player 4 votes: support with this team proposal.
 Player 5: Player 5 votes: support with this team proposal.
 Player 6: Player 6 votes: support with this team proposal.
 Player 1: Player 1 votes: disagree with this team proposal.
 Voiceover: The team proposal was approved by the majority. The mission start!
 Voiceover: The mission result is Success. The votes are: ['Success', 'Success', 'Success',
 'Success']
 Voiceover: Good side wins for now, moving on to assassination stage.

 Assassin: I think Player 3 is Merlin

 Voiceover: Good side wins finally!

 Voiceover: Game is over.

                                             40
