Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I DENTIFYING I NTERPRETABLE F EATURES IN
C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Single neurons in neural networks are often “interpretable” in that they represent
         individual, intuitively meaningful features. However, many neurons exhibit mixed
         selectivity, i.e., they represent multiple unrelated features. A recent hypothesis
         proposes that features in deep networks may be represented on non-orthogonal
         axes by multiple neurons, since the number of possible interpretable features in
         natural data is generally larger than the number of neurons in a given network.
         Accordingly, we should be able to find meaningful directions in activation space
         that are not aligned with individual neurons. Here, we propose (1) an automated
         method for quantifying visual interpretability that is validated against a large
         database of human psychophysics judgments of neuron interpretability, and (2)
         an approach for finding meaningful directions in network activation space. We
         leverage these methods to discover directions in convolutional neural networks
         that are more intuitively meaningful than individual neurons. In a series of analy-
         ses to understand this phenomenon we find, for instance, examples of feature syn-
         ergy where pairs of uninterpretable neurons work together to encode interpretable
         features. These results contribute to a larger effort to automate interpretability
         research, providing a foundation for scaling bespoke perceptual judgments to the
         analysis of complex neural network models.


1     I NTRODUCTION
 A)                                      B)                         Figure 1: Conceptual Overview.
                              ← MEIs
                                                                    A) A representation of two neuron’s
                              Neuron 1                              activations for different images. The
                              Neuron 2                              highlights indicate maximally excit-
                              MEIs →                                ing images (MEIs) for each neuron.
                             Feature 1                              B) There exist directions in feature
                             Feature 2
                                                                    space that are more interpretable.


One of the oldest ideas in neuroscience is the single neuron doctrine (Barlow, 1972), i.e., the hy-
pothesis that individual sensory neurons encode individually meaningful features.1 The idea dates
back to the early 1950s, when researchers began to find evidence of neurons that reliably and se-
lectively fire in response to particular stimuli, such as dots on a contrasting background (Barlow,
1953) and lines of particular orientation and width (Hubel & Wiesel, 1959). These findings gave
rise to the standard model of the ventral visual stream as a process of hierarchical feature extrac-
tion and pooling (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968; Gross et al., 1972; Riesenhuber & Poggio, 1999; Quiroga
et al., 2005). Neurons in the early stages extract simple features, such as oriented lines, while neu-
rons at later stages combine simple features to construct more complex composite features. In the
highest stages, complex features are combined to yield representations of entire objects encoded by
single neurons—the shape of a hand, or the face of a friend. This model has remained a dominant
paradigm in sensory neuroscience for the last seven decades and ultimately inspired the development
of convolutional neural networks (Fukushima, 1980).
   1
     In this work, we adopt a pragmatic definition of feature based on human discernability, measured through
psychophysics experiments (see below). For an attempt at a more formal definition see Elhage et al. (2022).


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mechanistic interpretability research, i.e., the single-unit electrophysiology of artificial neural net-
works, has yielded some remarkably coherent results, including many that align with classic em-
pirical findings from neuroscience: the existence of neurons with center-surround receptive fields,
color-contrast detectors, and oriented edge detectors that combine to form curve detectors in higher
layers, for example (Olah et al., 2020). However, the study of individual neurons, both in vitro and
in silico, faces two major problems. First is the inherent subjectivity of “interpretability,” which
generally necessitates the hand-inspection of neuron response properties. Second is the ubiquitous
existence of hard-to-interpret units with mixed selectivity (Fusi et al., 2016; Olah et al., 2020).2
We address both problems in this work by (1) defining a quantitative, automated measure of in-
terpretability that does not rely on human inspection and (2) demonstrating a simple approach for
finding meaningful directions in activity space that may not correspond to individual neurons.
Our first goal is to find a similarity metric that reflects human judgments of interpretability (Zim-
mermann et al., 2023). We then leverage this metric to test whether non-axis aligned directions in
the neural activation space of CNNs trained on real data may be more interpretable than the neurons
themselves—a test of the recently stated superposition hypothesis (Elhage et al., 2022). We compare
simple low-level metrics (e.g., similarity in color) to mid-level metrics proposed to reflect human
perceptual judgments (e.g., LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018)) to high-level similarity metrics encoding
object category (e.g., labels from a classification task) and assess our quantification of interpretabil-
ity against a large-scale human psychophysics experiment conducted by Zimmermann et al. (2023).
If a given metric provides a good match to human judgments of interpretability, it can serve as an
automated interpretability tool: this allows for the quantification of interpretability in deep neural
networks at scale (Leavitt & Morcos, 2020).
We perform a large number of analyses on a trained deep image model and find: directions that
are more interpretable than individual neurons and exhibit sparse activations on the natural image
manifold (Chen et al., 2018), and feature synergy—sparse combinations in activation space that yield
more interpretable features than the constituent parts. Ultimately, our work pushes in the direction of
automated interpretability research for CNNs, in line with recent efforts for language models (Bills
et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Gurnee et al., 2023; Sharkey et al., 2022).


2     M ETHODS

We propose an approach for quantifying the interpretability of neural network activations that is
grounded in human judgement, yet is fully automated and scalable. In general, individual neurons
— i.e., N directions corresponding to basis vectors of an activation space RN — might not be
interpretable. Yet, other directions in RN might be: we refer to them as features. For example,
in Fig. 1 B) the human observer can define three directions that are interpretable and correspond
approximately to horse-, car- and cat-like images. The superposition hypothesis stipulates that the
activation space RN of a neural network possesses several interpretable directions that are non-
orthogonal (Elhage et al., 2022). Given a CNN, we aim to identify such directions and quantify
their interpretability through the following three steps: 1. Collect neural network activations
for a given dataset. Images are passed through the network up to the layer under analysis, if
this is a convolutional layer, we average across space as is common practice (Zimmermann et al.,
2023). This generates a dataset in activation space RN ; 2. Identify directions in activation space.
Directions may be provided by the neurons themselves (basis vectors) or by an algorithm (e.g.,
PCA, sparse coding, K-Means); 3. Quantify the interpretability of each direction. We compute
an interpretability index (II) as the average pairwise similarity of the top M Maximally Exciting
Images (MEIs, defined in the next subsection) for each direction. Through a suite of experiments,
we argue that the II is a meaningful measure of the interpretability.

2.1   Q UANTIFYING I NTERPRETABILITY IN N EURAL NETWORKS

A neural network layer defines an activation space RN with N the number of neurons of that layer.
We consider directions in this space, for example, individual neurons are represented as directions:
   2
     One might wonder why evolution or gradient descent would be so kind as to make any neurons inter-
pretable. Annecdotally, researchers have explained this as a result of the use of pointwise nonlinearities in deep
networks. We provide a more formal argument for this explanation in Appendix B.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the basis vectors of RN . In activation space, some directions may be interpretable, in the sense that
they detect a single feature or concept within the image data. For example, an interpretable direction
may detect features such as edges, corners, textures in early layers, or more abstract patterns in later
layers such as dogs, cats, trucks. By contrast, other directions respond to several unrelated features
or concepts. For instance, Fig. 1 (A) shows the first neuron firing in response to unrelated car- or
cat-like images.
Maximally Exciting Images (MEIs) are defined as synthetic images that maximally activate a given
direction in activation space (Erhan et al., 2009). Given a direction u, we propose an Interpretabil-
ity Index (II) computed as the average pairwise similarity of its top M “ 5 MEIs:
                                               M M
                                            1 ÿ ÿ        ´       ¯
                                  IIpuq “             sim xj , xk .                                 (1)
                                            M j“1 k“1

In this work, we consider and compare several similarity metrics sim: color (low-level), LPIPS
(mid-level) (Zhang et al., 2018), and category labels (high-level).

2.2   I MAGE S IMILARITY M ETRICS

We consider image similarity metrics that capture notions of similarity at different levels of abstrac-
tion: 1) Low-Level: Color The color similarity between two images is defined as the difference
between the average color in each image; 2) Mid-Level: LPIPS Learned Perceptual Image Patch
Similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018) is a perceptual metric used for assessing the perceptual dif-
ferences between images. It relies on a CNN such as VGG or AlexNet that has been pre-trained on
an image classification task. Given two images, LPIPS extracts their respective feature maps from
multiple layers of the CNN. LPIPS then computes the distance between the corresponding feature
maps. The distances are scaled by learned weights and then aggregated to yield a single scalar value
representing the perceptual similarity between the two images; 3) High-Level: Labels The label
similarity between two images is a value equal to 0 if the two images have been assigned different
labels during a reference classification task, and equal to 1 if the two images have been assigned the
same label. In our experiments, we use the CIFAR dataset and associated classification task.

2.3   F ROM H UMAN P SYCHOPHYSICS TO I N -S ILICO P SYCHOPHYSICS

How can we validate whether the proposed interpretability index from Eq. 1 is indeed a sensible
measure of interpretability? The concept of interpretability is intimately tied to human judgment. A
long history of theoretical inquiry has demonstrated the impossibility of identifying necessary and
sufficient conditions for many natural semantic categories (Stekeler-Weithofer, 2012). Due of this
difficulty, we adopt a Wittgensteinian view, converting the question of whether a representation is
interpretable into an empirical measure of the human interpretability judgment (Wittgenstein, 1953).

H UMAN P SYCHOPHYSICS
Psychophysics is a field that quantitatively investigates the relationship between stimuli (e.g. im-
ages) and the perceptions they produce for human observers. Borowski et al. (2020) and Zimmer-
mann et al. (2023) have demonstrated that large-scale psychophysics experiments can be leveraged
for conducting quantitative interpretability research. In these works, researchers used the judgments
of human participants to quantify the interpretability of neurons in trained artificial neural networks.
In Zimmermann et al. (2023), participants are shown 9 minimally and 9 MEIs for a given neuron.
The participant is then asked to select one of two query images x1 , x2 that they believe also strongly
activates that neuron (see App. D for an illustration). The (human) psychophysics accuracy obtained
for that neuron is defined as the percentage of participants that are able to select the correct image.

I N -S ILICO P SYCHOPHYSICS
Psychophysics experiments provide a way of crowd-sourcing and quantifying human intuition of
interpretability at scale. However, such experiments are time consuming, noisy and costly ($12,000
for (Zimmermann et al., 2023)). Here, we propose a method for automating psychophysics experi-
ments, with a model that faithfully approximates human judgments while requiring no human input.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We replicate, in-silico, the experiments of Zimmermann et al. (2023), comparing different similarity
metrics as proxies for human judgments. In our experiments, the model computes the maximum
similarity, according to the image similarity metric, between each of the query images x1 , x2 and
the set of MEIs. The model then chooses as its response the image that is the closest to that set, i.e.,
that minimizes the cost:


                           Cpxq “ simpx, MEIpuqq “ min simpx, xk q,                                 (2)
                                                        k“1,...,9

where x1 , ..., x9 are the top 9 MEIs for a neuron or direction u, and sim the image similarity metric.
The psychophysics accuracy for a given neuron or direction u is defined as the percentage at which
the model selects the correct query image for that neuron, i.e.:

                                     # of correct selections for direction u
                          Accpuq “                                           .                      (3)
                                          # of queries with direction u

We check in practice that directions u with high interpretability index IIpuq are indeed more in-
terpretable to a human observer. We note that we could have chosen the in-silico psychophysics
accuracy Accpuq of direction u to quantify its interpretability: the more interpretable u is, the eas-
ier it is for participants to correctly select images associated with it (Zimmermann et al., 2023).
However, we observe in practice that Accpuq is often at ceiling, and does not contain as much in-
formation as our proposed IIpuq. Since it is also more expensive to compute, we use it only to
validate the viability of the IIpuq. Since the human psychophysics accuracy was computed only for
directions corresponding to individual neurons, having in-silico psychophysics experiments is a key
component of our approach. Note that we deliberately chose to work with MEIs rather than feature
visualisations (Olah et al., 2017), because the latter showed consistently lower interpretability in
different psychophysics studies (Borowski et al., 2020; Zimmermann et al., 2021; 2023).


3     R ESULTS

3.1   C OMPARISON : H UMAN VS . I N -S ILICO P SYCHOPHYSICS

We first test the LPIPS similarity metric as a model of human perception of neuron interpretability.
The experiments from Zimmermann et al. (2023) quantify the interpretability of neurons in models
trained on ImageNet-1k through crowd-sourced human perceptual judgments. We reproduce this
experiment in-silico by presenting the same image queries to a simple model based on the LPIPS
metric. For each query, we evaluate whether the image selected by the model agrees with the image
selected by human participants: it is a correct classification it they agree, incorrect otherwise. The
results of this binary classification task are shown in Figure 2 for the LPIPS image similarity metric
(Zhang et al., 2018), on five of its AlexNet layers.


Figure 2: Interpretability Metric vs. Human Behaviour. Data from Zimmermann et al. (2023).
Left to Right: Agreement between human and in-silico psychophysics on the predictability of the
outputs of four layers within a ResNet50. Human and model agree on what makes a feature pre-
dictability for the ResNet50’s early layers. For these layers, the proposed interpretability metric is a
valid representation of the human’s perception of interpretability. AUC: Area Under the Curve.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The predictions of the LPIPS model match human judgments well for earlier layers of the
ResNet50—layers 1 and 23 —with an AUC up to 0.71 (Figure 2, left two panels). While there is
certainly room for improvement, we conclude that this metric, based on LPIPS-based pairwise im-
age comparison, serves as a good first proxy of human perception of interpretability. Crucially,
our metric has the added benefit of not having to recruit a cohort of human participants. Thus, we
will use this metric to evaluate the interpretability of features across neural network layers in the
next subsections. Since the interpretability metric is more accurate for early layers, we focus the
remainder of our analyses on layer 1 of the same ResNet50 architecture trained on CIFAR-10.

3.2      I DENTIFYING I NTERPRETABLE D IRECTIONS IN F EATURE S PACE

We next apply the II to analyze the interpretability of features in a 50-layer ResNet50 pre-trained on
the CIFAR-10 image dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)4 . We evaluate several methods for identifying
interpretable directions in activation space: PCA, ICA, NMF, K-Means with cosine similarity, and
the shallow sparse autoencoder used in Sharkey et al. (2022). We evaluate several similarity metrics
and compute the II for each, comparing the interpretability of individual neurons in a layer with the
interpretability of identified directions from that layer.
For a quantitative comparison, we present comparative box plots for the distributions of II indices
for neurons and directions in Figure 3 while we vary: the LPIPS layer defining the similarity metric
used in the II (left), the number of K directions in activation space (middle), and distributions after
splitting neurons into uninterpretable and interpretable groups (right). We observe that the K-means
approach detects directions that are indeed more interpretable (higher II) than the individual neurons
of the activation space — independently of the LPIPS layer considered for the II (Figure 3 left). Our
method achieves higher II values (mean “ ´0.0159) than all baselines and the sparse autoencoder
(best mean “ ´0.0188) (detailed comparison in App. A) [note that the II has arbitrary units].
Interestingly, the number of directions K does not impact their IIs in the regime tested (Figure 3
left). Thus, we focus our analyses on the K “ N “ 256 setting for a fair comparison.


Figure 3: Quantification of Interpretability. Left: II score [a.u.] distribution for neurons (N “
256), PCA and ICA baselines, and K-Means as a function of K P t128, 256, 512u. Middle: II score
distribution for neurons (N “ 256) and K-Means (K “ 256) as a function of LPIPS layer. Right: II
score distribution for uninterpretable neurons (N “ 128), i.e. those with II score below the median,
and interpretable neurons (N “ 128), i.e., those with II score above the median; II score distribution
for K-Means (K “ 128) computed on each of these subsets separately.

The K-means approach can detect directions within subsets of uninterpretable neurons as well as
within interpretable neurons, as we do not observe II differences in Figure 3 (right). Further, trans-
forming interpretable neurons and uninterpretable neurons into their direction increases the II of
both. We see a trend where the II increases with respect to the LPIPS layer used, which is a similar
pattern as we saw in Figure 2. Like in Figure 2, using LPIPS Layer 3 yields the highest II.
For a qualitative comparison, Figure 4 shows the Maximally Exciting Images (MEIs) for 5 neurons
(left) and 5 directions extracted from K-Means (right) selected in 5 different quantiles of II values (to
avoid cherry picking in this qualitative comparison). The distributions of II indices is shifted towards
the higher values for the directions detected by K-means, as shown by the II values associated with
each quantile. This is confirmed by the visualization of MEIs which appear more visually coherent
to the human observer for the directions (right) compared to the neurons (left).
   3
       This refers to the PyTorch module names, corresponding to layers 10 and 23 in the network.
   4
       Hosted at https://github.com/huyvnphan/PyTorch CIFAR10


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: MEIs of Neurons and Monosemantic Directions. These are the Maximally Exciting
Images (MEIs) for neurons (left) and directions (right) as retrieved with K-Means. To represent the
interpretability index (II) distribution, we show neurons and directions at different II quantiles.


3.3   C OMPARING S IMILARITY M ETRICS FOR I N -S ILICO P SYCHOPHYSICS

We now compare the interpretability of the directions measured using the three image similarity
metrics described in Section 2. Each metric defines similarity at a different level of abstraction,
from low-level to high-level: same color (Figure 5 left), same perceptual structure as defined by
LPIPS (Figure 5 middle) or same category (Figure 5 right). For each metric, we perform the in-
silico psychophysics task from Section 3.1, varying the difficulty of the psychophysics experiment.
The difficult of a task is by choosing query images that cause less extreme activations—i.e. are
farther away from the set of MEIs (Borowski et al., 2020). This allows us to probe a more general
understanding of the interpretability of a neuron or direction.


Figure 5: In Silico Psychophysics Performance. Accuracy across neurons and interpretable di-
rections revealed by K-Means clusters (K P t128, 256, 512u) for in silico psychophysics task for
different levels of difficult, i.e., limiting query and reference image selection to the central range of
activations (e.g., from the 0.45th until the 0.55th quantile, see (Zimmermann et al., 2023)). Predic-
tions are made based on different metrics from low level semantics (colour match, left), over mid
level semantics (LPIPS average over layers, center), to high level semantics (label match, right).

As expected, we see in Figure 5 that both the neurons and the directions have a decreased psy-
chophysics accuracy as the task becomes more difficult. The directions detected by our approach
are more predictable than the individual neurons across low, mid and high-level semantics and across
task difficulties. The largest improvement over individual neurons is observed for the low-level se-
mantics using colors, and the improvement decreases as we move towards higher level semantics.
Additionally, as observed in Figure 3, the number of clusters K does not impact the accuracy.

3.4   I NTERPRETABLE N EURONS AS S PARSE ACTIVATIONS ON THE DATA M ANIFOLD

One way of understanding interpretability is in terms of the distribution of a given neuron’s acti-
vations over the image manifold. This concept and the following analysis are directly inspired by
the sparse manifold transform (Chen et al., 2018). We take the top M “ 5 MEIs for both neurons
(N “ 256 and K-Means (K “ 256) features and compute all pairwise image similarities using
LPIPS. We then embed this distance matrix into a 2D space for visualization purposes using t-SNE


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) (perplexity“ 10) (Fig. 6). Each point in the visualization corre-
sponds to a different image, and is colored according to a different scheme in each subplot. In Fig.
6:A, the color of each point indicates the average color of the image. In Fig. 6:B, color indicates the
image label. In Figs. 6:E and 6:F, color indicates the activation of a single neuron (E) or K-Means
feature (F) over the dataset. Activations for both neurons and K-Means features are computed as
follows:
                                      d1          d ´ avgpdq
                          fi pxq “ e´ τ , d1 “                d “ }x ´ µi }22                       (4)
                                                    s.d.pdq
Where µi is the location of the cluster centroids for K-Means features and a one hot vector for neu-
rons. Taking the z-score before the exponential ensures a fair comparison. Finally, the temperature
τ “ 2 is introduced for visualization purposes.5

 A)                     B)                            C)                      D)


 E)


 F)


Figure 6: Sparse Manifold Activations. The natural image manifold (subset of MEIs) embedded
in 2D with tSNE and coloured by average image colour A), image label B), activation of neurons
E) and activation of features F). There is a correlation between sparsity on the manifold (average
distance of most activating points) and the II for both neurons C) and features D).

We see that colour (Fig. 6:A) is a major factor in determining the layout of the manifold, and
although labels tend to cluster locally, image category plays a lesser role (Fig. 6:B). Interestingly,
we see that the features (Fig. 6:F) are much sparser on the manifold than the neural activations (Fig.
6:E). This suggests that more interpretable units are more sparsely active across the natural image
manifold. Thus, we provide evidence (Fig. 6:C&D) for a long-standing hypothesis in the neural
coding literature (Chen et al., 2018).

3.5   S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

We investigate the sensitivity of the interpretable directions (directions), i.e., of the K-Means cen-
troids. Specifically, we perturb each direction and quantify whether the perturbed direction is still
interpretable. Our perturbation process is explained below. We interpolate from one K-Means
centroid µa to another µb (and beyond to test extrapolation) and compute the II for these different
directions in latent space. The intermediate directions are:
                               vpαq “ αµa ` p1 ´ αqµb , for α P R.                                 (5)

We normalize each intermediate direction vpαq to maintain the same norm 1. For each direction v
along the interpolation path we compute the II index from the images that lie closest to that point in
   5
     Lower τ would make Fig. 6:F look even sparser, and higher τ would make Fig. 6:E look even more
uniform; using the same τ ensures a fair comparison.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


latent space:
                                       fv pxq “ ´}ypxq ´ v},                                      (6)
where x is an image (an input), y is the function representing the first layer of the CNN, ypxq is
the feature associated to image x in latent space, and }} is the Euclidean norm in latent space. The
results are shown in Figure 7 B). We observe that µa and µb , corresponding to interpolation factors
α “ 0 and α “ 1 have higher II and that the II strongly drops for interpolating directions vpαq. This
supports the idea that the direction extracted via K-Means are interpretable. Moreover, based on
signal detection theory (Dayan & Abbott, 2005), we hypothesize that more meaningful directions
are so in virtue of being highly selective and less sensitive to input perturbations, i.e., to image
perturbations Paiton et al. (2020). Thus, for each intermediate direction v, we also compute the
norm of the input gradient:
                }∇fv |x } “ }∇r´}ypxq ´ v}s} “ }∇r´}ypxq ´ αµa ` p1 ´ αqµb }s}.                    (7)
For a fixed intermediate direction v, this value quantifies how much the response of a feature ypxq
representing image x changes given perturbations on image x.

 A)                                B)                               C)
                                    II


Figure 7: Sensitivity Analysis. A) Clusters that are further away from each other are have lower
semantic similarity (measured as cross-II). B) Computing the II for interpolations (from one centroid
to another) between and beyond all pairs of maximally separated clusters (determined with Hungar-
ian algorithm). C) Sensitivity (i.e., average norm of the input gradient) for different interpolation
points, coloured by the cluster similarity of start and end point in interpolation.

Figure 7 shows the average norm of the input gradient. We observe that the gradient’s norm is gen-
erally much lower at a neuron’s MEI (α “ 0) vs. the MEI of a different unit (α “ 0), unless they
are very similar. We also find a weak but significant negative correlation (Spearman ρ “ ´0.18
p ă 3.110´5 between the interpretability and the minimal gradient norm, as shown in Figure 7 D).
Together, these suggests that units which are more interpretable are also less sensitive to input per-
turbations at their preferred inputs. Consequently, a hypothesis derived from these analyses: neurons
in CNNs that are more interpretable are also more robust to adversarial or noise perturbations.

3.6   PAIRWISE S YNERGIES B ETWEEN N EURONS

Efficient coding principles such as minimal wiring length (Laughlin & Sejnowski, 2003), as well as
the circuit analysis approach of mechanistic interpretability (Conmy et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023)
inspire us to look for minimal subcircuits that increase interpretability. Specifically, we investigate
the pairwise synergies between pairs of neurons. For all pairs of neurons a, b in the same ResNet50
layer, we compute the II score for their added (z-scored) activity. The synergy is the difference
between this II score and the maximum of their individual II scores to account for pairings with
highly interpretable neurons:
                          Synergypa, bq “ IIpa ` bq ´ max rIIpaq, IIpbqs .                         (8)
The synergy measures whether adding these neurons produces a direction in activation space that
is more interpretable than taking each neuron individually. This is visualized in Figure 8 A) and
B) which show two pairs of neurons a, b with the highest synergy: the MEIs resulting from their
addition are more interpretable that their individual MEIs.
The histogram of Figure 8 C) shows a large fraction of negative values of the synergy, i.e., most pair-
ings are, as expected, detrimental for interpretability. However, a good fraction of the added neurons
a ` b become more interpretable. Figure 8 D) shows that correlated neurons tend to have higher syn-
ergy but correlation alone does not explain everything: two neurons can be uncorrelated, yet their


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A)    II = –0.04                 II = –0.05              II = –0.01        B)      II = –0.04        II = –0.04                  II = –0.01


 C)                                                  D)                                          E)


           Synergy = II(a + b) - max[II(a), II(b)]                     Correlation(a, b)                           Interpretability (II)


Figure 8: Synergies. A), B) Example pairs (two highest synergies) of neurons and the result when
adding them (all visualized by their 4 MEIs). C) Histogram of synergies for every pair of neurons.
D) A slight positive relationship between the correlation and synergy over all pairs of neurons (i.e.,
more correlated neuron pairs have higher synergies). E) A strong negative relationship between the
II of a neuron and the maximum synergy it can achieve (i.e., pairings dilute interpretable neurons).


addition can produce a very interpretable feature. This shows that our notion of interpretability is
distinct from the familiar notion of (un)correlation. Lastly, we find that more interpretable neu-
rons (higher II) show lower maximal synergy (Figure 8 E)). This suggest that their representation is
already interpretable and that any pairing would only dilute it.


4     D ISCUSSION

In this work, we have proposed a quantitative metric of interpretability and a method for finding
interpretable features in activation space. We hope that further research will find better metrics6 and
better feature identification methods. Nevertheless, we believe that our initial combination of metric
and feature recovery method used here demonstrates the viability of our framework for automat-
ing interpretability research for vision models. In particular, we emphasize the value of validating
quantitative metrics of interpretability against large-scale human psychophysics experiments of in-
terpretability (Zimmermann et al., 2023). This allows us to scale human intuition to large-scale,
complex neural network models—thus automating what is ordinarily done in mechanistic inter-
pretability research by hand (Leavitt & Morcos, 2020). We hope that this approach will ultimately
lead to a better understanding of neural coding principles and cast light into the black box of deep
network representations.
Mixed selectivity is widely observed in neuroscience, (Rigotti et al., 2013) and there are coding
advantages believed to be conferred by such a representation (Fusi et al., 2016)—for instance, in
the case of representational drift, a phenomenon observed in cortex in which neurons change their
tuning over time while maintaining a stable representation as a population (Rule et al., 2019; Driscoll
et al., 2022; Masset et al., 2022). Moreover, such a code may be more robust to input perturbations,
as suggested by our sensitivity analysis. In Appendix C, we show that network activations follow
the same spectral power law as cortical representations (Stringer et al., 2019). That is, they are
low-dimensional enough to maintain differentiability (i.e. they are robust to input perturbations),
while being high-dimensional enough to capture the data structure. This suggests a universal coding
strategy employed by biological and artifical neural networks alike. We believe that future analyses
grounded in a quantified metric of interpretability may illuminate the computational function of
these convergent neural coding strategies and more.

    6
      Preliminary experiments with newer perceptual metrics (Fu et al., 2023) already show improved match to
the human psychophysics data.


                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Horace B Barlow. Summation and inhibition in the frog’s retina. The Journal of physiology, 119(1):
  69, 1953.
Horace B Barlow. Single units and sensation: a neuron doctrine for perceptual psychology? Per-
  ception, 1(4):371–394, 1972.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in lan-
  guage models. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.
  html.(Date accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2023.
Judy Borowski, Roland S Zimmermann, Judith Schepers, Robert Geirhos, Thomas SA Wallis,
  Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Exemplary natural images explain cnn activations better
  than state-of-the-art feature visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12606, 2020.
Yubei Chen, Dylan Paiton, and Bruno Olshausen. The sparse manifold transform. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.14997, 2023.
Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
  2023.
Peter Dayan and Laurence F Abbott. Theoretical neuroscience: computational and mathematical
  modeling of neural systems. MIT press, 2005.
Laura N Driscoll, Lea Duncker, and Christopher D Harvey. Representational drift: Emerging theo-
  ries for continual learning and experimental future directions. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
  76:102609, 2022.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposi-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.
Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Visualizing higher-layer
  features of a deep network. University of Montreal, 1341(3):1, 2009.
Stephanie Fu, Netanel Tamir, Shobhita Sundaram, Lucy Chai, Richard Zhang, Tali Dekel, and
  Phillip Isola. Dreamsim: Learning new dimensions of human visual similarity using synthetic
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09344, 2023.
Kunihiko Fukushima. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of
  pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biological cybernetics, 36(4):193–202, 1980.
Stefano Fusi, Earl K Miller, and Mattia Rigotti. Why neurons mix: high dimensionality for higher
  cognition. Current opinion in neurobiology, 37:66–74, 2016.
Charles G Gross, CE de Rocha-Miranda, and DB Bender. Visual properties of neurons in inferotem-
  poral cortex of the macaque. Journal of neurophysiology, 35(1):96–111, 1972.
Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bert-
 simas. Finding neurons in a haystack: Case studies with sparse probing. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.01610, 2023.
David H Hubel and Torsten N Wiesel. Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex.
  The Journal of physiology, 148(3):574, 1959.
David H Hubel and Torsten N Wiesel. Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate
  cortex. The Journal of physiology, 195(1):215–243, 1968.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Simon B Laughlin and Terrence J Sejnowski. Communication in neuronal networks. Science, 301
  (5641):1870–1874, 2003.
Matthew L Leavitt and Ari Morcos. Towards falsifiable interpretability research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2010.12016, 2020.
Paul Masset, Shanshan Qin, and Jacob A Zavatone-Veth. Drifting neuronal representations: Bug or
  feature? Biological cybernetics, 116(3):253–266, 2022.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Liberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05217, 2023.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2(11):e7,
  2017.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. An
  overview of early vision in inceptionv1. Distill, 5(4):e00024–002, 2020.
Dylan M Paiton, Charles G Frye, Sheng Y Lundquist, Joel D Bowen, Ryan Zarcone, and Bruno A
  Olshausen. Selectivity and robustness of sparse coding networks. Journal of vision, 20(12):
  10–10, 2020.
R Quian Quiroga, Leila Reddy, Gabriel Kreiman, Christof Koch, and Itzhak Fried. Invariant visual
  representation by single neurons in the human brain. Nature, 435(7045):1102–1107, 2005.
Maximilian Riesenhuber and Tomaso Poggio. Hierarchical models of object recognition in cortex.
 Nature neuroscience, 2(11):1019–1025, 1999.
Mattia Rigotti, Omri Barak, Melissa R Warden, Xiao-Jing Wang, Nathaniel D Daw, Earl K Miller,
 and Stefano Fusi. The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature, 497
 (7451):585–590, 2013.
Michael E Rule, Timothy O’Leary, and Christopher D Harvey. Causes and consequences of repre-
 sentational drift. Current opinion in neurobiology, 58:141–147, 2019.
Lee Sharkey, Dan Braun, and Beren Millidge. Taking features out of superposition with sparse au-
  toencoders. https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/
  interim-research-report-taking-features-out-of-superposition#
  Method_1__The_presence_of_dead_neurons, 2022. [Online; accessed 26-Sept-
  2023].
Pirmin Stekeler-Weithofer. Grundprobleme der Logik: Elemente einer Kritik der formalen Vernunft.
  Walter de Gruyter, 2012.
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Matteo Carandini, and Kenneth D Harris.
  High-dimensional geometry of population responses in visual cortex. Nature, 571(7765):361–
  365, 2019.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophische untersuchungen. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1953.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Roland S Zimmermann, Judy Borowski, Robert Geirhos, Matthias Bethge, Thomas Wallis, and
  Wieland Brendel. How well do feature visualizations support causal understanding of cnn activa-
  tions? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11730–11744, 2021.
Roland S Zimmermann, Thomas Klein, and Wieland Brendel. Scale alone does not improve mech-
  anistic interpretability in vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05471, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     A PPENDIX

A     C OMPARISON WITH A S PARSE AUTOENCODER

We compare the K-Means approach for identifying interpretable directions in activation space to the
shallow sparse autoencoder used in Sharkey et al. (2022). The model is a single-layer overcomplete
(i.e. latent dimension is greater than input dimension) autoencoder trained with an L1 penalty on
its hidden layer activation. We see in Fig. 9 that the directions identified by the sparse autoencoder
are more interpretable according to our metric than the original neuron basis. However, we find
that the K-Means approach performs better than the sparse autoencoder. In Sharkey et al. (2022),
the authors assessed the relationship between source recovery and sparsity, using synthetic data
containing known features. Here, we perform the same analysis, but with the II as a proxy for
ground truth feature recovery. The functional relationship that we obtain between sparsity and II is
remarkably similar Fig. 9 a&b, which suggests that the II may provide a good proxy for ground truth
feature recovery.


 A)                           B)                                         C)


Figure 9: Model Comparison with Sparse Autoencoder. A) Sparse autoencoder results repro-
duced from (Sharkey et al., 2022). B), C) We train the same sparse autoencoder model and measure
the II index for different number of hidden dimensions (Z) and L1 sparsity penalties (λ).


B     M ONOSEMANTICITY AND THE P RIVILEGED BASIS H YPOTHESIS

Why should we see individual neurons learning meaningful representations at all? Recent research
in the mechanistic interpretability literature has suggested that there exists privileged bases in neural
networks, corresponding to neurons, emerging from nonlinearities such as ReLU that operate per
neuron. The intuition behind the privileged basis needs further explanation.
For K neurons, there are 2K quadrants as shown in Figure 10 A) for K “ 2. We consider what
happens for a feature vector in each of these quadrant after the application of ReLU. Of those, 1
(all positive) stays untouched, as shown in yellow in Figure 10 B. Another 1 quadrant (all negative)
becomes zero: shown in purple. Next, K quadrants get represented by 1 neuron (i.e. K dimensions
are collapsed to 1) shown in blue and green; K ´ 1 get represented by 2 neurons (i.e. K dimensions
are collapsed to 1), etc. In other words, each neuron participates in encoding points in K! quadrants
of compressed dimensionality. Now, we ask: which of these neurons should be more interpretable?
Consider data points unequally distributed into the different quadrants, with one quadrant (bottom
right in Figure 10 A)) containing more points than another (top left in Figure 10 A)). Neurons in
charge of representing the features from a quadrant with many point is more active. A resulting
hypothesis is that neurons which are more active when others are inactive, i.e., which are active
alone, are more interpretable — and form the priviledged basis.
Figure 10 C) uses our our interpretability index (II) to confirm this hypothesis by showing a neg-
ative correlation between a co-activation measure (“Active with Others”) and II. The co-activation
measure is defined as the correlation between each neuron’s response and the average population
response.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           A)                               B)                          C)
                     Before ReLU                 After ReLU


           D)                                                                E)
                             y3                                                         y3
                                                 V1 projected on〈y1 , y2 〉
                                       V3        V2 projected on〈y2 , y3 〉
                                                                              V5
                                                 V3 projected on〈y1 , y3 〉
                V2                                                                           y1
                                            y1
                                                 V4 projected on〈y2 〉
                        y2                                                         y2   V6
                                                 V5 projected on〈y3 〉
                                  V1                                         V4
                                                 V5 projected on〈y1 〉


Figure 10: Privileged Basis Hypothesis. Activations before A) and B) after ReLU nonlinearity. In
this scenario, the first neuron is more active as it has to represent the large number of (green) points
in the bottom right quadrant, while the second neuron only needs to represent few (blue) points
in the top left quadrant. C) Significant negative correlation between neurons that are more active
together with others (measured as the correlation between the neuron’s activity and the population,
excluding the neuron, average) and the interpretability index (II). D In a three dimensional space,
the positive only quadrant remains untouched by ReLUs, the negative only quadrant gets mapped to
0, three quadrants (V1 , V2 , V3 , D) are projected onto two dimensional subspaces, and three quadrants
(V4 , V5 , V7 , D) are projected onto two one subspaces. Thus, e.g. neuron y1 has to represent (together
with y2 ) all of V1 , and it also has to represent (completely on its own) all of V5 .



C    D IMENSIONALITY OF THE N EURAL ACTIVATION M ANIFOLD


Figure 11: High Dimensional Smooth Activation Manifold. Same analysis as in Stringer et al.
(2019), showing that activations in CNN feature space are high dimensional within the constraints
of remaining differentiable. A spectrum that decays slower than the critical value (green line in
right plot, Stringer et al. (2019)), would be non-differentiable and, therefore, highly non-robust.
Remarkably, this spectral behaviour is the same as observed across many cortical areas.



D    TASK E XPLANATION

Here is an illustration of the task used by Zimmermann et al. (2023).


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Psychophysics Task. Left images indicate positive reference (M EIpyq), right images
indicate negative reference (M EIp´yq). The center images are the querries, the participant, here
has to select the top image.


E    A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS TO P SYCHOPHYSICS DATA
Here we look at some of the other exemplary models studied by Zimmermann et al. (2023).


Figure 13: Psychophysics Match for Other Models. Data from Zimmermann et al. (2023). Top,
Clip ResNet50; Bottom, GoogLeNet. Left to Right: Agreement between human and in-silico psy-
chophysics on the predictability of the outputs of different layers in the network. Human and model
agree on what makes a feature predictability for the early layers. For these layers, the proposed
interpretability metric is a valid representation of the human’s perception of interpretability. AUC:
Area Under the Curve.


                                                 14
