Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ISK A SSESSMENT AND S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE
IN THE AGE OF F OUNDATION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We propose a distributional framework for assessing socio-technical risks of foun-
         dation models with quantified statistical significance. Our approach hinges on a
         new statistical relative testing based on first and second order stochastic domi-
         nance of real random variables. We show that the second order statistics in this
         test are linked to mean-risk models commonly used in econometrics and math-
         ematical finance to balance risk and utility when choosing between alternatives.
         Using this framework, we formally develop a risk-aware approach for foundation
         model selection given guardrails quantified by specified metrics. Inspired by port-
         folio optimization and selection theory in mathematical finance, we define a met-
         rics portfolio for each model as a means to aggregate a collection of metrics, and
         perform model selection based on the stochastic dominance of these portfolios.
         The statistical significance of our tests is backed theoretically by an asymptotic
         analysis via central limit theorems instantiated in practice via a bootstrap vari-
         ance estimate. We use our framework to compare various large language models
         regarding risks related to drifting from instructions and outputting toxic content.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Foundation models such as large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities re-
defining the field of artificial intelligence. At the same time, they present pressing and challenging
socio-technical risks regarding the trustworthiness of their outputs and their alignment with human
values and ethics (Bommasani et al., 2021). Evaluating LLMs is therefore a multi-dimensional
problem, where those risks are assessed across diverse tasks and domains (Chang et al., 2023).
In order to quantify these risks, Liang et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023) proposed
benchmarks of automatic metrics for probing the trustworthiness of LLMs. These metrics include
accuracy, robustness, fairness, toxicity of the outputs, etc. Human evaluation benchmarks can be
even more nuanced, and are often employed when tasks surpass the scope of standard metrics. No-
table benchmarks based on human and automatic evaluations include, among others, Chatbot Arena
(Zheng et al., 2023), HELM (Bommasani et al., 2023), MosaicML’s Eval, Open LLM Leaderboard
(Wolf, 2023), and BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022), each catering to specific evaluation areas
such as chatbot performance, knowledge assessment, and domain-specific challenges. Traditional
metrics, however, sometimes do not correlate well with human judgments. Aiming for a better
alignment with human judgments, some approaches utilize ChatGPT/GPT-4 for natural language
generation evaluations (Liu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Hada et al., 2023).
A comprehensive evaluation of LLMs requires addressing the following critical considerations:

      1. Interpretability. Evaluation of foundation models is multi-dimensional in nature and mul-
         tiple metrics assess the models on different socio-technical dimensions that probe the trust-
         worthiness of their outputs and their adherence to shared values and ethics. It is critical to
         establish an aggregate-level measure to facilitate the interpretation and effective commu-
         nication of the evaluation results.
      2. Risk Assessment. In natural language (and other) applications, metrics quantify impor-
         tant guardrails such as model’s toxicity, safety, or robustness. Therefore, a comprehensive
         evaluation framework must incorporate a risk assessment that quantifies associated risks.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             LLM Comparison by Quantiles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LLM Comparison by Tvar
                                 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oasst-sft-4-pythia-12b-epoch-3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  koala-7B-HF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         alpaca-native
                                 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              llama-7b-hf-baize-lora-bf16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  flan-t5-xxl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         stablelm-tuned-alpha-7b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tail Value at Risk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vicuna-13b-1.1
                                 0.6


                     Quantiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dolly-v2-12b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  moss-moon-003-sft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  chatglm-6b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mpt-7b
                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mpt-7b-instruct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1


                                 0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0
                                       0.0   0.2     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6   0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0                              0.0   0.2    0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="2RRwxLXlY8TROIoM98j2WcOjpro=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMQL2FXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLspDcZMju7zMwKIeQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7gkRwbVz328mtrW9sbuW3Czu7e/sHxcOjpo5TxbDBYhGrdkA1Ci6xYbgR2E4U0igQ2ApGtzO/9YRK81g+mnGCfkQHkoecUWOlhzI97xVLbsWdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE177Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNi4p3WaneV0u1myyOPJzAKZTBgyuowR3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8Ai5mNUw==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Percentile                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percentile
                                                     (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="KWh0RLJ0bw8em/x3PU2+HIlN2FQ=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMQL2FXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLspDcZMju7zMwKIeQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7gkRwbVz328mtrW9sbuW3Czu7e/sHxcOjpo5TxbDBYhGrdkA1Ci6xYbgR2E4U0igQ2ApGtzO/9YRK81g+mnGCfkQHkoecUWOlh3Jw3iuW3Io7B1klXkZKkKHeK351+zFLI5SGCap1x3MT40+oMpwJnBa6qcaEshEdYMdSSSPU/mR+6pScWaVPwljZkobM1d8TExppPY4C2xlRM9TL3kz8z+ukJrz2J1wmqUHJFovCVBATk9nfpM8VMiPGllCmuL2VsCFVlBmbTsGG4C2/vEqaFxXvslK9r5ZqN1kceTiBUyiDB1dQgzuoQwMYDOAZXuHNEc6L8+58LFpzTjZzDH/gfP4AjR6NVA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="oMYcx8nAFvX5nnYPeedyKOzsjl4=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMQL2FXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLspDcZMju7zMwKIeQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7gkRwbVz328mtrW9sbuW3Czu7e/sHxcOjpo5TxbDBYhGrdkA1Ci6xYbgR2E4U0igQ2ApGtzO/9YRK81g+mnGCfkQHkoecUWOlhzI77xVLbsWdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE177Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNi4p3WaneV0u1myyOPJzAKZTBgyuowR3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8AjqONVQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (c)

Figure 1: (a) Quantiles, (b) Tail Value at Risk (TVAR), of Metrics portfolio of an LLM, showing
that TVAR (second-order stochastic dominance) more clearly ranks the models than the quantiles
alone (first-order stochastic dominance). (c) Ranking of models using Relative First and Second
Stochastic Dominance of Portfolios (R-FSD, R-SSD @P) versus ranking of models using Relative
First and Second Stochastic Dominance of chatGPT evaluation scores and ranking by Mean Win
Rate on the metrics portfolio. Note that (1) the metrics portfolio successfully approximates the
chatGPT evaluation, since the @P rankings largely agree with the @chatGPT rankings; (2) the
Relative Stochastic Dominance rankings outperform the baseline Mean Win Rate.

            This entails ranking models based on the assessment of failure modes and tail statistics1 ,
            providing a nuanced understanding of potential pitfalls.
         3. Statistical Significance. Evaluating machine learning models is intimately connected to
            statistical significance testing (SST), although this framework is still underutilized: Dror
            et al. (2018) reports almost 50% of ACL papers miss SST indicators. With the ever in-
            creasing parametric complexity of LLMs, obtaining a reliable SST in evaluating foundation
            models becomes ever more urgent.

We propose in this paper an evaluation framework that offers a principled solution and an efficient
implementation that addresses each of these challenges. Our main contributions are:

         1. Interpretable Metrics-Portfolio (Section 4). Drawing inspiration from econometrics and
            mathematical finance, we define a metrics-portfolio for aggregating metrics. This portfolio
            normalizes and aggregates metrics, yielding a single interpretable number assessing each
            output of a LLM. A higher value of the portfolio is preferable. We illustrate in Figure
            1 panels (a) and (b) summary statistics of the metrics portfolio aggregating a total of 8
            automatic metrics computed using 5K samples from the Mix-instruct dataset (Jiang et al.,
            2023). In panel (c) we show that model ranking based on our metrics-portfolio aligns with
            human evaluation proxies such as chatGPT (Please refer to Appendix B for details of how
            chatGPT score is computed).
         2. Risk Assessment via Second Order Stochastic Dominance (Section 2). Stochastic orders
            define partial orders on random variables and play a vital role in econometrics and mathe-
   1
       I.e. understanding and quantifying low-probability high-risk events.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         matical finance for comparing and selecting portfolios. We propose using stochastic order
         to select LLMs based on their metrics-portfolios. A portfolio dominates in the First Or-
         der Stochastic Dominance (FSD) if it has higher quantiles for all percentiles. However,
         in Figure 1 (Panel (a)), the quantiles of the metrics-portfolio of an LLM don’t provide a
         clear ordering, and FSD doesn’t adequately assess the risks of these models. Instead, we
         propose the use of Second Stochastic Dominance (SSD), where a portfolio dominates if it
         has higher Tail Values at Risk (TVAR) for all percentiles (also known as Conditional Value
         at Risk). TVAR, illustrated in Figure 1 (Panel (b)), represents normalized integrated quan-
         tiles, assessing the risks of low values in the portfolio. Small TVAR corresponds to fat left
         tails in the distribution of the portfolio, identifying risky LLMs as those with the lowest
         TVAR. For example, Flan-t5 emerges as the riskiest model in our running example.
      3. Statistical Significance via Dominance Tests. (Section 3) Armed with these notions of
         stochastic dominance, we define statistics that assess the relative dominance of a model’s
         portfolio on another (R-FSD and R-SSD in Panel (c) in Figure 1). We subject these statistics
         to an asymptotic analysis, proving central limit theorems that provide the foundation for
         hypothesis testing with false discovery rate control. We then perform stochastic dominance
         hypothesis testings between all pairs of models. Having adjusted the confidence level of
         these tests, we aggregate these pairwise rankings to a single rank via rank aggregation
         techniques such as the Borda Algorithm (de Borda, 1781). The resulting ranks, depicted
         in Panel (c) of Figure 1, highlight that the portfolio of automatic metrics (@P) leads to a
         similar ranking to chatGPT score (@chatGPT) for both first and second stochastic order.
         To underscore the importance of risk assessment, we present the ranking of the metrics-
         portfolio produced by the ubiquitous Min Win Rate (MWR) used in LLM benchmarks
         (Liang et al., 2022)(last column in Panel (c)). Flan-t5 ranks close to last with all other
         orders, but ranks 6 with MWR. This highlights that the ubiquituous MWR used in LLM
         benchmarks is risky for ranking LLMs as it does not take into account failure modes of the
         model, and we caution practitioners of its pitfalls.


2     S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE
We first review notions of stochastic dominance and their relation to downside risk measures and risk
averse preference modeling. We use the notation of the seminal paper of Ogryczak & Ruszczynski
(2002), and assume that the random variables are standardized so that larger outcomes are preferable.
Throughout this Section, the reader can think of the random variable X as a metric evaluating the
performance of model A on a specific test set. Likewise, Y represents the evaluation of model B.
We defer the definition of metrics portfolio to Section 4. In a multi-metric evaluation, as explained
in the introduction, X and Y represent portfolios of evaluations of model A and B respectively.

2.1   F IRST AND S ECOND ORDER D OMINANCE AND M EAN -R ISK M ODELS

First Order Stochastic Dominance The First-order Stochastic Dominance (FSD) between real-
valued random variables uses the right-continuous cumulative distribution (CDF) as a performance
                                                                                             (1)
function. Specifically, for a real random variable X, define the first performance function FX :
                          (1)
R → [0, 1] as the CDF: FX (η) = P(X ≤ η), ∀η ∈ R. The FSD of X on Y is defined as follows:
                                              (1)            (1)
                            X ≽ Y ⇐⇒ FX (η) ≤ FY (η), ∀η ∈ R,                                       (1)
                               FSD
this intuitively means that for all outcomes η, the probability of observing smaller outcomes than η
                                                                                        (−1)
is lower for X than Y . An equivalent definition can be expressed using the quantile FX (See e.g
Ogryczak & Ruszczynski (2002)):

                                           (−1)          (−1)
                        X ≽ Y ⇐⇒ FX               (p) ≥ FY      (p), ∀p ∈ (0, 1],             (2)
                           FSD


         (−1)                                                      (1)    (−1)              (1)
where FX      : [0, 1] → R is the left-continuous inverse of FX : FX (p) = inf{η : FX (η) ≥
p} for p ∈ (0, 1]. We focus on this definition as it is more computationally and notationally friendly
since the quantile function is always supported on [0, 1].


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Second Order Stochastic Dominance The Second-order Stochastic Dominance (SSD) is defined
                                     (2)
via the second performance function FX : R → [0, 1] that measures the area under the CDF:
  (2)      R η   (1)
FX (η) = −∞ FX (x)dx, for x ∈ R, yielding:
                                                      (2)             (2)
                                 X ≽ Y ⇐⇒ FX (η) ≤ FY (η), ∀η ∈ R.                                         (3)
                                    SSD
Note that FSD implies SSD, hence SSD is a finer notion of dominance. While FSD implies that X is
preferred to Y by any utility-maximizing agent preferring larger outcomes2 , Ogryczak & Ruszczyn-
ski (2002) showed that SSD implies that X is preferred to Y by any risk-averse agent preferring
larger outcomes.3 Similarly to FSD, SSD can be measured with quantile functions via introducing
                                                                   (−2)
the second quantile function also known as integrated quantiles FX : (0, 1] → R
                                        Z p
                               (−2)            (−1)
                             FX (p) =       FX (t)dt, for t ∈ (0, 1].                         (4)
                                                  0
Similarly to the FSD case, an equivalent more computationally friendly definition can be expressed
in terms of the second quantile function (a proof of this equivalence can be found in Theorem 3.2 in
Ogryczak & Ruszczynski (2002)):

                                                  (−2)               (−2)
                              X ≽ Y ⇐⇒ FX                (p) ≥ FY           (p), ∀p ∈ (0, 1].        (5)
                                 SSD


This equivalence is not straightforward and is due to Fenchel duality between F (2) and F (−2) . Using
p = 1 we see that SSD implies µX ≥ µY , where µX and µY are means of X and Y .
Mean – Risk Models (MRM) As noted earlier SSD is linked to risk assessment via the second per-
formance function F (2) (.) measuring expected shortfall, and the negative second quantile function
−F (−2) (p) that is an assessment of expected losses given outcomes lower than the p-quantile.
Definition 1 (Mean – Risk Models). A mean – risk model of a random variable X consists of the
pair (µX , rX ), where µX is the mean of X, and rX is a functional that measures the risk of the
random outcome X.
The consistency of a mean – risk model with SSD is defined as follows:
Definition 2 (SSD consistency of Mean – Risk Models). A mean – risk model (µX , rX ) is
α−consistent with SSD, if for α > 0 the following is true:
                             X ≽ Y =⇒ µX − αrx ≥ µY − αrY .                         (6)
                                       SSD
The ubiquitous mean – risk model in machine learning is (µX , σX ), where σX is the standard
deviation. Unfortunately this model is not consistent with the SSD and has several limitations as it
implies Gaussianity of the outcomes or a quadratic utility function. We give in Table 1 (Appendix
F.1 ) risk measurements and their α−consistency (proofs in Ogryczak & Ruszczynski (2002)).

2.2 R ELAXATIONS OF S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE
Recalling the definitions of FSD and SSD in Equations (2) and (5), in the finite-sample regime
it is hard to test for these relations as one needs to show the infinite-sample quantile or second
quantile properties hold uniformly over all p ∈ (0, 1]. This difficulty motivated the relaxation of
stochastic dominance to an almost stochastic dominance pioneered by Leshno & Levy (2002). These
relaxations were revisited for the first order by Alvarez-Esteban et al. (2014) who later proposed an
optimal transportation approach to assess almost first stochastic order (Del Barrio et al., 2018).
Almost FSD (ε-FSD) Following Leshno & Levy (2002), Del Barrio et al. (2018) relaxed FSD
(Equation (2)) via the violation ratio of FSD:

                                                            R1        (−1)           (−1)
                                                                0
                                                                    (FY    (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
                  X    ≽      Y ⇐⇒ εW2 (FX , FY ) =                                           ≤ ε,   (7)
                      ε−FSD                                               W22 (FX , FY )

   2
       I.e. having an increasing utility function.
   3
       I.e. having an increasing and concave utility function.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where W2 is the Wasserstein -2 distance between FX and FY .This ratio corresponds to a measure
of the “area” of violation of the FSD dominance of X on Y . Note that 0 ≤ εW2 (FX , FY ) ≤ 1, with
value 0 if X ≻ Y and 1 if Y ≻ X. For ε ∈ (0, 12 ], Figure 5a in Appendix G illustrates ε-FSD,
              FSD                      FSD
dashed areas represent the violation set.
Almost SSD (ε-SSD) We define ε-SSD, for ε ∈ (0, 12 ), by relaxing Equation (5) as follows:

                                                               R1       (−2)           (−2)
                                                                  0
                                                                      (FY       (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
              X      ≽      Y ⇐⇒ εIQ (FX , FY ) =                              2                   ≤ ε,    (8)
                    ε−SSD                                                     dIQ (FX , FY )

where dIQ is the L2 distance between the Integrated Quantiles (F (−2) ). This ratio corresponds to
a measure of the “area” of violation of the SSD dominance of X on Y . Figure 5b in Appendix G
illustrates the second order, dashed areas represent the violation set of SSD of X on Y . Appendix D
gives a more detailed account on almost stochastic dominance.

2.3   R ELATIVE S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE

In the remainder of the paper, we refer to the FSD violation ratio as εW2 (FX , FY ) ≡ ε(1) (FX , FY )
and to the SSD violation ratio as εIQ (FX , FY ) ≡ ε(2) (FX , FY ). One of the shortcomings of almost
stochastic dominance is the need to fix a threshold ε on the violation ratio. When comparing two ran-
dom variables, setting a threshold is a viable option. Nevertheless, when one needs to rank multiple
variables X1 , . . . , Xk (considering all pairwise comparisons), setting a single threshold that would
lead to a consistent relative stochastic dominance among the k variables becomes challenging. To
alleviate this issue, we draw inspiration from relative similarity and dependence tests (Bounliphone
et al., 2016a;b) that circumvent the need for a threshold via relative pairwise testings.
For ℓ ∈ {1, 2} (i.e for FSD or SSD) we consider all pairs of violations ratios:
                               (ℓ)
                              εij = ε(ℓ) (FXi , FXj ) for i, j ∈ {1 . . . k}, i ̸= j,
             (ℓ)      (ℓ)
noting that εij + εji = 1. Let F = (FX1 , . . . FXk ). We define the one-versus-all violation ratio of
the dominance of Xi on all other variables Xj , j ̸= i :
                                     (ℓ)           1 X (ℓ)
                                    εi (F ) =              εij .
                                                 k−1
                                                                       j̸=i

We then define relative stochastic dominance for both orders, R-FSD an R-SSD respectively:

                                                                            (1)               (1)
                     Xi1     ≽       Xi2 . . .       ≽    Xik ⇐⇒ εi1 (F ) ≤ · · · ≤ εik (F )               (9)
                            R−FSD                R−FSD
                                                                            (2)               (2)
                     Xi1     ≽       Xi2 . . .       ≽    Xik ⇐⇒ εi1 (F ) ≤ · · · ≤ εik (F )              (10)
                            R−SSD                R−SSD


In this definition of relative stochastic dominance, the most dominating model is the one with the
lowest one-versus-all violation ratio and to test for relative dominance of Xi on Xj we can look at
the following statistics:
                                       (ℓ)        (ℓ)         (ℓ)
                                    ∆εij (F ) = εi (F ) − εj (F ),                             (11)
and we have the following threshold-free test for relative order:4

                                                                         (1)
                                       Xi        ≽       Xj ⇐⇒ ∆εij (F ) ≤ 0                              (12)
                                             R−FSD
                                                                         (2)
                                       Xi        ≽       Xj ⇐⇒ ∆εij (F ) ≤ 0                              (13)
                                             R−SSD

   4
     For comparing k = 2 random variables, these r-FSD and r-SSD tests reduce to 0.5-FSD and 0.5-SSD
absolute tests, respectively.


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    T ESTING F OR A LMOST AND R ELATIVE S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE

Given empirical samples from FX and FY we perform statistical testing of the almost and relative
stochastic dominance of X on Y given empirical estimates of the statistics given in Sections 2.2
and 2.3. A key ingredient for quantifying the statistical significance of such tests is a central limit
theorem that guarantees that the centered empirical statistics is asymptotically Gaussian at the limit
                                                                                                n
of infinite sample size. Given n samples from FX (m from FY respectively), we denote FX             and
FYm the corresponding empirical distributions. For ε0 − FSD, Del Barrio et al. (2018) studied the
following hypothesis testing H0 : X ≽ Y versus the alternative Ha : X ≽ Y . Using (2),
                                        ε0 −SSD                                    ε0 −SSD
                                                              n
this amounts to the following null hypothesis : H0 : εW2 (FX    , FYm ) > ε0 . Del Barrio et al. (2018)
showed the asymptotic normality of the empirical statistics:
                r
                    mn            n
                          (εW2 (FX  , FYm ) − εW2 (FX , FY )) → N (0, σ 2 (FX , FY )).
                   m+n
Del Barrio et al. (2018); Ulmer et al. (2022) propose to reject H0 with a confidence level 1 − α if:

                                                   r
                                                       m+n 2
                              n
                        εW2 (FX , FYm ) ≤ ε0 +             σ (FX , FY )Φ−1 (α),                  (14)
                                                        mn

where Φ−1 is the quantile function of a standard normal.
For the tests we propose below, we assume the following structure on the underlying CDFs to derive
the corresponding central limit theorems (CLTs).

    Assumption 1. [Regularity] Let the CDF F be supported on the interval [−M, M ] for
                                                 ′
    some constant M , and have pdf f such that ff3(p)
                                                   (p) is bounded for almost every p for which
    f (p) > 0 (i.e. all p in the support of f ).


ε-SSD Testing Similar to ε-FSD, using the definition in (5) we propose to test using the following
null hypothesis for testing for ε0 -SSD:
                                                  n
                                       H0 : εIQ (FX , FYm ) > ε0
                                                            n
Supposing Assumption 1 holds for FX , FY and assuming n+m       → λ for some λ, we state a Central
Limit Theorem for the second order statistics in Appendix H (Theorem 1, proved in Appendix J.1).
Similarly to (14), Theorem 1 suggests to reject H0 with a confidence 1 − α if :

                                                   r
                                                       m+n 2
                              n
                        εIQ (FX , FYm ) ≤ ε0 +             σ (FX , FY )Φ−1 (α),                  (15)
                                                        mn λ

where (for the same reasons as the FSD case) σλ2 is given by the central limit theorem.
Relative Stochastic Dominance Testing We turn now to relative stochastic dominance that we
introduced in (12) and (13) for first and second orders. Given n samples from k random variables
(X1 . . . Xk ), let F = (F1 , . . . , Fk ) be the marginals of Xi and Fn = (F1n , . . . , Fkn ) denote the
empirical marginals. To test for R-FSD (resp R-SSD) of Xi1 on Xi2 we propose to test the following
null hypothesis:
                                             (ℓ)
                                    H0 : ∆εij (Fn ) > 0, ℓ = 1 or 2

Assuming that each Fi satisfies Assumption 1, we state in Appendix H a central limit theorem for
the relative second order statistics (Theorem 2 proved in in Appendix J.2). A similar result holds
for the relative first order statistics that we omit for brevity. Theorem 2 suggests to reject H0 with a
confidence 1 − α if:


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              r
                             (2)                  1 2
                           ∆εi1 ,i2 (Fn ) ≤        σ         (FX , FY )Φ−1 (α)                    (16)
                                                  n relative

       2
where σrelative (FX , FY ) is given by the central limit theorem (similar test exists for R-FSD).
Bootstrapping Heuristic While the CLT above provides an asymptotic value for the variance, in
practice (as in the ASO framework of (Ulmer et al., 2022)) we estimate the variance with a bootstrap-
ping heuristic (Efron & Tibshirani, 1993). This estimate is nonasymptotic and hence should often
be more accurate than the asymptotic value. Proving the consistency of the bootstrap for functions
of quantiles is generally nontrivial (Shao & Tu, 2012), but recall that the stochastic ordering can be
defined in terms of either quantiles or CDFs. In Appendix K we provide a bootstrap consistency
proof for the absolute statistics based on the CDF, leaving the quantile based proof for future work.
Multi-Testing Algorithm Algorithm 1 given in Appendix C summarizes the multi-testing setup for
both relative and almost (absolute) FSD and SSD. The main idea behind Algorithm 1 is to turn
multi-testing to pairwise testings i.e testing for stochastic dominance between all pairs of models
using relative (or absolute) FSD or SSD. In order to ensure that this multi-testing has a confidence
level 1 − α, we correct the individual test’s confidence level by dividing α by the number of all
pairs (Bonferroni, 1936). Then in order to combine the pairwise rankings to a single rank, we use a
simple Borda count (de Borda, 1781) rank aggregation algorithm.

4   D ISTRIBUTIONAL R ISK A SSESSMENT OF F OUNDATION M ODELS
Setup In this section we consider the multi-metric evaluation setup of a foundation model A : X →
O, using N metrics mi : O → R, i = 1 . . . N , where mi are real valued functions evaluated on a test
set D.Without loss of generality, assume that each of the metrics are standardized such that higher
values of mi correspond to more desirable model performance. We model observed values for each
metric mi as a continuous random variable Mi with unknown CDF FMi . For a model A : X → O
and a data sample X ∼ D, we describe the evaluation of model A with mi with the following
random variable Mi : Mi |A, X := mi (A(X)), X ∼ D, i = 1 . . . N, where the randomness arises
from the data sampling procedure X ∼ D, and (if applicable) the stochasticity of the model A, for
example if the model uses sampling to compute its output.
Metrics Portfolio Selection using Stochastic Dominance Let λ = (λ1 , . . . , λN ) be a probability
vector that represents the importance of the mi metrics to the model’s end user. Inspired by the
portfolio optimization literature, we model the user return from a model as a portfolio of metrics
mi evaluated on a test set D. Following (Ulan et al., 2021; Belgodere et al., 2023), we define this
portfolio as an Archimedean copula, which forms a weighted geometric mean of the CDFs:

                               N
                                                                !       N
                               X                                        Y
                                                                               λi
             RA (X) = exp            λi log FMi (mi (A(X)))         =         FM i
                                                                                   (mi (A(X))).   (17)
                               i=1                                      i=1


Note that (17) normalizes the metrics using the CDF of the metric Mi , eliminating the issue of
differing dynamic ranges. This CDF should be formed by pooling together the evaluations on all
samples and from all models being compared, to ensure that the various RA are comparable. The
CDF normalization is monotonic and hence it preserves the order of each metrics and allow us to
aggregate in the probability space the metrics using a simple weighted geometric mean. Computing
RA (X) for all test samples X, we can therefore characterize the distribution of the metric portfolio
of the model A. To compare two models it is enough to compare their corresponding portfolios,
specifically, Model A is preferred to Model B using ε- or R-SSD:
                                     RA (X)          ≽      RB (X).                                  (18)
                                              ε− or R−SSD

Similar tests can be performed for FSD.
Multiple Models Comparison Given k models Aℓ , ℓ = 1 . . . k and their evaluations
mi (Aℓ (X)), X ∼ D, i = 1 . . . N , we pool all model evaluations for a metric to estimate the


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CDF of each metric FMi and construct a portfolio for each model RAℓ (X). We use our Relative
Stochastic Dominance testing introduced in Section 3 and in Algorithm 1 to rank the models by their
metrics portfolio in relative SSD or FSD with a confidence level 1 − α.
Per Metric Stochastic Dominance and Rank Aggregation We also explore another approach for
multi-testing, by considering the stochastic dominance of the models on per-metric basis. This
amounts to computing N relative stochastic orders for each Mi = (mi (A1 (X)), . . . , mi (Aℓ (X))),
i = 1 . . . N . This amounts to producing via Algorithm 1 a relative ranking πi of the models based on
Mi . A single rank π is then obtained via rank aggregation with uniform weighting on the per-metric
rankings πi , i = 1 . . . N . We use for rank aggregation the R package of (Pihur et al., 2009). For
more details on rank aggregation, the reader is referred to Appendix F.3.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   VALIDATION OF S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE

We examine the statistical properties of our tests as a function of sample size. We purposely design
synthetic score distributions to represent challenging problems comprising large overlap between
the distributions and considerable violation ratio, but where one would still like to have an ordering
among the variables. For this we consider the two Gaussian variables X ∼ N (0, 1) and and Y ∼
N (0.5, 2). Figure 6 in Appendix L.1 shows that our tests have desirable statistical properties. We
also perform synthetic experiment on fat tailed distribution such as log normal (Figure 7 App. L.1).

5.2   LLM EVALUATION WITH S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE

We showcase LLM evaluation with stochastic dominance to assess two risks: drifting from instruc-
tions and outputting toxic content. The following datasets correspond to each risk we assess.
Mix-Instruct Evaluation Data We use the data from (Jiang et al., 2023), that consists of an in-
struction, an input sentence and an expected output from the user, as well as the output of a set of
different LLMs. The dataset consists of a training set of 100K samples and a test set of 5K samples.
(Jiang et al., 2023) used automatic metrics such as BARTscore and BLEU score comparing the LLM
generation to the expected output in order to evaluate if each LLM followed the instruction. (Jiang
et al., 2023) used also chatGPT to evaluate the generations. The number of automatic metrics N is 8,
the total number of evaluated models k is 12. Metrics are unified so that larger values are preferred.

Toxicity Evaluation We use the real toxicity prompts dataset of Gehman et al. (2020), and gen-
erate prompts completions from the Llama 2 7b , Llama 2 13b, Llama 2 70b , MosaicML MPT
30b and Tiiuae Falcon 40b models available in Opensource (k = 5 models). We select two sets of
prompts: toxic prompts (toxicity > 0.8, that gives ∼10K prompts ) and non-toxic prompts (toxicity
< 0.2, from which we randomly sample 10K). We sample from each model, 10 completions per
prompt using nucleus sampling (top-p sampling with p = 0.9 and a temperature of 1). This proce-
dure yields a dataset of ∼200K sentence completions per model. We evaluate the toxicity of these
generations using the Perspective API, on the following toxicity metrics (N = 6 metrics): Toxicity,
Severe toxicity, Identity Attack, Insult, Profanity and Threat. Following Liang et al. (2022), we eval-
uate the toxicity of generated completions only and refer to this as Gen Only evaluation. In order
to also give the context of the completion, we prepend the model generation with the prompt and
evaluate the full sentence using Perspective API. We refer to this as Prompt+Gen. The polarity of
all toxicity metrics is unified so that high values refer to non toxic content (we use −log probabilities
of Perspective API outputs).
Evaluation Protocol and Baselines We evaluate each of the use cases (instruction following and
toxicity) using the following absolute stochastic dominance tests: (1) ε-FSD (corresponds to the
ASO evaluation of Ulmer et al. (2022)) for ε = 0.08, 0, 25, 0.4. (2) our proposed ε-SSD using the
same values for ε, (3) our relative stochastic dominance R-FSD and R-SSD tests, (4) the Mean –
Risk models described in Table 1, and (5) the ranking produced by the Mean Win Rate (MWR) used
by LLM leaderboards such as HELM (Liang et al., 2022). As noted in Section 4, we either perform
these tests on a metrics portfolio (given in Equation (17)) – we refer to this as test @ P; or on a
per metric basis leading to N rankings of the models that we reduce to a single ranking via Rank


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aggregation (RA) (Pihur et al., 2009) – we refer to this as RA(test @ M). In this naming convention,
test takes values in {MWR, ε-FSD, ε-SSD, R-FSD, R-SSD, Mean – Risk Model (µX − rX )}
where rX is a chosen risk from Table 1. We perform all our statistical tests with a significance level
α = 0.05, and use 1000 bootstrap iterations.
Efficient Implementation We compare the computational complexity of our implementation for
computing all stochastic orders to that of the Deep-Significance package (deepsig, 2022)
which implements ε-FSD in the ASO framework (Ulmer et al., 2022), on the task of com-
paring models on the Mix-Instruct dataset (sample size 5K, k = 12 models). Using the
Deep-Significance implementation of MULTI -ASO in (Ulmer et al., 2022) for ε = 0.25
with just 3 bootstrap iterations5 , the test completes in 15min50s (averaged over 7 runs). Our code
for relative and absolute testing performs all tests at once and relies on caching vectorization and
multi-threading of the operations. Our code completes all tests in an average of just 17.7 s with 1000
bootstraps. Experiments were run on a CPU machine with 128 AMD cores, of which 2 were used.
Mix-Instruct Results and Analysis Figure 1 and Table 2 in Appendix and summarize the rankings
we obtain for different models using the different tests described above. Note that we compare
here our portfolio approach versus a ChatGPT score evaluation of the models (See Appendix B for
ChatGPT evaluation). We see that our portfolio agrees with this human evalutaion proxies on both
R-SSD and R-FSD orders. On the other hand, as we show in Appendix A, our portfolio approach
also agrees with per metric aggregation for both R-FSD and R-SSD while being 7x faster. When
compared to the Mean Win Rate currently used in LLM leaderboards such as HELM (Liang et al.,
2022), we see that it leads to different orderings than FSD and SSD. For example the flan-t5 model
is ranked 5 or 6 by MWR with rank aggregation and portfolio respectively. In contrast, for R-FSD
and R-SSD it is given a low ranking (8, 11) or 12. This is due to the fact that MWR only counts
wins and does not take into account how fat is the left tail of the distribution of the metric being
assessed, possibly leading to overevaluation of risky models. When comparing R-FSD and R-SSD
to each other, we see some changes in the ranking in near or adjacent positions. Remarkably, the
R-SSD ordering agrees with the rank aggregation of all (consistent) mean – risk models, confirming
the theoretical link between second order dominance and risk averse decision making. Nevertheless,
as shown in Appendix A R-SSD has lower variance in smaller sample regime. Table 3 in Appendix
L shows that R-FSD and R-SSD are consistent with ε-FSD and SSD respectively for various values
of ε on this dataset. While it is common to give radar plots of MWR for a metric or an average of the
metric, we give in L a radar plot (Figure 8) for each of the Mean – Risk models, to aid practitioners
in visualizing and selecting models in a risk aware manner.

Toxicity Results and Analysis Table 4 in Appendix L summarizes the results of our tests. We
make a few observations: First, overall the portfolio approach agrees well with the rank aggrega-
tion of per-metric rankings. The portfolio is more computationally efficient as it needs to run the
stochastic dominance test only on the portfolio, rather than running N tests and aggregating them
via rank aggregation. Secondly, on this dataset the R-FSD and R-SSD agree, with a few exceptions.
Interestingly, when comparing models on model generation only, on toxic prompts MosaicML MPT
stands out, while on non toxic prompts Llama2 7B stands out and on the combined set Mosaic ML
MPT stands out. When evaluating the toxicity of the context (Prompt + Gen), Llama70B stands
out on toxic prompts, Llama7b stands out on non toxic prompts and MosaicML MPT still stands
out on the combined set. This study shows that the evaluation problem is not only challenging in
terms of the statistical significance of the test, but also with regards to the conditioning on which
data the evaluation is performed. The stability of the ranking across all methods, on the combined
set suggests that rank stability can be a criterion to assess the representativity of the evaluation set.


6       C ONCLUSION

In this paper we introduced a distributional framework for risk assessment and comparison of foun-
dation models based on multi-metric evaluations. Our framework is of interest beyond the current
applications presented here by providing statistical significance while ranking assets for decision
making. We believe our tools for training models to be risk averse can be of significant use to
practitioners and serve as a stepping stone towards solving the AI alignment problem.
    5
        Limited to 3 for computational reasons.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pedro C Alvarez-Esteban, E del Barrio, JA Cuesta-Albertos, and C Matrán. A contamination model
  for approximate stochastic order: extended version. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1920, 2014.
Brian Belgodere, Pierre Dognin, Adam Ivankay, Igor Melnyk, Youssef Mroueh, Aleksandra Mo-
  jsilovic, Jiri Navratil, Apoorva Nitsure, Inkit Padhi, Mattia Rigotti, Jerret Ross, Yair Schiff, Rad-
  hika Vedpathak, and Richard A. Young. Auditing and generating synthetic data with controllable
  trust trade-offs, 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Rishi Bommasani, Percy Liang, and Tony Lee. Holistic evaluation of language models. Annals of
  the New York Academy of Sciences, 2023.
C.E. Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilità. Pubblicazioni del R.
  Istituto superiore di scienze economiche e commerciali di Firenze. Seeber, 1936. URL https:
  //books.google.com/books?id=3CY-HQAACAAJ.
Wacha Bounliphone, Eugene Belilovsky, Matthew Blaschko, Ioannis Antonoglou, and Arthur Gret-
 ton. A test of relative similarity for model selection in generative models. Proceedings ICLR
 2016, 2016a.
Wacha Bounliphone, Eugene Belilovsky, Arthur Tenenhaus, Ioannis Antonoglou, Arthur Gretton,
 and Matthew B Blashcko. Fast non-parametric tests of relative dependency and similarity. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1611.05740, 2016b.
Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Linyi Yang, Xiaoyuan
  Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. A survey on evaluation of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.03109, 2023.
Jean-Charles de Borda. Mémoire sur les élections au scrutin. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des
  Sciences, 1781.
deepsig.       Deepsignificance.                       https://github.com/Kaleidophon/
  deep-significance, 2022.
Eustasio Del Barrio, Juan A Cuesta-Albertos, and Carlos Matrán. An optimal transportation ap-
  proach for assessing almost stochastic order. The Mathematics of the Uncertain: A Tribute to
  Pedro Gil, pp. 33–44, 2018.
Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Reichart. The hitchhiker’s guide to testing
  statistical significance in natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 56th annual meeting
  of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers), pp. 1383–1392, 2018.
Rotem Dror, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Reichart. Deep dominance-how to properly compare deep
  neural models. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 2773–2785, 2019.
B. Efron and R. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap, 1993.
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. Realtoxici-
  typrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings, 2020. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:221878771.
Alexander A Gushchin and Dmitriy A Borzykh. Integrated quantile functions: properties and appli-
  cations. Modern Stochastics: Theory and Applications, 4(4):285–314, 2017.
Rishav Hada, Varun Gumma, Adrian de Wynter, Harshita Diddee, Mohamed Ahmed, Monojit
  Choudhury, Kalika Bali, and Sunayana Sitaram. Are large language model-based evaluators the
  solution to scaling up multilingual evaluation? arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07462, 2023.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yue Huang, Qihui Zhang, Lichao Sun, et al. Trustgpt: A benchmark for trustworthy and responsible
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11507, 2023.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
  with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.
Moshe Leshno and Haim Levy. Preferred by “all” and preferred by “most” decision makers: Almost
 stochastic dominance. Management Science, 48(8):1074–1085, 2002.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan,
  Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Ré, Diana
  Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong,
  Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuk-
  sekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter Hen-
  derson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan
  Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models, 2022.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. Gpteval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023.
Wlodzimierz Ogryczak and Andrzej Ruszczynski. Dual stochastic dominance and related mean-risk
 models. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 13(1):60–78, 2002.
Vasyl Pihur, Susmita Datta, and Somnath Datta. Rankaggreg, an r package for weighted rank aggre-
  gation. BMC Bioinformatics, 10:62 – 62, 2009. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:206970248.
Jun Shao and Dongsheng Tu. The jackknife and bootstrap. Springer Science & Business Media,
  2012.
Edwin D Simpson. Statistical significance testing for natural language processing, 2021.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
L.Y. Tzeng, Rachel Huang, and P.T. Shih. Revisiting almost second-degree stochastic dominance.
  Management Science, 59:1250–1254, 05 2013. doi: 10.2307/23443939.
Maria Ulan, Welf Löwe, Morgan Ericsson, and Anna Wingkvist. Copula-based software metrics
 aggregation. Software Quality Journal, 29(4):863–899, 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.
 1007/s11219-021-09568-9.
Dennis Ulmer, Christian Hardmeier, and Jes Frellsen. deep-significance-easy and meaningful statis-
  tical significance testing in the age of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06815, 2022.
Boxin Wang, Weixin Chen, Hengzhi Pei, Chulin Xie, Mintong Kang, Chenhui Zhang, Chejian Xu,
  Zidi Xiong, Ritik Dutta, Rylan Schaeffer, Sang T. Truong, Simran Arora, Mantas Mazeika, Dan
  Hendrycks, Zinan Lin, Yu Cheng, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. Decodingtrust: A
  comprehensive assessment of trustworthiness in gpt models, 2023.
Edward Beeching , Clémentine Fourrier , Nathan Habib , Sheon Han, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen
  Rajani, Omar Sanseviero, Lewis Tunstall, Thomas Wolf. Open llm leaderboard. https://
  huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard, 2023.
Haopeng Zhang, Xiao Liu, and Jiawei Zhang. Summit: Iterative text summarization via chatgpt.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14835, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

A Ablation Studies                                                                                   12

B Transforming Discrete Relative ChatGPT Scores to Absolute Real Valued Scores                       13

C Multi-Testing Algorithm for Relative and Almost Stochastic Dominance                               15

D Absolute or Almost Stochastic Dominance                                                            15

E Related Works on Stochastic Dominance                                                              17

F Supplement Discussions                                                                             17
    F.1   Mean Risk Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
    F.2   δ− Consistency of Gini-Risk Models with ε-SSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
    F.3   Rank Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
    F.4   Mean Win Rate and CDF normalizers in portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18

G Figures                                                                                            19

H Central Limit Theorems                                                                             19
    H.1 CLT for ε-SSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
    H.2   CLT for Relative Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20

I   Proof of Theorem 3                                                                               20

J   Proofs of Central Limit Theorems                                                                 21
    J.1   Absolute Testing: Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
    J.2   Relative Testing: Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24

K Consistency of Bootstrapping                                                                       25

L Additional Experimental Results                                                                    27
    L.1 Statistical Significance on Synthetic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
    L.2 Mix-Instruct     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
    L.3 Toxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
    L.4 Fat Left Tails of Metrics and Inconsistency of Mean-Variance with SSD . . . . . .            29


A    A BLATION S TUDIES

Metrics Aggregation Versus Portfolio For portoflio, computing ranking using FSD and SSD in-
cluding the portfolio computation on 5K samples for 5 bootstrap samples , we have mean execution
time of 32.01 ± 4.51 s. For FSd and SSD ranking computation for all metrics, followed by rank
using pearson distance the execution time is of 254.99 ± 16.76 s. On the other hand, we observe on
the mix-instruct dataset a consistency of ranks between these two approaches (FSD or SDD on port-


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


folio & FSD or SSD on all metrics followed by rank aggregation) as quantified by the kendall-tau
similarity between the ranks:
     1. Kendall Tau(R-SSD@P, RA(R-SSD@M)) = 0.848
     2. Kendall Tau(R-FSD@P, RA(R-FSD@M)) =0.878
We see that these two approaches lead to similar ranks while portfolio approach leads to 7x speedups.
Portfolio versus Mean Risk Models and MWR
                                                                          Kendall Tau Similarity to Asymptotic Ranks

                                                       1.00


                                                       0.95
                              Kendall Tau Similarity


                                                       0.90


                                                       0.85


                                                       0.80
                                                                                                                Eval Type
                                                                                                              Mean Win Rate
                                                       0.75                                                   Mean Risk Models
                                                                                                              Relative Testing SSD

                                                              100   500        1000            2000          3000                 4000
                                                                                             Sample Size


Figure 2: We compute ranking resulting from each ranking method using varying sample sizes from
100 to 5K. We repeat each experiment 5 times. We report for each method, the kendall-tau similarity
between resulting ranks at each sample to the asymptotic rank at 5K. We see that Relative SSD on
portfolio is more stable in sample size than rank aggregation of all Mean Risk Models and than
MWR on portfolio. Furthermore Relative SSD on portfolio has lower variance than aggregation of
Mean Risk Models on portfolio.
                                                       Sample dependent Portfolio based Model Ranking Comparison with ChatGPT SSD


                                                  0.75

                                                  0.70
                       Kendall Tau Similarity


                                                  0.65
                                                                                                            Eval Type
                                                  0.60                                                     Mean Win Rate
                                                                                                           Mean Risk Models
                                                  0.55                                                     Relative Testing SSD


                                                  0.50

                                                  0.45

                                                  0.40

                                                              100 500   1000          2000         3000      4000           5000
                                                                                         Sample Size


Figure 3: We use the same setup of the Figure above, but instead of kendall tau distance to asymp-
totic rank of each method. We plot the distance to R-SSD @ChatGPT rank. We see that MWR
is inconsitent with rank while both R-SSD @P and RA(MRM @P) have a kendall-tau similarity
between 0.7-0.75, with a lower variance for R-SSD in small sample regime.


B    T RANSFORMING D ISCRETE R ELATIVE C HAT GPT S CORES TO A BSOLUTE
     R EAL VALUED S CORES
We follow Jiang et al. (2023) in mapping discrete chatGPT scores to real valued ones. Note that
chatGPT scores for comparing models A and B are discrete and are one of these 4 options: A is
better, B is better, Both are equally good, Both are equally bad.


                                                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Given m models we construct for each prompt sample ℓ = 1 . . . N a m × m comparison matrix with
chatGPT:
                         Xℓ,ij = +1, Xℓ,ji = −1 if model i is better

                           Xℓ,ij = −1, Xℓ,ji = +1 if model j is better

                      Xℓ,ij = Xℓ,ji = +0.5 if model i and j equally good

                       Xℓ,ij = Xℓ,ji = −0.5 if model i and j equally bad

Then each model will define the following scalar score at each sample ℓ:

                                             m
                                             X
                                   sℓ,i :=     (Xℓ,ij − Xℓ,ji ).
                                             j=1

hence we have a distribution of chatGPT score for each model :

                                             N
                                         1 X
                                  pi =        δs , i = 1 . . . m.
                                         N i=1 ℓ,i

Note that the scores sℓ,i take on even integer values between −2m and 2m inclusive, we treat the
support as continuous and consider the following kernel density estimator with Gaussian kernel of
width σ:
                                      N
                          (σ)      1 X        t − sℓ,i
                        p̂i (t) =         φ              , t ∈ R, i = 1 . . . m,
                                   N i=1         σ

where φ is the standard normal density. In Figure 4 below we plot chatGPT scores kernel density
estimates for two models, openassistant and flan-t5:


Figure 4: ChatGPT density scores for two models, open-assistant has clearly higher scores than the
Flan-t5 models



                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    M ULTI -T ESTING A LGORITHM FOR R ELATIVE AND A LMOST S TOCHASTIC
     D OMINANCE

Our multi-testing algorithm for relative and almost stochastic dominance is detailed in Algorithm 1.
In a nutshell our multi-testing consists of the following steps:

      1. For evaluation of each model compute summary statistics , i.e quantiles and integrated
         quantiles.

      2. For all pairs of models, compute statistics of absolute and relative tests by computing vio-
         lation ratios.

      3. Compute the variance of these statistics via bootstrapping.

      4. Perform the hypothesis testing for all pairs models with a corrected confidence level taking
         into account the number of all pairs

      5. Aggregate pairwise rankings to a rank using the Borda algorithm, that ranks the model by
         their number of wins in the stochastic dominance tests performed above.



D    A BSOLUTE OR A LMOST S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE

Almost FSD (ε-FSD) Following Leshno & Levy (2002), Del Barrio et al. (2018) relaxed FSD via
the violation ratio of FSD:


    Definition 3 (FSD Violation Ratio (Del Barrio et al., 2018) ). For FX ̸= FY define the
    violation ratio:
                                  (−1)        (−1)
                                       (t) − FY (t))2 dt
                        R                                  R 1 (−1)
                           (1) (F
                                                                             (−1)
                          A0     X                          0
                                                              (FY (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
        εW2 (FX , FY ) = R 1 (−1)                        =                           ,
                                             (−1)
                             (FX (t) − FY (t))2 dt                 W22 (FX , FY )
                           0
                   n                                o
             (1)                  (−1)         (−1)
    where A0 = t ∈ (0, 1) : FY (t) > FX (t) is the violation set the relation X ≽ Y ,
                                                                                          FSD
    and W2 is the Wasserstein−2 distance.


Note that 0 ≤ εW2 (FX , FY ) ≤ 1, with value 0 if X ≻ Y and 1 if Y ≻ X. For ε ∈ (0, 12 ], the
                                                        FSD              FSD
relaxed FSD can be therefore defined as follows


                                X    ≽      Y ⇐⇒ εW2 (FX , FY ) ≤ ε.                        (19)
                                    ε−FSD



Figure 5a in Appendix G illustrates ε-FSD, dashed areas represent the violation set.
Almost SSD (ε-SSD) Note that the original definition of ε-FSD of   R∞X on Y in Leshno & Levy
(2002) is an L1 definition and uses the CDF rather than quantiles: −∞ (FX (x) − FY (x))+ dx ≤
  R∞
ε ∞ |FX (x) − FY (x)|dx. Tzeng et al. (2013) gave a similar L1 definition for ε-SSD using the
second performance function F (2) (.). According to Tzeng et al. (2013), X dominates Y in the ε-
       R∞       (2)        (2)               R +∞ (2)          (2)
SSD if −∞ (FX (x) − FY (x))+ dt ≤ ε −∞ |FX (x) − FY (x)|dx. Following Del Barrio et al.
(2018), we redefine ε-SSD using second quantiles and with a L2 definition, this eases the analysis
and practically the integration is on (0, 1] rather than (−∞, ∞).
We define the SSD violation ratio as follows:


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Stochastic Order Multi-testing (relative and absolute)
 1: Input: F1 , ..., Fk , k models we want to rank corresponding to empirical measure p1 =
      1
      P    n                 P   1   n
      n    i=1 δx1i , . . . pk = n   i=1 δxk
                                           i
                                             , Threshold: τ .
 2: Input: Desired stochastic order ∈ {1, 2}, B number of bootstraps, m = K 2 number of com-
      parisons, significance level α.
 3: Cache the bootstraps samples and their statistics
 4: for j = 1 to k do
 5:    p0j ← pj
 6:    Get Quantiles and Integrated Quantiles
 7:    Q0,j ← G ET Q UANTILES(pj )
 8:    IQ0,j ← G ET I NTEGRATED Q UANTILES(pj )
 9:    for b = 1 to B do
10:       Get Quantiles and Integrated Quantiles
11:       pbj ← R ESAMPLE W ITH R EPLACEMENT(pj , n) {using quantiles and uniform}
12:       Qb,j ← G ET Q UANTILES(pbj )
13:       IQb,j ← G ET I NTEGRATED Q UANTILES(pbj )
14:    end for
15: end for
16: Compute all violation ratios
17: εb,i,j ← C OMPUTE V IOLATION R ATIOS(Fib , Fjb , order) for b = 0 . . . B, i, j = 1 . . . k, i ̸= j
      {ratio of Q or IQ of j > i by total area}
18: εb,i,i = 0, ∀ b, i
19: Compute the sum statistics
20: for b = 0 to B do
21:    for i = 1 to kP  do
                  1
22:        εib ← k−1     j εb,i,j
23:    end for
24: end for
25: Compute the relative statistics
        i,j           j
26: ∆εb = εib − εb , ∀b, i, j
27: Compute the Bootstrap Variance
28: for i = 1 to k do
29:    for j = 1q to k do
                       1
                            PB        i,j          i,j     2
30:        σij =      B−1      b=1 (∆εb − M EAN (∆εb , b))
                    q       PB
            abs         1                                        2
31:       σij    = B−1         b=1 (εb,i,j − M EAN (εb,i,j , b))
32:   end for
33: end for
34: Compute the test
35: Winij = Winabs   ij = 0
36: for i = 1 to k do
37:   for j = 1 to k do
38:       if i ̸= j and ∆εi,j     √1
                            0 − n σij Φ
                                            −1
                                               (α/k 2 ) ≤ 0 then
39:          Winij = 1 {with confidence level 1 − α/k 2 }
40:       end if
                                       abs −1
41:       if i ̸= j and ε0.i,j − √1n σij   Φ (α/k 2 ) ≤ τ then
42:        Winabs                                    2
                ij = 1 {with confidence level 1 − α/k }
43:      end if
44:   end for
45: end for
    rank = B ORDA(Win) {with confidence level 1 − α}
    rankabs = B ORDA(Winabs ) {with confidence level 1 − α}
46: return rank, rankabs


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 C OMPUTE V IOLATION R ATIOS(Fa ,Fb ,order)
    if order =1 then
       return εW2 (Fa , Fb ) in Definition 3
    else if order=2 then
       return εIQ (Fa , Fb ) in Definition 4
    end if


      Definition 4 (SSD Violation Ratio ). For FX ̸= FY define the violation ratio:
                                    (−2)          (−2)
                                         (t) − FY (t))2 dt
                          R                                      R 1 (−2)
                             (2) (F
                                                                                  (−2)
                           A        X                             0
                                                                    (FY (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
         εIQ (FX , FY ) = R 01 (−2)                            =                           ,
                               (F      (t) −  F
                                                (−2)
                                                     (t)) 2 dt         d2IQ (FX , FY )
                            0     X             Y
                    n                                      o
              (2)                   (−2)           (−2)
      where A0 = t ∈ (0, 1) : FY (t) > FX (t) is the violation set the relation X ≽ Y ,
                                                                                                     SSD
      and dIQ is the L2 distance between the Integrated Quantiles (F (−2) ).

We are now ready to define ε-SSD, for ε ∈ (0, 12 ):


                                 X     ≽     Y ⇐⇒ εIQ (FX , FY ) ≤ ε                                    (20)
                                     ε−SSD


Figure 5b in Appendix G illustrates the second order, dashed areas represent the violation set of SSD
of X on Y . Integrated quantiles fully characterize one dimensional distributions as can be seen from
the Theorem 3 stated and proved in Appendix I:

E      R ELATED W ORKS ON S TOCHASTIC D OMINANCE

Stochastic Dominance In Dror et al. (2018; 2019); Ulmer et al. (2022); Simpson (2021) a distri-
butional assessment of the models based on stochastic dominance was proposed to overcome the
limitations of the ubiquitous Mean-Variance Risk model used in machine learning.
(Ulmer et al., 2022) used first order almost stochastic dominance and advocated for selecting a model
A over B based on a metric mi if: Mi |A, X ≽ Mi |B, X. We expand this to the Relative-FSD.
                                                 ε−FSD
In natural language (and other) applications, it is often crucial to mitigate the risk of outputs with
low metrics, especially when those metrics quantify important socio-technical guardrails such as
model’s toxicity, safety, or robustness. Unfortunately, the first stochastic ordering does not capture
an assessment of the left tail behavior of Mi |A, X and Mi |B, X and hence does not provide a risk-
aware assessment Ogryczak & Ruszczynski (2002). To alleviate this issue, we instead consider the
second order stochastic ordering and use our second order almost or relative stochastic dominance
tests introduced in Section 3 for selecting a model A if:Mi |A, X       ≽      Mi |B, X.
                                                                          ε or R−SSD


F     S UPPLEMENT D ISCUSSIONS

F.1     M EAN R ISK M ODELS

 Name                                      Risk Measure
                                                 p                              α− consistency with SSD
 Standard deviation                        σX = E(X − µX )2                     not consistent
 Absolute semi deviation                   δX = E(µX − X)+                      1− consistent
                                                           (−2)
 Negative Tail Value at Risk               −TVARX (p) = − F p (p)               1− consistent for all p ∈ (0, 1]
                                                             (−2)
                                                         F          (p)
 Mean absolute deviation from a quantile   hX (p) = µx − X p                    1− consistent for all p ∈ (0, 1]
                                                   R1        (−2)
 Gini Tail                                 ΓX = 2 0 (µX p − FX (p))dp           1− consistent

                       Table 1: Risk models and their α−consistency with SSD.

                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that several risks in Table 1 use the second quantile function as part of an assessment of the
left tails of the outcomes.

F.2   δ− C ONSISTENCY OF G INI -R ISK M ODELS WITH ε-SSD

δ− Consistency of Gini-Risk Models with ε-SSD We relax the definition of α− consistency of
mean-risk models with SSD to (α, δ) consistency with ε-SSD as follows:
Definition 5 ((α, δ) consistency of MRM with ε-SSD). A mean-risk model (µX , rX ) is (α, δ) con-
sistent with ε-SSD, if there exists α, δ > 0 such that X ≽ Y =⇒ µX − αrx + δ ≥ µY − αrY
                                                                         ε-SSD

It is easy to see that the Mean-Gini tail MRM of X and Y is consistent with their ε-SSD:
                                                                 1
Proposition 1. The Mean-Gini Tail MRM is (1, 2ε 2 dIQ (FX , FY )) consistent with ε-SSD.

Proof of Proposition 1.
                     Z 1                       Z 1
                                  (−2)               (−2)     (−2)     (−2)
µX − ΓX = µX − 2         (µX p − FX (p))dp = 2     (FX (p) − FY (p) + FY (p))dp
                       0                                             0
               Z 1                   Z                                                   Z
                      (−2)                     (−2)     (−2)                                                  (−2)          (−2)
          =2         FY (p) + 2              (FX (p) − FY (p))dp + 2                                        (FX      (p) − FY      (p))dp
                                         (2)                                                          (2)
                0                    A0                                                      [0,1]/A0
                                                                                         |                           {z                }
                                                                                                                  ≥0
               Z 1                   Z
                      (−2)                     (−2)                  (−2)
          ≥2         FY (p) − 2             |FX       (p) − FY              (p))|dp
                                      (2)
                0                    A0
                           Z 1
                                     (−2)              (−2)
          = µY − ΓY − 2          (FY        (p) − FX          (p))+ dp
                             0
                            Z 1             12  Z 1                                              21
                                                        (−2)     (−2)
          ≥ µY − ΓY − 2              dp               (FY (p) − FX (p))2+ dp                          (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                                 0                0
                            1
          ≥ µY − ΓY − 2ε 2 dIQ (FX , FY )(By assumption X                         ≽      Y)
                                                                                 ε−SSD


F.3   R ANK AGGREGATION

Given N ranks πi , i = 1 . . . N represented as permutations in Sk , the rank aggregation in (Pihur
et al., 2009) solves the following problem :
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                             min            αi d(π, πi ),
                                             π∈Sk
                                                      i=1
                PN
where αi ≥ 0, i=1 αi = 1 represent importance of each ranking and d is a distance between
permutations. (Pihur et al., 2009) have multiple choices of distance such as Pearson or Kendall’s-
Tau. We fixed through out our experiments the distance to Pearson.

F.4   M EAN W IN R ATE AND CDF NORMALIZERS IN PORTFOLIO

To unpack the notations in (17), consider a distribution A on models space. For a sample X ∼ Di
and a model A ∼ A, the metric mi () normalization through its CDF can be written as follows:
                       FMi (mi (A(X)) = EB∼A EY ∼Di 1mi (B(Y )≤mi (A(X)) .                                                  (21)
Hence for a model A on each evaluated sample the CDF normalizer computes a soft ranking of the
evaluation of the model A with a metric mi on the sample X with respect to all models and all
samples.


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1 (Mean Win Rate ). Note that in LLM leaderborads such as HELM and Hugging face, the
performance of a model A evaluated with a metric mi , is summarized via a Mean Win Rate (MWR)
aggregated on models level looking on expected metrics
                   MWRA,Mi = EB∼A 1EX∼Di [mi (B(X))]≤EX∼Di [mi (A(X))] ,                  (22)
or aggregated on sample level marginalizing on models with a max:
                         MWRA,Mi = EX∼Di 1maxB̸=A mi (B(X))≤mi (A(X)) ,                            (23)
Contrasting (21) , (22) and (23) we see that instead of looking at the MWR summary statistics that
does not allow to consider all order statistics and relative ordering as well the risks of tails events,
we consider a full distributional assessment in the metrics portfolio approach.

G           F IGURES

                                                                                               1                                            µX
           40                                                                                                                     (−2)


                                                                        Integrated Quantile
                                                                                              0.8                               FX
                                                    (−1)
           30                                      FU
Quantile


                                                                                              0.6                                           µY
           20                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                  (−2)
                            (−1)                                                                                                FY
           10             FV                                                                  0.2

            0                                                                                  0
                      0     0.2    0.4       0.6    0.8        1                                    0     0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8       1
                                         p                                                                            p
                     (a) ε- FSD (first order): U    ≽      V                                    (b) ε-SSD (second order): X      ≽      Y
                                                   ε−FSD                                                                        ε−SSD


Figure 5: (a) An Example of Almost First Order Stochastic Dominance: Plots of quantile func-
tions of U and V . Dashed areas is the violation set of first order stochastic dominance of U on V .
(b) An Example of Almost Second Order Stochastic Dominance: Plots of integrated quantile
functions; dashed area is the violation set for the second order stochastic dominance of X on Y .
H           C ENTRAL L IMIT T HEOREMS
H.1             CLT FOR ε-SSD

           Theorem 1 (Central Limit Theorem for ε-SSD). Assume that FX , FY are supported on
                                                                               ′
                                                                     f ′ (p) f (p)
           intervalsa in [−M, M ], and have pdfs fx , fy such that fx3 (p) , fy3 (p) are bounded almost
                                                                      x       y
           everywhere on the support of fx and fy respectively. Assume we have n samples from FX
                                                                 n
           and m samples from FY , with n, m → ∞ such that n+m       → λ for some λ. Then
                        r
                           mn           n
                                (εIQ (FX  , FYm ) − εIQ (FX , FY )) → N (0, σλ2 (FX , FY ))
                          m+n
           where
                                              1
                          σλ2 (FX , FY ) =             [(1 − λ)Var(vX (U )) + λVar(vY (U ))] ,
                                      d8IQ (FX , FY )
                                                                    R
                                                          1            1    (−2)         (−2)
           for U ∼ Unif[0, 1], vY (t) = 2 f (F −1                     t
                                                                         (FX     (p) − FY     (p)) + dp   , and
                                      R               y   Y (t))
                           1             1   (−2)          (−2)
           vX (t) = 2 f (F −1 (t))      t
                                           (FX (p) − FY (p))− dp .
                               x   X

                a
                    The interval for FX and for FY need not coincide.



                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 2 (Non-independent samples). Theorem 1 assumes that the n-sample from FX is indepen-
dent of the m-sample for FY . Consider instead the setting where there are n samples from FX and
FY that are dependent (e.g. X, Y are evaluations of different models applied to the same data).
We can describe general dependence structure as the following. Suppose (X, Y ) has marginals
X ∼ FX , Y ∼ FY , with some unknown dependence structure (optionally described by the copula
CXY (ux , uy ) = Pr(FX (X) ≤ ux , FY (Y ) ≤ uy )). Let
                                     (Ux , Uy ) = (FX (X), FY (Y )) ∼ CXY .
Note that Ux and Uy have marginals equal to Unif([0, 1]), but Ux and Uy may be dependent. Hence
the variances in each term of the decomposition (25) in the appendix cannot be added. Instead, one
should modify the result of Theorem 1 to use
                                             1
                      σ̄λ2 (FX , FY ) = 8             Var [vX (Ux ) + vY (Uy )] .
                                       dIQ (FX , FY )

H.2        CLT FOR R ELATIVE S TATISTICS

We focus here on presenting the Central Limit Theorem for SSD. The relative FSD has a similar
form and we omit its statement here.

    Theorem 2 (Central limit Theorem for Relative SSD). Assume F1n , . . . , Fkn are available
    and independent, and each Fi satisfies the conditions of Theorem 1. Then
                                                                      k
                                                                                     !
             √   (2)                (2)
                                                                1    X
                                                                          2
              n ∆εi1 ,i2 (Fn ) − ∆εi1 ,i2 (F ) →w N 0,                   σ (i1 , i2 ) .
                                                            (k − 1)2 i=1 i

    where
                                        (1)−                          (1)−

                                         2vi i (Ui )     P            vi j (Ui )
                                    Var d4 (Fi ,Fi ) + j̸=i1 ,i2 d4 (Fi ,Fj )
                                            1 2                         1
                                                                                     i = i1
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                         IQ(2)+1 2                    IQ    1
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                                                      (1)−

                                         2v i (Ui )                   v j (Ui )
                 σi2 (i1 , i2 ) =   Var d4 i(F          − j̸=i1 ,i2 d4 i2(F
                                                         P
                                            1 2
                                              i1 ,Fi2 )                    i ,Fj )
                                                                                     i = i2
                                         IQ                           IQ
                                  
                                  
                                        (2)+             (2)+
                                                                        2
                                        vi j (Ui )      vi j (Ui )
                                   Var d4 1(Fi ,Fj ) − d4 2(Fi ,Fj )                i ̸= i1 , i2
                                  
                                  
                                             IQ    1            IQ   2


                                                                                              (1),−
    for    U           ∼          Unif([0, 1])     all   independent,              and      vij       (t)   =
        −1 i    R
        dFi (t)       1     (−2)         (−2)              (2),+
    2                    (Fi     (p) − Fj     (p))− dp , vij (t)                                            =
        dt           t
        dFj−1 (t)
                     R
                        1    (−2)         (−2)
    2      dt          t
                          (Fi     (p) − Fj     (p))+ dp .


Remark 3 (Dependent samples). If the Fin are dependent, a similar expression to that shown in
Remark 2 for the absolute testing case also holds here. The statement is omitted.

I       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

    Theorem 3 (dIQ is a metric). dIQ is a metric on the space of univariate distributions with
    continuous CDF, moreover, it metrizes the weak topology.

First, we show that dIQ (F, G) = 0 if and only if F = G. The forward direction is obvious.
For the reverse direction, if dIQ (F, G) = 0, then F (−2) (t) = G(−2) (t) a.e. By the continuity of
integrated quantiles, this implies F (−2) = G(−2) everywhere. Then, since F (−1) (t) is simply the
derivative of F (−2) (t) with respect to t6 , F (−1) = G(−1) everywhere by differentiating both sides of
F (−2) (t) = G(−2) (t). Hence F = G since distributions are uniquely determined by their quantile
functions.
    6
        This follows because F −2 is the integral of the finite-valued quantile function F −1 (t).


                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The triangle inequality follows from the triangle inequality of the L2 norm, since
q R1
   0
     (F (−2) (t) − G(−2) (t))2 dt = ∥F (−2) (t) − G(−2) (t)∥L2 ([0,1]) . Hence dIQ is a metric. By The-
orem 10 in Gushchin & Borzykh (2017), we know that random variable X(i) →w X (with cdf F(i) )
                  (−2)
if and only if F(i)      converges uniformly to F (−2) . Hence dIQ must metrize weak convergence.

J      P ROOFS OF C ENTRAL L IMIT T HEOREMS
J.1     A BSOLUTE T ESTING : P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Note that for Ui and Vi an n-sample and an m-sample respectively from Unif([0, 1]), we can get
Xi , Yi as Xi = F −1 (Ui ), Yi = G−1 (Vi ). Let Hn,1 and Hm,2 be the empirical d.f.s of the Ui and
Vi respectively. We have
                                                       −1
                                   Fn−1 (t) = F −1 (Hn,1  (t)),
hence                                      Z t                         Z t
                                                                                    −1
                            Fn(−2) (t) =         Fn−1 (p)dp =                F −1 (Hn,1 (p))dp.
                                            0                           0

We are interested in
                                                                (−2)             (−2)
                                                                       (t) − Gm (t))2 dt
                                                     R
                                                         A0
                                                              (Fn
                             εIQ (Fn , Gm ) =                                               ,
                                                                    d2IQ (Fn , Gm )
where                               n                               o
                                A0 = t ∈ (0, 1) : G(−2)     (−2)
                                                   m (t) > Fn    (t) ,
is the violation set.
It is shown in Gushchin & Borzykh (2017) (Theorem 10 therein) that integrated quantiles converge
                 (−2)
uniformly, i.e. Fn (t) → F (−2) (t) pointwise. As an immediate consequence, we have
                                      εIQ (Fn , Gm ) →a.s. εIQ (F, G).

We apply the following decomposition and bound the two terms separately:
    εIQ (Fn , Gm ) − εIQ (F, G) = (εIQ (Fn , Gm ) − εIQ (F, Gm )) + (εIQ (F, Gm ) − εIQ (F, G)). (24)

We derive asymptotic normality of these terms for Gm , the proof for Fn is identical by symmetry.
We introduce the statistics                 Z 1
                                   Sm =             (F (−2) (t) − G(−2)  2
                                                                   m (t)) dt
                                             0
                                            Z 1
                                    +
                                   Sm =             (F (−2) (t) − G(−2)  2
                                                                   m (t))+ dt
                                                0
                                            Z 1
                                    −
                                   Sm =             (F (−2) (t) − G(−2)  2
                                                                   m (t))− dt
                                                0
The nonrandom S, S + , S − are defined similarly with G instead of Gm .
Next, set                                         √
                                             Tm = m(Sm − S)
                                              +
                                                 √   +
                                            Tm  = m(Sm − S+)
                                             −
                                                 √   −
                                            Tm  = m(Sm − S − ).
Theorem 4. Assume that G is supported on an interval that is a subset of [−M, M ], and has pdf g
            ′
such that gg3(p)
              (p) is bounded almost everywhere on the support of g. Then

                                            Tm = αm,2 (v) + oP (1)
                                            +
                                           Tm = αm,2 (v + ) + oP (1)


                                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                −
                                                               Tm = αm,2 (v − ) + oP (1)
                                                  −1 √                        R1
where we define αm,2 (t) =               m(t − Hm,1   (t)) and αm,2 (v) = 0 v(t)αm,2 (t)dt, and
                                                          Z 1
                                                1                  (−2)         (−2)
                                v(t) = 2                         F      (p) − G      (p)dp   .
                                            g(G−1 (t))        t
                                                         Z 1
                               +               1                   (−2)         (−2)
                             v (t) = 2                          (F      (p) − G      (p))+ dp ,
                                           g(G−1 (t))       t
                                                         Z 1
                                               1
                             v − (t) = 2                        (F (−2)
                                                                        (p) − G (−2)
                                                                                     (p))− dp   .
                                           g(G−1 (t))       t


Proof. We begin with Tm . Note that7
             √
       Tm = m(Sm − S)
                  Z 1
             √
           = m        (F (−2) (t) − G(−2)  2
                                     m (t)) − (F
                                                 (−2)
                                                      (t) − G(−2) (t))2 dt
                                    0
                                Z 1h
                        √                                                            i
                    =       m                   2F (−2) (t) − G(−2)
                                                               m    (t) − G (−2)
                                                                                 (t)   (G(−2) (t) − G(−2)
                                                                                                     m (t))dt
                                    0
                                    Z 1h
                      √                              i
                    →2 m      F (−2) (t) − G(−2) (t) (G(−2) (t) − G(−2)
                                                                     m (t))dt
                          0
                         Z 1h                       i  Z t
                      √

                                (−2)        (−2)            (−1)        (−1)   −1
                    =2 m      F      (t) − G     (t)       G     (p) − G     (Hm,1 (p)))dp dt
                                        0                                            0


Let us do integration by parts:
             Z 1h                         i  Z t
        √

                     (−2)        (−2)             (−1)        (−1)   −1
       2 m         F      (t) − G     (t)        G     (p) − G     (Hm,1 (p)))dp dt =
                     0                                                  0
                           Z 1                                     Z 1
             √

                                                                                           −1
           =2 m                         F (−2) (t) − G(−2) (t)dt       G(−1) (t) − G(−1) (Hm,1 (t)))dt
                                0                                                    0
               Z 1  Z t                                  h                            i
                                                                             −1
           −                    F (−2) (p) − G(−2) (p)dp G(−1) (t) − G(−1) (Hm,1 (t))) dt
                0           0
                         Z 1  Z 1
             √
                                                                                      h                                i
                                                     (−2)             (−2)                                    −1
           =2 m                                  F          (p) − G          (p)dp        G(−1) (t) − G(−1) (Hm,1 (t))) dt
                            0           t
                         Z 1        Z 1
             √          dG−1 (t)

                                           (−2)        (−2)               −1
           =2 m                          F      (p) − G     (p)dp (t − Hm,1  (t))dt
                   0      dt           t
                     Z 1Z 1
                √

                                                             −1
           +O     m         F (−2) (p) − G(−2) (p)dp)(t − Hm,1  (t))2 dt
                                0           t
                         Z 1                                Z 1
             √                          dG−1 (t)

                                                                                                    −1
           =2 m                                                      F (−2) (p) − G(−2) (p)dp (t − Hm,1 (t))dt + oP (1).
                            0             dt                   t

In the penultimate step we have used a first-order Taylor series on G−1 (t) via the assumption that
d2 G−1 (t)       ′   −1

   dt2     = − gg3(G    (t))
                   (G−1 (t)) is bounded almost everywhere, and in the final step we have noted that
               Z 1  Z 1                                                                           Z 1
       √                                                                                       √

                                    (−2)                     (−2)               −1      2                   −1
           m                    F               (p) − G             (p)dp (t − Hm,1 (t)) dt ≤ 2 m     (t − Hm,1 (t))2 dt
                0        t                                                                                      0
                                                                                                    = oP (1),
                                                                                 R1            −1
since the support of F and G lie in [−M, M ] and                                     0
                                                                                         (t − Hm,1 (t))2 dt = Op (1/m).
   7
       Convergence here is uniform convergence of the integrated quantiles.


                                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We then have
                                       Tm = αm,2 (v) + oP (1),
                     √          −1
                                                     R1
where αm,2 (t) =         m(t − Hm,1 (t)), and αm,2 (v) =
                                                      0
                                                          v(t)αm,2 (t)dt where
                                     −1    Z 1
                                    dG (t)
                          v(t) = 2                F (−2) (p) − G(−2) (p)dp .
                                      dt      t

Similarly,
                                                                      −
                           +
                          Tm = αm,2 (v + ) + oP (1),                 Tm = αm,2 (v − ) + oP (1)
where                                                 Z 1
                                        dG−1 (t)

                      v + (t) = 2                                  (F (−2) (p) − G(−2) (p))+ dp ,
                                          dt               t
                                                      Z 1
                                        dG−1 (t)

                         −                                              (−2)             (−2)
                      v (t) = 2                                    (F          (p) − G          (p))− dp .
                                          dt               t


                                                                                                                        ′
Corollary 1. Assume that G is supported on an interval in [−M, M ], and has pdf g such that gg3(p)
                                                                                               (p)
is bounded almost everywhere on the support of g. Then as m → ∞
                        √
                          m(ϵIQ (F, Gm ) − ϵIQ (F, G)) →w N (0, σ 2 )
and if additionally n → ∞
                        √
                          m(ϵIQ (Fn , Gm ) − ϵIQ (Fn , G)) →w N (0, σ 2 ),
if for U ∼ Unif([0, 1])
                                                           Var(v + (U ))
                                               σ2 =
                                                            d8IQ (F, G)
is finite.

Proof. Note that by Theorem 4
                                                            −
                                                                                       √
      √                                        √                S−                                        αm,2 (v + )

                                                           Sm                            m −
          m(ϵIQ (F, Gm ) − ϵIQ (F, G)) =           m          −                    =       (Tm − Tm ) → −
                                                           Sm    S                     SSm                  S2
since Sm → S a.s. Recalling the definition of αm,2 yields asymptotic normality with zero mean as
in Del Barrio et al. (2018), and variance as calculated in the corollary statement.
            √
The case of m(ϵIQ (Fn , Gm ) − ϵIQ (Fn , G)) follows similarly since integrated quantiles weakly
converge as Fn → F .

Continuing with the main proof, recalling (24) and using Corollary 1 along with the asymptotic
                                                 n
independence of the two terms and the fact that n+m → λ, we have
  r
     mn
           (εIQ (Fn , Gm ) − εIQ (F, G))
    m+n
              p                                           √
           = (1 − λ)n(εIQ (Fn , Gm ) − εIQ (F, Gm )) + λn(εIQ (F, Gm ) − εIQ (F, G)) (25)
               → N (0, σλ2 (F, G))
where
                                          1
                    σλ2 (F, G) =                [(1 − λ)Var(vF (U )) + λVar(vG (U ))] .
                                    d8IQ (F, G)
Here, we have defined
                                                        Z 1
                                           1                            (−2)               (−2)
                     vG (t) = 2                                    (F          (p) − G            (p))+ dp ,
                                      g(G−1 (t))               t

and                                                     Z 1
                                           1                            (−2)               (−2)
                     vF (t) = 2                                    (F          (p) − G            (p))− dp .
                                      f (F −1 (t))             t


                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.2   R ELATIVE T ESTING : P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Note that
                         ∆εiIQ
                             1 ,i2
                                   (F ) = ϵiIQ
                                             1
                                               (F ) − ϵiIQ2
                                                            (F )
                                                                          
                                              1  X i1 j X i2 j 
                                        =                  ϵIQ −       ϵIQ
                                          k−1
                                                    j̸=i1        j̸=i2
                                                                                      
                                              1  i1 i2              X ij
                                        =           2ϵIQ − 1 +            (ϵIQ
                                                                             1
                                                                               − ϵiIQ
                                                                                    2j 
                                                                                      ) .
                                          k−1
                                                                           j̸=i1 ,i2

For compactness, let us introduce the differencing notation ϕ(·)|F
                                                                 F = ϕ(Fn ) − ϕ(F ). We seek a
                                                                   n

CLT on
                                                                                    Fi1 ,n
                                    √
                                          
√      i1 ,i2         i1 ,i2          n                        X
  n(∆ε[IQ (Fn ) − ∆εIQ (F )) =              2ϵIQ (·, Fi2 ,n ) +      ϵIQ (·, Fj,n )
                                   k−1
                                                                                    j̸=i1 ,i2
                                                                                                                  Fi1
                                                                                                          Fi2 ,n
                                               √
                                                       
                                             n                  X
                                       +        2ϵIQ (Fi1 , ·) −   ϵIQ (·, Fj,n )
                                            k−1
                                                                               j̸=i1 ,i2
                                                                                                                Fi2
                                               √
                                  n X                                          F
                               +               (ϵIQ (Fi1 , ·) − ϵIQ (Fi2 , ·))|Fj,n
                                 k−1                                             j
                                     j̸=i1 ,i2
                                                   Fi1 ,n                                               Fi2 ,n
          √                                                     √
                                                                     
            n                   X                                n                      X
      →w        2ϵIQ (·, Fi2 ) +     ϵIQ (·, Fj )           +           2ϵIQ (Fi1 , ·) −   ϵIQ (·, Fj )
         k−1                                                   k−1
                                           j̸=i1 ,i2                                                                    j̸=i1 ,i2
                                                                         Fi1                                                        Fi2
             |                          {z                                     }     |                                  {z                }
                                           I                                                                            II
                                               √
                                             n X                                         F
                                       +                 (ϵIQ (Fi1 , ·) − ϵIQ (Fi2 , ·))|Fj,n
                                           k−1                                            j
                                               j̸=i1 ,i2
                                           |                     {z                         }
                                                                          III

where we have used the uniform convergence of integrated quantiles. Note that I, II, and each term
in the sum in III are all independent.
Define
                                           dFi−1 (t)
                                                          Z 1
                         (1)                                           (−2)        (−2)
                        vij (t) = 2                                   Fi    (p) − Fj    (p)dp               ,
                                              dt
                                                       !  Zt
                                           dFj−1 (t)              1
                         (2)                                           (−2)        (−2)
                        vij (t) = 2                                   Fi    (p) − Fj    (p)dp               ,
                                              dt              t
      (1)+       (2)+
and vij , vij similarly. Then by the proof of Corollary 1, each term in III converges to
      √                                                        (2)+                       (2)+
        n                                  F            αm,j (vi1 j )             αm,j (vi2 j )
           (ϵIQ (Fi1 , ·) − ϵIQ (Fi2 , ·))|Fj,n → −                           +
     k−1                                    j       (k − 1)d4IQ (Fi1 , Fj ) (k − 1)d4IQ (Fi2 , Fj )
                                                                        (2)+            (2)+
                                                                                                   !
                                                    1                  vi 1 j          vi 2 j
                                                =      αm,j − 4                  +
                                                  k−1             dIQ (Fi1 , Fj ) d4IQ (Fi2 , Fj )

                                                              1        2
                                                →w N 0,             σ (i1 , i2 ) , ∀j ̸= i1 , i2 .
                                                          (k − 1)2 j
where
                                                       (2)+                        (2)+
                                                                                                !
                                   1                 vi1 j (U )      vi j (U )
             σj2 (i1 , i2 ) =            Var        4             − 4 2                             ,   ∀j ̸= i1 , i2 ,
                                (k − 1)2           dIQ (Fi1 , Fj ) dIQ (Fi2 , Fj )


                                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and U ∼ Unif([0, 1]). Similarly for I and II,

                                                 1     2
                                I →w N 0,             σ (i1 , i2 )
                                              (k − 1)2 i1

                                                 1     2
                              II →w N 0,              σ (i1 , i2 )
                                              (k − 1)2 i2


where8                                                                                    
                                                 (1)−                          (1)−
                                              2v      (U )        X          v i1 j  (U )
                     σi21 (i1 , i2 ) = Var  4 i1 i2          +                            ,
                                             dIQ (Fi1 , Fi2 )             d4IQ (Fi1 , Fj )
                                                                j̸=i1 ,i2
                                                                                          
                                                 (2)+                          (1)−
                                              2v i i  (U )        X          v i   j (U )
                     σi22 (i1 , i2 ) = Var  4 1 2            −                  2         .
                                             dIQ (Fi1 , Fi2 )             d4IQ (Fi2 , Fj )
                                                                 j̸=i1 ,i2

Putting everything together via independence,
                                                                               k
                                                                                               !
             √

                     [i1 ,i2         i1 ,i2                             1     X
               n ∆εIQ (Fn ) − ∆εIQ (F ) →w N                      0,             σ 2 (i1 , i2 ) .
                                                                     (k − 1)2 i=1 i


K     C ONSISTENCY OF B OOTSTRAPPING
In this section, we consider the relaxation measure using the CDFs9 :
                                             R∞    (ℓ)        (ℓ)
                                              −∞
                                                 (FY (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
                            ϵ̃ℓ (FX , FY ) = R ∞    (ℓ)       (ℓ)
                                                                        .
                                              −∞
                                                 (FY (t) − FX (t))2 dt
Note that we can relax FSD as follows:
                                    Y    ≽      X ⇐⇒ ϵ̃1 (FX , FY ) ≤ ε.                                     (26)
                                        ε−FSD

Similarly we can relax SSD as follows:
                                    Y    ≽      X ⇐⇒ ϵ̃2 (FX , FY ) ≤ ε.                                     (27)
                                        ε−SSD


We will prove bootstrap consistency for ℓ = 1 (approximate first order dominance), the proof for
ℓ = 2 (approximate second order dominance) is similar.
                                                              n∗
We seek to show that the bootstrapped variance Var(ϵ̃1 (FX       , FYm∗ )) is an asymptotically consistent
                       n
estimator of Var(ϵ̃1 (FX , FYm ), i.e. their ratio goes to 1:
                                                    n∗
                                         Var(ϵ̃1 (FX   , FYm∗ ))
                                                                 →p 1.
                                          Var(ϵ̃1 (FX , FYm ))
                                                     n


Note we can write this as
                                         n∗
                               Var(ϵ̃1 (FX  , FYm∗ )     Var(T (FXn∗
                                                                     , FYm∗ ))
                                         n , F m ))  → p           n , F m )) ,
                               Var(ϵ̃1 (FX     Y          Var(T (FX     Y

where                                             R∞
                                                       (FY (t) − FX (t))2+ dt
                                T (FX , FY ) = R−∞
                                                ∞                                .
                                                   −∞
                                                        (FY (t) − FX (t))2 dt
   8
     This U ∼ Unif([0, 1]) is drawn simply for this variance calculation and is not dependent on anything
outside of this equation.
   9
     The result using quantiles as described in the main text is less straightforward and if left for future work.


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider the metric created by the sup norm
                           ρ∞ (F, G) = ∥F − G∥∞ = sup |F (x) − G(x)|.
                                                            x

Note that T is continuously ρ∞ -Frechet differentiable in both arguments due to the differentiability
of the function (·)2+ and integration. Specifically,
                                         1
      D1,(FX ,FY ) (GX ) = R ∞                          ·
                           ( −∞ (FY (t) − FX (t))2 dt)2
                        h  Z ∞                         Z ∞
                                                2
                               (FY (t) − FX (t)) dt          2(FY (t) − FX (t))+ GX dt
                            −∞                            −∞
                            Z ∞                          Z ∞                            i
                                                  2
                         −       (FY (t) − FX (t))+ dt         2(FY (t) − FX (t))GX dt .
                                −∞                              −∞

and similarly for D2,(FX ,FY ) (GY ). Since T is continuously differentiable, by the definition of
continuous Frechet differentiability we can write (see Chapter 2 in Shao & Tu (2012)) the following:
    n∗
T (FX  , FYm∗ ) − T (FX
                      n
                        , FYm )
                   n∗
= D1,(FXn ,FYm ) (FX  − FX n
                             ) + D2,(FXn ,FYm ) (FYm∗ − FYm ) + (ρ∞ (FX
                                                                      n∗    n
                                                                         , FX ) + ρ∞ (FYm∗ , FYm ))ϵ∗n,m

               n∗
           T (FX  , FYm ) − T (FX
                                n
                                  , FYm ) = D1,(FXn ,FYm ) (FX
                                                             n∗    n
                                                                − FX           n∗
                                                                     ) + (ρ∞ (FX     n
                                                                                  , FX ))ϵ∗n

              n
          T (FX , FYm∗ ) − T (FX
                               n
                                 , FYm ) = D2,(FXn ,FYm ) (FYm∗ − FYm ) + (ρ∞ (FYm∗ , FYm ))ϵ∗m
and
       n
   T (FX , FYm ) − T (FX , FY )
                      n
   = D1,(FX ,FY ) (FX   − FX ) + D2,(FX ,FY ) (FYm − FY ) + (ρ∞ (FX
                                                                  n
                                                                    , FX ) + ρ∞ (FYm , FY ))ϵn,m

                 n                                        n                n
             T (FX , FY ) − T (FX , FY ) = D1,(FX ,FY ) (FX − FX ) + (ρ∞ (FX , FX ))ϵn

            T (FX , FYm ) − T (FX , FY ) = D2,(FX ,FY ) (FYm − FY ) + (ρ∞ (FYm , FY ))ϵm
where ϵ∗n,m , ϵ∗n , ϵ∗m , ϵn,m , ϵn , ϵm → 0 as n, m → ∞.
Hence, combining terms,
    n∗
T (FX  , FYm∗ )−T (FX
                    n
                      , FYm ) = (T (FX
                                     n∗
                                        , FYm )−T (FX
                                                    n
                                                      , FYm ))+(T (FX
                                                                    n
                                                                      , FYm∗ )−T (FX
                                                                                   n
                                                                                     , FYm ))+op (n−1/2 +m−1/2 ),
and
    n
T (FX , FYm )−T (FX , FY ) = (T (FX
                                  n
                                    , FY )−T (FX , FY ))+(T (FX , FYm )−T (FX , FY ))+op (n−1/2 +m−1/2 ).

Hence, assuming independence of the n-sample and m-sample and respective bootstrap resam-
plings,
                         n∗
                Var(T (FX    , FYm∗ ))                n
                                              Var(T (FX , FYm∗ )) + Var(T (FX
                                                                            n∗
                                                                               , FYm ))
                           n , F m ))  → a.s.                               n , F )) ,
                 Var(T (FX      Y              Var(T (FX , FYm )) + Var(T (FX     Y
i.e. we add the variances.
We have now divided the task to the one-sided setting where the bootstrap is only done in one argu-
ment of T . Hence we can apply Theorem 3.10 of Shao & Tu (2012) which states that for ρ∞ -Frechet
differentiable functions of a CDF, the bootstrap variance estimator is asymptotically consistent if the
support is bounded (more general results can be stated but are omitted for simplicity). Applying sep-
arately to each of the two variances we have the following.
                                                                                                     n
Proposition 2. Suppose FX , FY , have support contained in [−M, M ] for some M > 0, and FX             ,
  m
FY arise from independent samples. Then
                                                 n∗
                                      Var(ϵ̃1 (FX   , FYm∗ ))
                                       Var(ϵ̃1 (FXn , F m )) →a.s. 1.
                                                       Y


                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L          A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

L.1         S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE ON S YNTHETIC DATA

We examine the statistical properties of our tests as a function of sample size. We purposely de-
sign synthetic score distributions to represent challenging problems with large overlap between the
distributions and a considerable violation ratio, but where one would still like to have an ordering
among the variables. For this we consider the two Gaussian distributions with mean µ = 0 and
standard deviation σ = 1, and with mean µ = 0.5 and standard deviation σ = 2, respectively. In
the top panels of Figure 6 we show the PDF, CDF and integrated quantile function of these two
Gaussians, illustrating the large violation ratio. The orange distribution can be calculated to be 0.2-
FSD and 0.45-SSD over the blue distribution. Note that these ε values are not comparable, due to
the differences in definitions. In Figure 6, we conduct experiments illustrating the power of our
tests for the absolute tests of the hypotheses H0,F SD = 0.45-FSD and H0,SSD = 0.45-SSD. We
also use our relative tests, which in this 2-variable case (as noted in the main text) are equivalent
to testing H0,F SD = 0.5-FSD and H0,SSD = 0.5-SSD. The bottom left panel in Figure 6 show
the True Positive Rate for the different types of tests that we developed: relative test with quantile
function, relative test with Integrated Quantile Function, absolute test with quantile function, and
absolute test with Integrated Quantile Function. As expected, all tests quickly converge towards
True Positive Rate of 1.0 for growing sample sizes.


                                      PDF                                                                            CDF
                                                     = 0, 0, = 0.5                         1.0
          1.50
                                                     = 0.0, = 1.0                          0.9
          1.25
          1.00                                                                             0.8
density


                                                                      prob


          0.75                                                                             0.7
          0.50
                                                                                           0.6                                    = 0, 0, = 0.5
          0.25                                                                                                                    = 0.0, = 1.0
          0.00                                                                             0.5
                 0.0   0.5    1.0     1.5      2.0      2.5     3.0                              0.0   0.5     1.0   1.5    2.0       2.5    3.0
                                       X                                                                              X
                       Integrated quantile function                                                           True Positive Rate
                                    = 0, 0, = 0.5                                          1.0
           0.0                      = 0.0, = 1.0                                           0.9
                                                                      true positive rate


           0.1                                                                             0.8
                                                                                           0.7
           0.2                                                                                                                  relative test Q
                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                relative test IQ
           0.3                                                                             0.5                                  absolute test Q
                                                                                           0.4                                  absolute test IQ
           0.4
                 0.0    0.2     0.4          0.6       0.8      1.0                              0     1000      2000 3000         4000     5000
                                      prob                                                                        sample size

Figure 6: True Positive Rate vs sample size for Gaussian distributions. We compute the True
Positive Rate of our stochastic dominance methods on the test distributions in the top panels for
different sample sizes. Decisions are made using a confidence threshold of α = 0.05 and τ = 0.45
(for the absolute tests) and rates are computed over 1000 repetitions of the tests. Note that the FSD
and SSD curves should not be compared due to differences in the underlying hypotheses.



L.2         M IX -I NSTRUCT

Results for the Mix-Instruct data are shown in Figures 8 and 9, as well as Table 3.


                                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          PDF                                                                                                   CDF
                                                           = 0, 0, = 0.5                             1.0
          0.8                                              = 0.0, = 1.0                              0.8
          0.6                                                                                        0.6
density


                                                                                prob
          0.4                                                                                        0.4
          0.2                                                                                        0.2                                                        = 0, 0, = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                = 0.0, = 1.0
          0.0                                                                                        0.0
                0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5      2.0         2.5     3.0                                     0.0       0.5         1.0         1.5      2.0       2.5        3.0
                                           X                                                                                                      X
                      Integrated quantile function                                                                               True Positive Rate
     1.50              = 0, 0, = 0.5                                                                 1.0
     1.25              = 0.0, = 1.0


                                                                                true positive rate
     1.00                                                                                            0.8
     0.75
     0.50                                                                                            0.6                                                      relative test Q
                                                                                                                                                              relative test IQ
     0.25                                                                                                                                                     absolute test Q
                                                                                                     0.4                                                      absolute test IQ
     0.00
                0.0    0.2          0.4          0.6         0.8        1.0                                0             500           1000 1500                   2000         2500
                                          prob                                                                                          sample size

Figure 7: True Positive Rate vs sample size for Lognormal distributions generated as X = eµ+σZ ,
where Z is a standard Gaussian variable. We compute the True Positive Rate of our stochastic
dominance as in Fig. 6, but in this case we examine True Positive Rate for heavy-tailed distributions
examplified by Lognormal distributions.

                             Open       koala     alpaca      llama   flan-t5             stablelm               Vicuna        Dolly       Moss        ChatGLM      mpt-7b      mpt-7b
                            assistant                           7b                                                             (v2)         6b                      instruct

 Mean Win Rates
 RA(MWR @ M)                   1           6           2       8        5                             7              3          10          9             4           11         12

 MWR @ P                       1           5           2       7        6                             8              3          9           10            4           11         12


 Relative FSD
 RA(R-FSD @ M)                 1           6           2       5        8                            11              4          10          7             3            9         12

 R-FSD @ P                     1           6           2       5        11                           10              4          8           7             3            9         12

 R-FSD @ChatGPT                1           7           3       4        12                           11              2          8           5             6            9         10


 Relative SSD
 RA(R-SSD @ M)                 1           7           2       5        12                           10              4          9           6             3            8         11

 R-SSD @ P                     1           6           3       5        12                           11              4          7           8             2            9         10

 R-SSD @ChatGPT                1           8           3       4        11                           12              2          7           5             6            9         10


 Mean-Risk Models
 RA(µX − ΓX ) @ M              1           7           2       5        12                           11              4          9           6             3            8         10
 RA(µX − rX ) @ P              1           6           3       5        12                           11              4          7           8             2            9         10



Table 2: Rankings of models on following instructions according to all tests, with the top 3 ranks
highlighted. We see that SSD and Mean – Risk models are consistent. Note that RA(µX − rX ) @
P denotes the aggregation of rankings produced by (µX − rX ) @ P for each rX in Table 1.



                                                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Radar plot of mean – risk models of the portfolio on Mix-Instruct data. Note that the outer
models are indeed the ones preferred by SSD in Table 3.


               Figure 9: Empirical CDF and TvaR for portfolio on Mix-Instruct data


L.3   T OXICITY

Toxicity results are in Table 4.

L.4   FAT L EFT TAILS OF M ETRICS AND I NCONSISTENCY OF M EAN -VARIANCE WITH SSD

When metrics evaluated have fat tails, the Mean-Variance ranking can be inconsistent with the SSD.
See Table 5.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Open       koala    alpaca   llama   flan-t5    stablelm   Vicuna   Dolly   Moss   ChatGLM   mpt-7b     mpt-7b
                     assistant                       7b                                   (v2)     6b              instruct

Mean Win Rates

RA(MWR @ M)             1         6         2       8        5            7        3       10      9        4        11        12

MWR @ P                 1         5         2       7        6            8        3       9       10       4        11        12



Relative FSD

RA(R-FSD @ M)           1         6         2       5        8            11       4       10      7        3         9        12

R-FSD @ P               1         6         2       5        11           10       4       8       7        3         9        12



Relative SSD

RA(R-SSD @ M)           1         7         2       5        12           10       4       9       6        3         8        11

R-SSD @ P               1         6         3       5        12           11       4       7       8        2         9        10

R-SSD @ChatGPT          1         8         3       4        11           12       2       7       5        6         9        10


Absolute FSD

ε-FSD @ P ε=0.08        1         6         2       5        10           11       4       7       8        3         9        12

ε-FSD @ P ε=0.25        1         6         2       5        12           10       4       7       8        3         9        11

ε-FSD @ P ε=0.4         1         6         2       5        12           10       4       8       7        3         9        11


Absolute SSD

ε-SSD @ P ε = 0.08      1         6         3       5        12           11       4       7       8        2         9        10

ε-SSD @ P ε = 0.25      1         6         3       5        12           11       4       8       7        2         9        10

ε-SSD @ P ε=0.4         1         6         3       5        12           11       4       7       8        2         9        10


Mean-Risk Models

RA(µX − rX ) @ P        1         6         3       5        12           11       4       7       8        2         9        10


                                         Table 3: Mix instruct Extended Results.


                                                                     30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Scenario                                   Llama 2 7b   Llama 2 13b   Llama 2 70b   MosaicML MPT 30b   Tiiuae Falcon 40b


 Toxic Prompts

 RA(R-FSD @M ) (Gen Only)                       3            2             4                1                    5
 R-FSD @ P(Gen Only)                            2            3             4                1                    5
 RA(R-SSD @M ) (Gen Only)                       3            2             4                1                    5
 R-SSD@P (Gen Only)                             3            2             4                1                    5


 RA(R-FSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                    2            3             1                4                    5
 R-FSD @P(Prompt + Gen)                         2            3             1                4                    5
 RA(R-SSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                    2            3             1                4                    5
 R-SSD @P (Prompt + Gen)                        2            3             1                4                    5


 Non-Toxic Prompts

 RA(R-FSD @M) (Gen Only)                        1            2             4                3                    5
 R-FSD @P (Gen Only)                            1            2             3                4                    5
 RA(R-SSD @M) (Gen Only)                        1            2             3                4                    5
 R-SSD @P (Gen Only)                            1            2             3                4                    5


 RA( R-FSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                   3            2             4                1                    5
 R-FSD @ P (Prompt + Gen)                       1            2             4                3                    5
 RA(R-SSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                    1            2             3                4                    5
 R-SSD @P (Prompt + Gen)                        1            2             4                3                    5


 All Combined (Toxic + Non-Toxic Prompts)

 RA(R-FSD @M) (Gen Only)                        2            3             5                1                    4
 R-FSD @P (Gen Only)                            2            3             5                1                    4
 RA(R-SSD @M) (Gen Only)                        2            3             5                1                    4
 R-SSD @P (Gen Only)                            2            3             5                1                    4


 RA(R-FSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                    3            4             5                1                    2
 RA(R-FSD @M) (Prompt + Gen)                    3            4             5                1                    2
 R-SSD @P (Prompt + Gen)                        3            4             5                1                    2
 R-SSD @P (Prompt + Gen)                        3            4             5                1                    2



                                            Table 4: Toxicity Ranking

 Scenario                    Llama 2 7b     Llama 2 13b      Llama 2 70b       MosaicML MPT 30b     Tiiuae Falcon 40b


 Non Toxic Prompts

 Identity Attack Metric
 Gen evaluation

 Mean - Sigma                      1                3             4                    2                     5
 Mean - Gamma                      2                3             4                    1                     5
 Mean - nTvAR                      2                3             4                    1                     5
 SSD                               2                3             4                    1                     5
 Threat Metric
 Prompt + Gen evaluation

 Mean - Sigma                      1                3             2                    4                     5
 Mean - Gamma                      1                2             3                    5                     4
 Mean - nTvAR                      1                2             3                    5                     4
 SSD                               1                2             3                    5                     4

Table 5: Inconsistency of Mean - Sigma on Toxicity Metrics with SSD and other mean-risk models.
This is a due to the fact the metric evaluated may a have a fat left tail see Figures 10 and 12.


                                                           31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Identity Attack Metric distribution computed on Prompt+Generation output of Highly
Toxic Prompts


Figure 11: Threat Metric distribution computed on Prompt+Generation output of Less Toxic
Prompts


                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Identity Attack Metric distribution computed on Generation output of Less Toxic Prompts


                                               33
