Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A NIMATE D IFF : A NIMATE YOUR P ERSONALIZED
T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS WITHOUT
S PECIFIC T UNING
 Yuwei Guo1 Ceyuan Yang2† Anyi Rao3 Zhengyang Liang2 Yaohui Wang2
 Yu Qiao2 Maneesh Agrawala3 Dahua Lin1,2 Bo Dai2
 1
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
 3
   Stanford University


 (cartoon) 1boy, dark skin, play-    (oil painting) black pearl pirate   (realistic) a Lamborghini on
 ing guitar, concert, . . .          ship, night time, sea, . . .        road, fireworks, high detail, . . .


           zoom-in                   rolling             zoom-out + rolling              right + up

Figure 1: AnimateDiff directly turns existing personalized text-to-image (T2I) models to the corre-
sponding animation generators with a pre-trained motion module. First row: results by combining
AnimateDiff with three personalized T2Is in different domains; Second row: results of further com-
bining AnimateDiff with MotionLoRA (s) to achieve shot type controls. Best viewed with Acrobat
Reader. Click the images to play the animation clips.

                                               A BSTRACT
            With the advance of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion)
            and corresponding personalization techniques such as DreamBooth and LoRA,
            everyone can manifest their imagination into high-quality images at an afford-
            able cost. However, adding motion dynamics to existing high-quality personal-
            ized T2Is and enabling them to generate animations remains an open challenge.
            In this paper, we present AnimateDiff, a practical framework for animating per-
            sonalized T2I models without requiring model-specific tuning. At the core of
            our framework is a plug-and-play motion module that can be trained once and
            seamlessly integrated into any personalized T2Is originating from the same base
            T2I. Through our proposed training strategy, the motion module effectively learns
            transferable motion priors from real-world videos. Once trained, the motion mod-
            ule can be inserted into a personalized T2I model to form a personalized animation
   †
       Corresponding Author.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         generator. We further propose MotionLoRA, a lightweight fine-tuning technique
         for AnimateDiff that enables a pre-trained motion module to adapt to new motion
         patterns, such as different shot types, at a low training and data collection cost. We
         evaluate AnimateDiff and MotionLoRA on several public representative personal-
         ized T2I models collected from the community. The results demonstrate that our
         approaches help these models generate temporally smooth animation clips while
         preserving the visual quality and motion diversity. Codes and pre-trained weights
         are available at https://github.com/guoyww/AnimateDiff.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022) have greatly empowered artists and amateurs to create visual content using
text prompts. To further stimulate the creativity of existing T2I models, lightweight personalization
methods, such as DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) have been proposed.
These methods enable customized fine-tuning on small datasets using consumer-grade hardware
such as a laptop with an RTX3080, thereby allowing users to adapt a base T2I model to new do-
mains and improve visual quality at a relatively low cost. Consequently, a large community of
AI artists and amateurs has contributed numerous personalized models on model-sharing platforms
such as Civitai (2022) and Hugging Face (2022). While these personalized T2I models can generate
remarkable visual quality, their outputs are limited to static images. On the other hand, the ability
to generate animations is more desirable in real-world production, such as in the movie and cartoon
industries. In this work, we aim to directly transform existing high-quality personalized T2I models
into animation generators without requiring model-specific fine-tuning, which is often impractical
in terms of computation and data collection costs for amateur users.
We present AnimateDiff, an effective pipeline for addressing the problem of animating personalized
T2Is while preserving their visual quality and domain knowledge. The core of AnimateDiff is an
approach for training a plug-and-play motion module that learns reasonable motion priors from
video datasets, such as WebVid-10M (Bain et al., 2021). At inference time, the trained motion
module can be directly integrated into personalized T2Is and produce smooth and visually appealing
animations without requiring specific tuning. The training of the motion module in AnimateDiff
consists of three stages. Firstly, we fine-tune a domain adapter on the base T2I to align with the
visual distribution of the target video dataset. This preliminary step guarantees the motion module
concentrates on learning the motion priors rather than pixel-level details from the training videos.
Secondly, we inflate the base T2I together with the domain adapter and introduce a newly initialized
motion module for motion modeling. We then optimize this module on videos while keeping the
domain adapter and base T2I weights fixed. By doing so, the motion module learns generalized
motion priors and can, via module insertion, enable other personalized T2Is to generate smooth and
appealing animations aligned with their personalized domains. The third stage of AnimateDiff, also
dubbed as MotionLoRA, aims to adapt the pre-trained motion module to specific motion patterns
with a small number of reference videos and training iterations. We achieve this by fine-tuning
the motion module with the aid of Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021). Remarkably,
adapting to a new motion pattern can be achieved with as few as 50 reference videos. Moreover, a
MotionLoRA model requires only approximately 30M of additional storage space, further enhancing
the efficiency of model sharing. This efficiency is particularly valuable for users who are unable to
bear the expensive costs of pre-training but desire to fine-tune the motion module for specific effects.
We evaluate the performance of AnimateDiff and MotionLoRA on a diverse set of personalized T2I
models collected from model-sharing platforms (Civitai, 2022; Hugging Face, 2022). These models
encompass a wide spectrum of domains, ranging from 2D cartoons to realistic photographs, thereby
forming a comprehensive benchmark for our evaluation. The results of our experiments demon-
strate promising outcomes. In practice, we also found that a Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
architecture along the temporal axis is adequate for capturing appropriate motion priors. We also
demonstrate that our motion module can be seamlessly integrated with existing content-controlling
approaches (Zhang et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2023) such as ControlNet without requiring additional
training, enabling AnimateDiff for controllable animation generation.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In summary, (1) we present AnimateDiff, a practical pipeline that enables the animation generation
ability of any personalized T2Is without specific fine-tuning; (2) we verify that a Transformer archi-
tecture is adequate for modeling motion priors, which provides valuable insights for video genera-
tion; (3) we propose MotionLoRA, a lightweight fine-tuning technique to adapt pre-trained motion
modules to new motion patterns; (4) we comprehensively evaluate our approach with representative
community models and compare it with both academic baselines and commercial tools such as Gen-
2 (2023) and Pika Labs (2023). Furthermore, we showcase its compatibility with existing works for
controllable generation.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Text-to-image diffusion models. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Song et al., 2020) for text-to-image (T2I) generation (Gu et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2023; Podell
et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022b; Ramesh et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022) have gained
significant attention in both academic and non-academic communities recently. GLIDE (Nichol
et al., 2021) introduced text conditions and demonstrated that incorporating classifier guidance leads
to more pleasing results. DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) improves text-image alignment by lever-
aging the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) joint feature space. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) incorporates
a large language model (Raffel et al., 2020) and a cascade architecture to achieve photorealistic re-
sults. Latent Diffusion Model (Rombach et al., 2022), also known as Stable Diffusion, moves the
diffusion process to the latent space of an auto-encoder to enhance efficiency. eDiff-I (Balaji et al.,
2022) employs an ensemble of diffusion models specialized for different generation stages.
Personalizing T2I models. To facilitate the creation with pre-trained T2Is, many works focus on
efficient model personalization (Shi et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2022; Kumari et al.,
2023), i.e., introducing concepts or styles to the base T2I using reference images. The most straight-
forward approach to achieve this is complete fine-tuning of the model. Despite its potential to
significantly enhance overall quality, this practice can lead to catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; French, 1999) when the reference image set is small. Instead, DreamBooth (Ruiz et al.,
2023) fine-tunes the entire network with preservation loss and uses only a few images. Textual In-
version (Gal et al., 2022) optimize a token embedding for each new concept. Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) facilitates the above fine-tuning process by introducing additional LoRA
layers to the base T2I and optimizing only the weight residuals. There are also encoder-based ap-
proaches that address the personalization problem (Gal et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023). In our work,
we focus on tuning-based methods, including overall fine-tuning, DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023),
and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), as they preserve the original feature space of the base T2I.
Animating personalized T2Is. There are not many existing works regarding animating personal-
ized T2Is. Text2Cinemagraph (Mahapatra et al., 2023) proposed to generate cinematography via
flow prediction. In the field of video generation, it is common to extend a pre-trained T2I with
temporal structures. Existing works (Esser et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022a; Singer et al., 2022; Ho
et al., 2022b,a; Ruan et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023b,a; Wang et al., 2023b; Hong
et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023) mostly update all parameters and modify the feature space of the
original T2I and is not compatible with personalized ones. Align-Your-Latents (Blattmann et al.,
2023) shows that the frozen image layers in a general video generator can be personalized. Re-
cently, some video generation approaches have shown promising results in animating a personalized
T2I model. Tune-a-Video (Wu et al., 2023) fine-tune a small number of parameters on a single
video. Text2Video-Zero (Khachatryan et al., 2023) introduces a training-free method to animate a
pre-trained T2I via latent wrapping based on a pre-defined affine matrix.

3   P RELIMINARY
We introduce the preliminary of Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), the base T2I model used in
our work, and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021), which helps understand the domain
adapter (Sec. 4.1) and MotionLoRA (Sec. 4.3) in AnimateDiff.
Stable Diffusion. We chose Stable Diffusion (SD) as the base T2I model in this paper since it is
open-sourced and has a well-developed community with many high-quality personalized T2I models
for evaluation. SD performs the diffusion process within the latent space of a pre-trained autoen-


                                                  3
                                       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       coder E(·) and D(·). In training, an encoded image z0 = E(x0 ) is perturbed to zt by the forword
                                       diffusion:
                                                                     \label {eq:noise} z_t = \sqrt {\bar {\alpha _t}}z_0 + \sqrt {1-\bar {\alpha _t}}\epsilon ,~\epsilon \sim \mathcal {N}(0, \mathit {I}),  (1)
                                       for t = 1, . . . , T , where pre-defined ᾱt determines the noise strength at step t. The denoising
                                       network ϵθ (·) learns to reverse this process by predicting the added noise, encouraged by an MSE
                                       loss:
                                                                   \label {eq:objective} \mathcal {L} = \mathbb {E}_{\mathcal {E}(x_0), y, \epsilon \sim \mathcal {N}(0, \mathit {I}), t}\left \lbrack \lVert \epsilon - \epsilon _\theta (z_t, t, \tau _\theta (y)) \rVert _2^2 \right \rbrack ,  (2)
                                       where y is the text prompt corresponding to x0 ; τθ (·) is a text encoder mapping the prompt to a
                                       vector sequence. In SD, ϵθ (·) is implemented as a UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) consisting of
                                       pairs of down/up sample blocks at four resolution levels, as well as Component
                                                                                                                a middle block.  Each network
                                                                                                                          Modules of
ion Priors                             3. (optional)
                                       block  consists Adapt  to New
                                                       of ResNet  (He Patterns
                                                                       et al., 2016), spatial self-attention layers, AnimateDiff
                                                                                                                     and cross-attention layers
<prompts>                              that introduce text conditions.
                                                        <prompts>
                                                                                                                                                                                          Training
                            Low-rank adaptation (LoRA). LoRA (Hu et al., 2021)Pipeline    is an approach that accelerates the fine-
                            tuning of large models and is first proposed for language model adaptation. Instead of retraining
                                                                                                          Insertion
                            all model parameters, LoRA adds pairs of rank-decomposition matrices and optimizes only these
                           5~20 Ref.
                            newly
                            Videos introduced weights. By limiting the trainable parameters and keeping the original weights
                            frozen, LoRA is less likely to cause catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Concretely,
dule (Temporal Transformer) the rank-decomposition    matrices serve as the residual of the pre-trained model weights W ∈ Rm×n .
                                    Pretrained Image Layers (frozen)
                            The new   modelEraser
                                    Domain    weight  with LoRA
                                                  (trainable       is 1)
                                                             at stage
      Self-           Proj. Out
    Attention      (zero initialize)                    Motion Module (trainable at stage 2)                                                                          Iterative Denoise
+                                                                                      \mathcal {W}' = \mathcal {W} + \Delta \mathcal {W} = \mathcal {W} + AB^T,
                                                        Motion LoRA (trainable at stage    3)                                                                                                                                                                                                 (3)
 Enc.       ×N                                                                                                                                                 Image Layers of Personalized T2I
                                       where A ∈ Rm×r , B ∈ Rn×r are a pair of rank-decomposition matrices, r is a hyper-parameter,
                                       which is referred to as the rank of LoRA layers. In practice, LoRA is only applied to attention layers,
                                       further reducing the cost and storage for model fine-tuning.


                                       4           A NIMATE D IFF

n Priors                             3.The core of our
                                        (optional)     method
                                                   Adapt      is learning
                                                         to New   Patternstransferable mo-                                                                                                                                 Motion Modules of
                                       tion priors from video data, which can be applied to                                                                                                                                  AnimateDiff
<prompts>                              personalized T2Is<prompts>
                                                            without specific tuning. As shown                                                                                            Training
                                       in Fig. 2, at inference time, our motion module (blue)                                                                                            Pipeline
                                       and the optional MotionLoRA (green) can be directly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Module Insert
                                       inserted into a personalized T2I to constitute the an-
                                     20~50 Ref. generator, which subsequently generates ani-
                                       imation
                                       Videos
                                       mations via an iterative denoising process.
e (Temporal Transformer)               We achieve   this Image
                                              Pretrained by training
                                                                Layers three   components of Ani-
                                                                        (frozen)
                                              Domain
                                       mateDiff,      Reliever
                                                  namely       (trainable
                                                           domain          at stage
                                                                    adapter,        1) module, and
                                                                               motion              zt                                  zt−1
   Self-            Proj. Out
 Attention       (zero initialize)            Motion Module (trainable at stage 2)                            Iterative Denoise
                                       MotionLoRA.     The domain adapter in Sec. 4.1 is only
                                              Motion LoRA      (trainable at stage 3)
nc.     ×N                             used in the training to alleviate the negative effects          Image Layers of Personalized T2I
                                       caused by the visual distribution gap between the base
                                       T2I pre-training data and our video training data; the         Figure 2: Inference pipeline.
                                       motion module in Sec. 4.2 is for learning the motion
                                       priors; and the MotionLoRA in Sec. 4.3, which is optional in the case of general animation, is for
                                       adapting pre-trained motion modules to new motion patterns. Sec.4.4 elaborates on the training
                                       (Fig. 3) and inference of AnimateDiff.

                                       4.1            A LLEVIATE N EGATIVE E FFECTS FROM T RAINING DATA WITH D OMAIN A DAPTER

                                       Due to the difficulty in collection, the visual quality of publicly available video training datasets
                                       is much lower than their image counterparts. For example, the contents of the video dataset We-
                                       bVid (Bain et al., 2021) are mostly real-world recordings, whereas the image dataset LAION-
                                       Aesthetic (Schuhmann et al., 2022) contains higher-quality contents, including artistic paintings
                                       and professional photography. Moreover, when treated individually as images, each video frame
                                       can contain motion blur, compression artifacts, and watermarks. Therefore, there is a non-negligible
                                       quality domain gap between the high-quality image dataset used to train the base T2I and the target


                                                                                                                                                                    4
 Pretrained                                            Motion Module (Temporal Transformer)                                        Pretrained Image Layers (frozen)
 Image Layers   Self-/Cross-Attention
                                                                                                                                   Domain Adapter (trainable at stage 1)          zt
                Q = W Q z + Adapter(z)                                           Self-             Proj. Out
 ResNet Block               …                                Proj. In          Attention        (zero initialize)                  Motion Module (trainable at stage 2)                        Iterative De
                z = Wproj. z + Adapter(z)                              +                                                           MotionLoRA      (trainable at stage 3)
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024                     Position Enc.         ×N                                                                                              Image Layers of P


 1. Alleviate Negative Effects                        2. Learn Motion Priors                                                 3. (optional) Adapt to New Patterns
                 <prompts>                                                        <prompts>                                                          <prompts>


                                                  sample


                                                         Video                                                              20~50 Ref.
Sampled                                                 Dataset                                                               Videos
 Frames

      Pretrained                                              Motion Module (Temporal Transformer)                                      MSE Loss
      Image Layers   Self-/Cross-Attention                                                                                              Pretrained Image Layers (frozen)
                     Q = W Q z + Adapter(z)                                            Self-              Proj. Out                     Domain Adapter (trainable at stage 1)
      ResNet Block               …                                  Proj. In         Attention         (zero initialize)
                                                                              +                                                         Motion Module (trainable at stage 2)
                     z = Wproj. z + Adapter(z)                                                                                          MotionLoRA
                                                                        Position Enc.         ×N                                                        (trainable at stage 3)



Figure 3: Training pipeline of AnimateDiff. AnimateDiff consists of three training stages for the
corresponding component modules. Firstly, a domain adapter (Sec. 4.1) is trained to alleviate the
negative effects caused by training videos. Secondly, a motion module (Sec. 4.2) is inserted and
trained on videos to learn general motion priors. Lastly, MotionLoRA (Sec. 4.3) is trained on a few
reference videos to adapt the pre-trained motion module to new motion patterns.

video dataset we use for learning the motion priors. We argue that such a gap can limit the quality
of the animation generation pipeline when trained directly on the raw video data.
To avoid learning this quality discrepancy as part of our motion module and preserve the knowledge
of the base T2I, we propose to fit the domain information to a separate network, dubbed as
domain adapter. We drop the domain adapter at inference time and show that this practice helps
reduce the negative effects caused by the domain gap mentioned above. We implement the domain
adapter layers with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) and insert them into the self-/cross-attention layers in
the base T2I, as shown in Fig. 3. Take query (Q) projection as an example. The internal feature z
after projection becomes

                                 \label {eq:domain_adapter} Q = \mathcal {W}^Qz + \text {AdapterLayer}(z) = \mathcal {W}^Qz + \alpha \cdot AB^Tz,                           (4)
where α = 1 is a scalar and can be adjusted to other values at inference time (set to 0 to remove the
effects of domain adapter totally). We then optimize only the parameters of the domain adapter on
static frames randomly sampled from video datasets with the same objective in Eq. (2).

4.2    L EARN M OTION P RIORS WITH M OTION M ODULE

To model motion dynamics along the temporal dimension on top of a pre-trained T2I, we must 1)
inflate the 2-dimensional diffusion model to deal with 3-dimensional video data and 2) design a
sub-module to enable efficient information exchange along the temporal axis.
Network Inflation. The pre-trained image layers in the base T2I model capture high-quality con-
tent priors. To utilize the knowledge, a preferable way for network inflation is to let these image
layers independently deal with video frames. To achieve this, we adopt a practice similar to recent
works (Ho et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2023; Blattmann et al., 2023), and modify the model so that it
takes 5D video tensors x ∈ Rb×c×f ×h×w as input, where b and f represent batch axis and frame-
time axis respectively. When the internal feature maps go through image layers, the temporal axis
f is ignored by being reshaped into the b axis, allowing the network to process each frame inde-
pendently. We then reshape the feature map to the 5D tensor after the image layer. On the other
hand, our newly inserted motion module ignores the spatial axis by reshaping h, w into b and then
reshaping back after the module.
Module Design. Recent works on video generation have explored many designs for temporal mod-
eling. In AnimateDiff, we adopt the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture as our motion
module design, and make minor modifications to adapt it to operate along the temporal axis, which
we refer to as “temporal Transformer” in the following sections. We experimentally found this
design is adequate for modeling motion priors. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the temporal Transformer
consists of several self-attention blocks along the temporal axis, with sinusoidal position encoding
to encode the location of each frame in the animation. As mentioned above, the input of the motion
module is the reshaped feature map whose spatial dimensions are merged into the batch axis. When
we divide the reshaped feature map along the temporal axis, it can be regarded as vector sequences
with length of f , i.e., {z1 , ..., zf ; zi ∈ R(b×h×w)×c }. The vectors will then be projected and go


                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


through several self-attention blocks, i.e.
                         z_{out} = \text {Attention}(Q,K,V)=\text {Softmax}(QK^T / \sqrt {c})\cdot V,  (5)
                   Q           K                      V
where Q = W z, K = W z, and V = W z are three separated projections. The attention mech-
anism enables the generation of the current frame to incorporate information from other frames.
As a result, instead of generating each frame individually, the T2I model inflated with our motion
module learns to capture the changes of visual content over time, which constitute the motion dy-
namics in an animation clip. Note that sinusoidal position encoding added before the self-attention
is essential; otherwise, the module is not aware of the frame order in the animation. To avoid any
harmful effects that the additional module might introduce, we zero initialize (Zhang et al., 2023)
the output projection layers of the temporal Transformer and add a residual connection so that the
motion module is an identity mapping at the beginning of training.

4.3    A DAPT TO N EW M OTION PATTERNS WITH M OTION L O RA

While the pre-trained motion module captures general motion priors, a question arises when we
need to effectively adapt it to new motion patterns such as camera zooming, panning and rolling,
etc., with a small number of reference videos and training iterations. Such efficiency is essential for
users who cannot afford expensive pre-training costs but would like to fine-tune the motion module
for specific effects. Here comes the last stage of AnimateDiff, also dubbed as MotionLoRA (Fig. 3),
an efficient fine-tuning approach for motion personalization. Considering the architecture of the
motion module and the limited number of reference videos, we add LoRA layers to the self-attention
layers of the motion module in the inflated model described in Sec. 4.2, then train these LoRA layers
on the reference videos of new motion patterns.
We experiment with several shot types and get the reference videos via rule-based data augmenta-
tion. For instance, to get videos with zooming effects, we augment the videos by gradually reducing
(zoom-in) or enlarging (zoom-out) the cropping area of video frames along the temporal axis. We
demonstrate that our MotionLoRA can achieve promising results even with as few as 20 ∼ 50 ref-
erence videos, 2,000 training iterations (around 1 ∼ 2 hours) as well as about 30M storage space,
enabling efficient model tuning and sharing among users. Benefited by the low-rank property, Mo-
tionLoRA also has the composition capability. Namely, individually trained MotionLoRA models
can be combined to achieve composed motion effects at inference time.

4.4    A NIMATE D IFF IN P RACTICE

Training. As illustrated in Fig. 3, AnimateDiff consists of three trainable component modules to
learn transferable motion priors. Their training objectives are slightly different. The domain adapter
is trained with the original objective as in Eq. (2). The motion module and MotionLoRA, as part
of an animation generator, use a similar objective with minor modifications to accommodate higher
dimension video data. Concretely, a video data batch x1:f  0    ∈ Rb×c×f ×h×w is first encoded into
                  1:f
the latent codes z0 frame-wisely via the pre-trained auto-encoder of SD. The latent codes are then
noised using the defined forward diffusion schedule as in Eq. (1)
                                    z_t^{1:f} = \sqrt {\bar {\alpha _t}}z_0^{1:f} + \sqrt {1-\bar {\alpha _t}}\epsilon ^{1:f}.  (6)
The inflated model inputs the noised latent codes and corresponding text prompts and predicts the
added noises. The final training objective of our motion modeling module is:
                              \mathcal {L} = \mathbb {E}_{\mathcal {E}(x_0^{1:f}), y, \epsilon ^{1:f}\sim \mathcal {N}(0, \mathit {I}), t}\left \lbrack \lVert \epsilon - \epsilon _\theta (z_t^{1:f}, t, \tau _\theta (y)) \rVert _2^2 \right \rbrack .    (7)

It’s worth noting that when training the domain adapter, the motion module, and the MotionLoRA,
parameters outside the trainable part remain frozen.
Inference. At inference time (Fig. 2), the personalized T2I model will first be inflated in the same
way discussed in Section 4.2, then injected with the motion module for general animation genera-
tion, and the optional MotionLoRA for generating animation with personalized motion. As for the
domain adapter, instead of simply dropping it during the inference time, in practice, we can also in-
ject it into the personalized T2I model and adjust its contribution by changing the scaler α in Eq. (4).
An ablation study on the value of α is conducted in experiments. Finally, the animation frames can
be obtained by performing the reverse diffusion process and decoding the latent codes.


                                                                                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      RCNZ Cartoon 3d                TUSUN                        epiC Realism                 ToonYou


 a golden Labrador, nat-      cute Pallas’s Cat walk-        photo of 24 y.o woman,     coastline, lighthouse,
 ural lighting, . . .         ing in the snow, . . .         night street, . . .        waves, sunlight, . . .
         MeinaMix                 Realistic Vision                   MoXin                    Oil painting


 1girl, white hair, purple    a cyberpunk city street,       a bird sits on a branch,   sunset, orange sky, fish-
 eyes, dress, petals, . . .   night time, . . .              ink painting, . . .        ing boats, waves, . . .

Figure 4: Qualitative Result. Each sample corresponds to a distinct personalized T2I. Best viewed
with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to play the animation clips.


5     E XPERIMENTS
We implement AnimateDiff upon Stable Diffusion V1.5 and train motion module using the WebVid-
10M (Bain et al., 2021) dataset. Detailed configurations can be found in supplementary materials.
5.1 Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Evaluate on community models. We evaluated the AnimateDiff with a diverse set of representative
personalized T2Is collected from Civitai (2022). These personalized T2Is encompass a wide range
of domains, thus serving as a comprehensive benchmark. Since personalized domains in these T2Is
only respond to certain “trigger words”, we abstain from using common text prompts but refer to the
model homepage to construct the evaluation prompts. In Fig. 4, we show eight qualitative results of
AnimateDiff. Each sample corresponds to a distinct personalized T2I. In the second row of Figure
1, we present the outcomes obtained by integrating AnimateDiff with MotionLoRA to achieve shot
type controls. The last two samples exhibit the composition capability of MotionLoRA, achieved
by linearly combining the individually trained weights.
Compare with baselines. In the absence of existing methods specifically designed for animating
personalized T2Is, we compare our method with two recent works in video generation that can be
adapted for this task: 1) Text2Video-Zero (Khachatryan et al., 2023) and 2) Tune-a-Video (Wu
et al., 2023). We also compare AnimateDiff with two commercial tools: 3) Gen-2 (2023) for text-
to-video generation, and 4) Pika Labs (2023) for image animation. The results are shown in Fig. 5.

5.2    Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON

We conduct the quantitative comparison through user study and CLIP metrics. The comparison
focuses on three key aspects: text alignment, domain similarity, and motion smoothness. The results
are shown in Table 1. Detailed implementations can be found in supplementary materials.
User study. In the user study, we generate animations using all three methods based on the same
personalized T2I models. Participants are then asked to individually rank the results based on the


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Tune-A-Video                    AnimateDiff                 T2V-Zero                     AnimateDiff


      a raccoon is playing guitar, soft lighting, . . .       a horse galloping on the street, best quality, . . .

Figure 5: Qualitative Comparison. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to play the
animation clips.

          Table 1: Quantitative comparison. A higher score indicates superior performance.
                                           User Study (↑)                         CLIP Metric (↑)
       Method
                                   Text.    Domain. Smooth.               Text.     Domain. Smooth.
       Text2Video-Zero             1.620      2.620      1.560            32.04      84.84      96.57
       Tune-a-Video                2.180      1.100      1.615            35.98      80.68      97.42
       Ours                        2.210      2.280      2.825            31.39      87.29      98.00


above three aspects. We use the Average User Ranking (AUR) as a preference metric where a higher
score indicates superior performance. Note that the corresponding prompts and images are provided
for reference for text alignment and domain similarity evaluation.
CLIP metric. We also employed the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) metric, following the approach
taken by previous studies (Wu et al., 2023; Khachatryan et al., 2023). When evaluating domain
similarity, it is important to note that the CLIP score was computed between the animation frames
and the reference images generated using the personalized T2Is.

5.3    A BLATIVE S TUDY

Domain adapter. To investigate the impact of the domain adapter in AnimateDiff, we conducted
a study by adjusting the scaler in the adapter layers during inference, ranging from 1 (full impact)
to 0 (complete removal). As illustrated in Figure 6, as the scaler of the adapter decreases, there is
an improvement in overall visual quality, accompanied by a reduction in the visual content distri-
bution learned from the video dataset (the watermark in the case of WebVid (Bain et al., 2021)).
These results indicate the successful role of the domain adapter in enhancing the visual quality of
AnimateDiff by alleviating the motion module from learning the visual distribution gap.
Motion module design. We compare our motion module design of the temporal Transformer with
its full convolution counterpart, which is motivated by the fact that both designs are widely em-
ployed in recent works on video generation. We replace the temporal attention with 1D temporal
convolution and ensured that the two model parameters were closely aligned. As depicted in sup-
plementary materials, the convolutional motion module aligns all frames to be identical but does not
incorporate any motion compared to the Transformer architecture.
Efficiency of MotionLoRA. The efficiency of MotionLoRA in AnimateDiff was examined in terms
of parameter efficiency and data efficiency. Parameter efficiency is crucial for efficient model train-
ing and sharing among users, while data efficiency is essential for real-world applications where
collecting an adequate number of reference videos for specific motion patterns may be challenging.
To investigate these aspects, we trained multiple MotionLoRA models with varying parameter scales
and reference video quantities. In Fig. 7, the first two samples demonstrate that MotionLoRA is ca-
pable of learning new camera motions (e.g., zoom-in) with a small parameter scale while maintain-
ing comparable motion quality. Furthermore, even with a modest number of reference videos (e.g.,
N = 50), the model successfully learns the desired motion patterns. However, when the number of
reference videos is excessively limited (e.g., N = 5), significant degradation in quality is observed,


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    scaler
    alpha == 1.0
             1.0                                                                           scaler
                                                                                           alpha == 0.0
                                                                                                    0.0

Figure 6: Ablation on domain adapter. We adjust the scaler of the adapter from 1 to 0 to gradually
remove its effects. In this figure, we show the first frame of the generated animation.


    alpha = 1.0                                                                            alpha = 0.0
    alpha = 1.0                                                                            alpha = 0.0


     rank=2 (∼1M)    rank=128 (∼36M)             N=5                 N=50               N=1000

Figure 7: Ablation on MotionLoRA’s efficiency. Two samples on the left: with different network
rank; Three samples on the right: with different numbers of reference videos. Best viewed with
  alpha = 1.0
Acrobat   Reader. Click the images to play the animation clips.                     alpha = 0.0



suggesting that MotionLoRA encounters difficulties in learning shared motion patterns and instead
relies on capturing texture information from the reference videos.

5.4      C ONTROLLABLE GENERATION .

The separated learning of visual content and
motion priors in AnimateDiff enables the di-
rect application of existing content control
approaches for controllable generation. To
demonstrate this capability, we combined An-
imateDiff with ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023)
to control the generation with extracted depth
map sequence. In contrast to recent video edit- city street, neon, fog, closeup portrait photo of young
ing techniques (Ceylan et al., 2023; Wang et al., woman in dark clothes, . . .
2023a) that employ DDIM (Song et al., 2020) Figure 8: Controllable generation. Best viewed
inversion to obtain smoothed latent sequences, with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to play the
we generate animations from randomly sam- animation clips.
pled noise. As illustrated in Figure 8, our re-
sults exhibit meticulous motion details (such as hair and facial expressions) and high visual quality.


6      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present AnimateDiff, a practical pipeline directly turning personalized text-to-
image (T2I) models for animation generation once and for all, without compromising quality or
losing pre-learned domain knowledge. To accomplish this, we design three component modules in
AnimateDiff to learn meaningful motion priors while alleviating visual quality degradation and en-
abling motion personalization with a lightweight fine-tuning technique named MotionLoRA. Once
trained, our motion module can be integrated into other personalized T2Is to generate animated
images with natural and coherent motions while remaining faithful to the personalized domain. Ex-
tensive evaluation with various personalized T2I models also validates the effectiveness and gener-
alizability of our AnimateDiff and MotionLoRA. Furthermore, we demonstrate the compatibility of
our method with existing content-controlling approaches, enabling controllable generation without
incurring additional training costs. Overall, AnimateDiff provides an effective baseline for person-
alized animation and holds significant potential for a wide range of applications.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   E THICS S TATEMENT

We strongly condemn the misuse of generative AI to create content that harms individuals or spreads
misinformation. However, we acknowledge the potential for our method to be misused since it
primarily focuses on animation and can generate human-related content. It is also important to
highlight that our method incorporates personalized text-to-image models developed by other artists.
These models may contain inappropriate content and can be used with our method.
To address these concerns, we uphold the highest ethical standards in our research, including ad-
hering to legal frameworks, respecting privacy rights, and encouraging the generation of positive
content. Furthermore, we believe that introducing an additional content safety checker, similar to
that in Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), could potentially resolve this issue.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide comprehensive implementation details for the training and inference of our method in
supplementary materials, aiming to enhance the reproducibility of our approach. We also make both
the code and pre-trained weights open-sourced to facilitate further investigation and exploration.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This project is funded in part by Shanghai AI Laboratory (P23KS00020, 2022ZD0160201), CUHK
Interdisciplinary AI Research Institute, and the Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
(CPIl) Ltd under the Innovation and Technology Commission (ITC)’s InnoHK.

R EFERENCES
Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video and
 image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
 on Computer Vision, pp. 1728–1738, 2021.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao Paul Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12688, 2023.
Civitai. Civitai. https://civitai.com/, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19822–19835, 2021.
Shuangrui Ding, Maomao Li, Tianyu Yang, Rui Qian, Haohang Xu, Qingyi Chen, Jue Wang,
  and Hongkai Xiong. Motion-aware contrastive video representation learning via foreground-
  background merging. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 9716–9726, 2022.
Ziyi Dong, Pengxu Wei, and Liang Lin. Dreamartist: Towards controllable one-shot text-to-image
  generation via contrastive prompt-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11337, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03011, 2023.

Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences,
  3(4):128–135, 1999.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-
  Or. Designing an encoder for fast personalization of text-to-image models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12228, 2023.

Gen-2. Gen-2: The next step forward for generative ai. https://research.runwayml.
  com/gen2/, 2023.

Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.

Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022b.

Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868, 2022.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Hugging Face. Huggingface. https://huggingface.co/, 2022.

Xuhui Jia, Yang Zhao, Kelvin CK Chan, Yandong Li, Han Zhang, Boqing Gong, Tingbo Hou,
  Huisheng Wang, and Yu-Chuan Su. Taming encoder for zero fine-tuning image customization
  with text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02642, 2023.

Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion mod-
  els are zero-shot video generators. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2023.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wei Li, Xue Xu, Xinyan Xiao, Jiachen Liu, Hu Yang, Guohao Li, Zhanpeng Wang, Zhifan Feng,
 Qiaoqiao She, Yajuan Lyu, et al. Upainting: Unified text-to-image diffusion generation with
 cross-modal guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16031, 2022.
Haoming Lu, Hazarapet Tunanyan, Kai Wang, Shant Navasardyan, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Humphrey Shi. Specialist diffusion: Plug-and-play sample-efficient fine-tuning of text-to-image
  diffusion models to learn any unseen style. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14267–14276, 2023.
Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10209–10218, 2023.
Aniruddha Mahapatra, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Text-guided synthesis of eulerian cinemagraphs, 2023.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Pika Labs. Pika labs. https://www.pika.art/, 2023.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation, 2015.
Ludan Ruan, Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Huiguo He, Bei Liu, Jianlong Fu, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Qin
  Jin, and Baining Guo. Mm-diffusion: Learning multi-modal diffusion models for joint audio and
  video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10219–10228, 2023.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b:
  An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.08402, 2022.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03411, 2023.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Wen Wang, Kangyang Xie, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, Yue Cao, Xinlong Wang, and Chunhua Shen. Zero-
 shot video editing using off-the-shelf image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17599,
 2023a.
Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi Wang, Ceyuan Yang, Yinan
  He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, Yuwei Guo, Tianxing Wu, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Cunjian
  Chen, Chen Change Loy, Bo Dai, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Lavie: High-quality video
  generation with cascaded latent diffusion models, 2023b.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721, 2023.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Jie Shi, Houqiang Li, Gong Ming, and Nan Duan. Drag-
  nuwa: Fine-grained control in video generation by integrating text, image, and trajectory. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.08089, 2023a.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan
  Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, et al. Nuwa-xl: Diffusion over diffusion for extremely
  long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12346, 2023b.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022a.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu,
  Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. Towards language-free training for text-to-image generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17907–
  17917, 2022b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Training. We utilize the WebVid-10M dataset (Bain et al., 2021), a large-scale video dataset con-
sisting of approximately 10.7 million text-video data pairs to train the motion module. This dataset
offers diverse motion categories, which significantly facilitates the learning process of the motion
module. We adopt a training resolution of 256 × 256 to balance training efficiency and motion
quality. To train the domain adapter, we randomly sample static frames and resize them to the target
resolution. For the motion module and MotionLoRA, we uniformly sample the videos at a stride of
4 to get video clips at a length of 16. We use a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and train the motion module
with 16 NVIDIA A100s for 5 epochs.
Inference. As described in the main paper, at inference, we first inflate a personalized text-to-image
model and insert the pre-trained motion module to constitute the corresponding animation generator.
In our experiment setup, we generate animations at a resolution of 512 × 512 using a DDIM (Song
et al., 2020) sampler with classifier-free guidance. We referred to the model’s official web page to
determine the denoising hyperparameters (guidance scale, LoRA scaler, etc.) and generally adopted
the same settings.
                             Table 2: Community models for evaluation.
                       Model Name               Domain             Type
                       ToonYou1               2D Cartoon     T2I Base Model
                       MeinaMix2               2D Anime      T2I Base Model
                       Lyriel3                  Stylistic    T2I Base Model
                       RCNZ Cartoon 3d4       3D Cartoon     T2I Base Model
                       epiC Realism5            Realistic    T2I Base Model
                       Realistic Vision6        Realistic    T2I Base Model
                       Oil painting7            Stylistic        LoRA
                       MoXin8                   Stylistic        LoRA
                       TUSUN9                   Concept          LoRA

Models for evaluation. To ensure a comprehensive benchmark, we selected nine representative
personalized T2I models from Civitai (2022), a model-sharing platform that enables artists to upload
their creations. As illustrated in Table 2, these models encompass diverse domains such as 2D anime,
stylistic painting, and realistic photographic images. They also cover a wide range of subjects,
including portraits, animals, landscapes, etc.. This selection ensures a comprehensive evaluation of
our approach across various domains and subjects.
Baselines adaptation. To adapt the two academic baselines for personalized animation genera-
tion, we followed the recommended best practices in the respective papers and performed parameter
tuning on a case-by-case basis. For Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2023), we use a reference video on
the project’s webpage and fine-tune the network after replacing the T2I backbone with a person-
alized one, as suggested in the paper. Regarding Text2Video-Zero (Khachatryan et al., 2023), we
directly generate video clips upon the personalized T2Is without any modifications. In addition,
we conducted qualitative comparisons with two commercial tools for video generation and image
animation, namely Gen-2 (2023) and Pika Labs (2023). For Gen2, we employed personalized T2I
images as image prompts to generate the corresponding videos. As for Pika Labs, we utilized it to
animate still images generated by the personalized T2Is.
    1
      https://civitai.com/models/30240/toonyou
    2
      https://civitai.com/models/7240?modelVersionId=119057
    3
      https://civitai.com/models/22922/lyriel
    4
      https://civitai.com/models/66347?modelVersionId=82547
    5
      https://civitai.com/models/25694?modelVersionId=143906
    6
      https://civitai.com/models/4201?modelVersionId=130072
    7
      https://civitai.com/models/84542/oil-paintingoil-brush-stroke
    8
      https://civitai.com/models/12597/moxin
    9
      https://civitai.com/models/33194/leosams-pallass-catmanul-lora


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (SD1.5) Close up of        (SD1.5) Sunset              (SD1.5) An astronaut   (SD1.5) A bigfoot
      grapes on table.     time-lapse at the beach.           flying in space.        walking.

Figure 9: Results on base T2I backbone. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to
play the animation clips.

User study. To ensure a fair comparison between our method and the baselines, we generated 20
animations for each method without cherry-picking, resulting in 20 sets of triple pairs. Subsequently,
we conducted a user study involving ten participants. Each participant is presented with the three
samples generated by different methods at one time and asked to rank them based on three specific
aspects: text alignment, domain similarity, and motion smoothness. To evaluate text alignment, we
provide the corresponding text prompt to the users and request them to rank the samples accordingly.
To assess domain similarity, we initially generate reference images using the same personalized
T2I. These reference images are then presented to the users, who are asked to rate the animations
based on their perceived similarity to the reference images. Regarding motion smoothness, users are
instructed to rank the animations based on the consistency of the motion.
CLIP metric. Using the generated animations, we first extract the CLIP image embeddings of each
frame and then compute the cosine similarity under different settings. To assess text alignment, we
computed the average similarity between the prompt embedding and the embeddings of individual
frames. For evaluating domain similarity, we computed the CLIP score between the reference im-
ages and the frames of the animations. To measure motion smoothness, we calculated the similarity
between all pairs of video frames and reported the average number.


B     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS

B.1    V ISUAL Q UALITIES ON BASE T2I.

By integrating the motion module with the base T2I that the motion module is pre-trained upon, i.e.,
Stable Diffusion V1.5, AnimateDiff demonstrates capabilities in general T2V generation. We show-
case such ability by generating videos with commonly used textual prompts in previous works (Zhou
et al., 2022a; Blattmann et al., 2023). As illustrated in Fig. 9, without the enhancement from per-
sonalized T2I models, the domain of the synthetic videos corresponds closely with the pre-training
dataset WebVid-10M Bain et al. (2021).

B.2    D OMAIN A DAPTER V ISUALIZATION

To further validate the effectiveness of the domain adapter, we conduct an additional ablative study
where the motion module is trained with the domain adapter entirely removed from the pipeline.
We qualitatively compare the personalized T2I animation results upon three baselines: (1) training
without adapter; (2) full pipeline with scaler α set to 1; (3) full pipeline with scaler α set to 0.
As shown in Fig. 10, when the domain adapter is completely removed from the training pipeline,
visual attributes inherent to the training dataset, specifically watermarks, emerge in the synthetic
animations (1st row). This arises due to the intertwining of visual appearance and motion learning
during the motion module’s training phase, resulting in the watermark pattern being learned by
the motion module and subsequently transferred to other personalized T2I backbones. Similarly,
watermarks appear when the adapter exerts its full impact (2nd row). In contrast, by fitting the
visual distribution to a separate domain adapter and eliminating it during inference, our full pipeline


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   train w/o adapter        full pipeline, α = 1        full pipeline, α = 0

Figure 10: Abaltions on domain adapter. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to
play the animation clips.


    w/o scale-up training      w/ scale-up training        w/o scale-up training      w/ scale-up training

Figure 11: Ablations on scale-up training. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to
play the animation clips.

(3rd row) achieves superior quality devoid of watermarks. This implies that the visual distribution
within the training dataset can be effectively eliminated by merely dropping the adapter.

B.3     B ENEFITS FROM S CALE - UP T RAINING

In practice, we find that the overall quality of the generated animations benefits from scale-up train-
ing. This involves training with larger batch sizes, video resolution, and the number of total optimiz-
ing iterations. In Fig. 11, we present two pairs of qualitative comparisons between motion modules
trained with standard and scale-up training. Under the scale-up training setting, we train the mo-
tion module on the resolutions of 320 × 512, with 8× larger batch size compared to the standard
setting. The result indicates that considerable enhancement in motion amplitude and diversity can
be achieved through an increase in the training scale. For instance, the camera involves view angle
changes (2nd row) in contrast to mere zooming (1st row). The character’s head displays turning
movements (4th row) rather than solely facing forward (3rd row).

C     L IMITATIONS
C.1     M OTION P RIORS IN A NIMATE D IFF

The transferable motion priors in AnimateDiff are learned from a large-scale video dataset WebVid-
10M (Bain et al., 2021) that encompasses mainly real-world footage. Supported by the richness and
diversity of the dataset, the motion module can learn real-world motions (Ding et al., 2022) like sea
waves, vehicular movement, and human actions, which are modeled by the temporal self-attention
mechanism. Therefore, the motion priors largely depend on the dataset coverage and accuracy,
which introduces potential limitations discussed as follows.
Motion diversity and complexity. In practice, we find that the motion module pre-trained on
WebVid-10M performs well on non-violent motions such as fluid (e.g., ocean waves, fog, etc.),
rigid objects (e.g., cars, boats), and simple human movements (e.g., walking, facial expressions).
This aligns with our observation that the training dataset predominantly encompasses these motions.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Stable Diffusion V1.5        Stable Diffusion XL

Figure 12: Improvements on the more powerful backbone. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader.
Click the images to play the animation clips.

However, the module struggles with complex motions that are infrequent in the training dataset and
challenging to represent via short video clips during training, e.g., dance movements and drastic
scene changes. These instructions often result in static synthetic outcomes or unnatural deforma-
tions. Potential solutions could involve enriching the training set’s motion diversity or training with
larger resolution and extended clip length, which will help to better model motion patterns.
Text-motion alignment. In the pre-training dataset, WebVid-10M, most text labels primarily de-
scribe visual content while overlooking detailed motion descriptions. Consequently, this leads to the
animations generated by AnimateDiff exhibiting little response to the motion descriptions. Notwith-
standing, this phenomenon does not imply that the motion module does not acquire corresponding
motion priors. For instance, zoom-in/out effects frequently appear in the pre-training videos. How-
ever, their text labels typically contain only broad “zooming” tags, making it difficult for the motion
module to distinguish the difference between zoom-in and zoom-out accurately. As a result, utilizing
a “zoom in” prefix alongside the common text prompt generates both zoom-in and zoom-out effects,
indicating the need for a video dataset with more accurately labeled motion tags. This also suggests
that MotionLoRA does not learn new motion patterns entirely from scratch but refines and enhances
the pre-existing motion priors (regardless of whether they can be triggered by text) obtained during
pre-training, enabling the motion module to express such priors as desired during inference.

C.2   D EPENDENCY ON IMAGE BACKBONE

Under the decoupled training strategy, the motion and visual content in the generated animations
originate from the pre-trained motion module and the underlying image backbone, respectively.
Consequently, the performance of the entire pipeline of AnimateDiff is heavily reliant on the un-
derlying T2I models. If the base model struggles to respond appropriately to the text prompt and
fails to generate accurate content, the additional motion module is unlikely to compensate for this
weakness. Conversely, superior image backbones can enhance the synthetic results. To demonstrate
this, we implement AnimateDiff on Stable Diffusion XL (Podell et al., 2023) and compare general
T2V results on rare semantic compositions against the Stable Diffusion V1.5 version, as depicted
in Fig. 12. The figure illustrates that the synthetic video based on SDXL achieves better visual
composition and semantic alignment.
Practically, to mitigate potential limitations introduced by the foundational T2I models, employing
off-the-shelf modules such as IP-adapter (Ye et al., 2023) for additional style/content reference,
ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) for spatial composition corrections, could be beneficial.

D     M ORE V ISUAL R ESULTS
In Fig. 13, we show more visual results of AnimateDiff and the results of further combing Animate-
Diff with MotionLoRA to achieve shot type control. In Fig. 14, we show more qualitative compar-
isons between AnimateDiff and four academic and commercial baselines. In Fig. 15, we compare
two motion module architectures, i.e., the full convolution one and its Transformer counterpart.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Oil painting               Realistic Vision                  Realistic Vision               Realistic Vision


 city, rainy day, wet, car,   photo of 18 y.o woman             photo of a cyberpunk           b&w photo of 42 y.o
 a bustling street, oil       in dress, night city              city street, night time,       man in black clothes,
 painting, . . .              street, motion blur, . . .        dark atmosphere, . . .         bald, face, half body, . . .
       Oil painting                    Lyriel                         Oil painting                   epiC Realism


 oil painting,      black     portrait of halo, sun-            oil painting, mountain,        landscape,    a rocky
 pearl pirate ship, wind,     glasses, blue eyes, tar-          lake water, boat, forest,      mountain with milky
 waves, night time, . . .     tan scarf, . . .                  masterpiece, . . .             way, nighttime, . . .
      epiC Realism                 epiC Realism                         ToonYou                    Realistic Vision


 (zoom-in) A nebula           (rolling) landscape of            (rolling) 1boy, dark           (zoom-in) cabins in the
 in universe,       highly    a aesthetically Belgium           skin, playing guitar,          forest, water, aurora in
 detailed, colorful, . . .    and wildflower, . . .             concert, stage lights, . . .   the sky, fog, . . .
       Oil Painting                    MoXin                       RCNZ Cartoon 3d                       Lyriel


 (panning) oil painting,      (panning)          fantas-        (panning) a golden             (tilting) waters, canyon,
 house, grass, wheat field    tic composition, old              labrador, warm vibrant         sunlight, traveler, high
 laboring crowd, . . .        Chinese town, . . .               colours, . . .                 quality, . . .

Figure 13: Additional qualitative results. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to
play the animation clips.



                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Tune-A-Video                    AnimateDiff                         T2V-Zero                    AnimateDiff


    a man is playing guitar, dramatic lighting, . . .              a girl is playing guitar, wavy hair, upper body, . . .
   Pika Labs (2023)                  AnimateDiff                      Gen-2 (2023)                   AnimateDiff


 cabins in the forest, water, aurora in the sky, fog, . . .            taxi, rear view, New York city at night, . . .
   Pika Labs (2023)                  AnimateDiff                      Gen-2 (2023)                   AnimateDiff


  sunset, orange sky, fishing boats, ocean waves, . . .               a woman standing on the road at night, . . .

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to play
the animation clips.


       Convolution                    Transformer                       Convolution                   Transformer

                                    Figure 15: Module design comparison.


                                                              19
