Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS P ROVABLY B ENEFIT
FROM S TRUCTURAL I NFORMATION : A F EATURE
L EARNING P ERSPECTIVE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown remarkable capabilities in learn-
         ing from graph-structured data, outperforming traditional multilayer perceptrons
         (MLPs) in numerous graph applications. Despite these advantages, there has been
         limited theoretical exploration into why GNNs are so effective, particularly from
         the perspective of feature learning. This study aims to address this gap by exam-
         ining the role of graph convolution in feature learning theory under a specific data
         generative model. We undertake a comparative analysis of the optimization and
         generalization between two-layer graph convolutional networks (GCNs) and their
         convolutional neural network (CNN) counterparts. Our findings reveal that graph
         convolution significantly enhances the regime of low test error over CNNs. This
         highlights a substantial discrepancy between GNNs and MLPs in terms of gener-
         alization capacity, a conclusion further supported by our empirical simulations on
         both synthetic and real-world datasets.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently demonstrated remarkable capability in learning graph
representations, yielding superior results across various downstream tasks, such as node classifi-
cations (Kipf & Welling, 2016a; VelicМҢkovicМҒ et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017), graph classifica-
tions (Xu et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; Yuan & Ji, 2020) and link predic-
tions (Kipf & Welling, 2016b; Zhang & Chen, 2018; Kumar et al., 2020), etc. However, the the-
oretical understanding of why GNNs can achieve such success is still in its infancy. Compared
to multilayer perceptron (MLPs), GNNs enhance representation learning with an added message
passing operation (Zhou et al., 2020). Take graph convoluational network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling,
2016a) as an example, it aggregates a nodeвҖҷs attributes with those of its neighbors through a graph
convolution operation. This operation, which leverages the structural information (adjacency ma-
trix) of graph data, forms the core distinction between GNNs and MLPs. Empirical evidence from
three node classification tasks, as shown in Figure 1, suggests GCNs outperform MLPs. Motivated
by the superior performance of GNNs, we pose a critical question about graph convolution:
  What role does graph convolution play during gradient descent training, and what mechanism
enables a GCN to exhibit better generalization after training?
Several recent studies have embarked on a theoretical exploration of graph convolutionвҖҷs role in
GNNs. For instance, Baranwal et al. (2021) considered a setting of linear classification of data gen-
erated from a contextual stochastic block model (Deshpande et al., 2018). Their findings indicate
that graphвҲҡconvolution extends the regime where data is linearly separable by a factor of approxi-
mately 1/ D compared to MLPs, with D denoting a nodeвҖҷs expected degree. Baranwal et al. (2023)
further investigated the impact of graph convolutions in multi-layer networks, showcasing improved
non-linear separability. While insightful, these studies assume the Bayes optimal classifier of GNNs,
thereby missing a comprehensive characterization of the GNNsвҖҷ optimization process. This leaves
a notable gap in understanding of the optimization and generalization capabilities of GNNs, a gap
that existing theoretical explorations have yet to adequately address.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To respond to the growing demand for a comprehensive
theoretical understanding of graph convolution, we delve
into the feature learning analysis (Cao et al., 2022; Allen-
Zhu & Li, 2022) for graph neural networks. In our study,
we introduce a data generation modelвҖ”termed SNM-
SBMвҖ”that combines a signal-noise model (Cao et al.,
2022; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) for feature creation and a
stochastic block model (Abbe et al., 2015) for graph con-
struction. Our analysis is centered on the convergence and Figure 1: Performance comparison be-
generalization attributes of two-layer graph convolution tween GCN and MLP on node classifi-
networks (GCNs) when trained via gradient descent, com- cation tasks.
pared with the established outcomes for two-layer convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs) as presented by Cao et al. (2022). While both GCNs and CNNs
demonstrate to achieve near-zero training error, our study effectively sheds light on the discrepan-
cies in their generalization abilities. We emphasize the crucial contribution of graph convolution to
the enhanced performance of GNNs. Our studyвҖҷs key contributions are as follows:

вҖў We establish global convergence guarantees for graph neural networks training on data drawn
  from SNM-SBM model by characterizing the signal learning and noise memorization in feature
  learning. We demonstrate that, despite the nonconvex optimization landscape, GCNs can achieve
  zero training error after a polynomial number of iterations.
вҖў We further establish population loss bounds of overfitted GNN models trained by gradient descent.
  We show that under certain conditions on the signal-to-noise ratio, GNNs trained by gradient
  descent can achieve near zero test error.
вҖў We show a contrast in the generalization of GCNs and CNNs. We identify a regime where GCNs
  can attain nearly zero test error, whereas the test error of CNNs is greater than a constant. This
  conclusion is further supported by empirical verification on synthetic and real-world datasets.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Role of Graph Convolution in GNNs. Enormous empirical studies of various GNNs models with
graph convolution (Chen et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2019; He et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2023) have been demonstrating that graph convolutions can enhance the per-
formance of traditional classification methods, such as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Towards
theoretically understanding the role of graph convolution, Xu et al. (2020) identify conditions under
which MLPs and GNNs extrapolate, thereby highlighting the superiority of GNNs for extrapolation
problems. Their theoretical analysis leveraged the concept of the over-parameterized networks and
the neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018). Huang et al. (2021) use a similar approach to exam-
ine the role of graph convolution in deep GNNs within a node classification setting. They discover
that excessive graph convolution layers can hamper the optimization and generalization of GNNs,
corroborating the well-known over-smoothing issue in deep GNNs (Li et al., 2018). Another work
by Hou et al. (2022) propose two smoothness metrics to measure the quantity and quality of infor-
mation derived from graph data, along with a novel attention-based framework. Some rent works
(Baranwal et al., 2021; 2023; Ma et al., 2021) have demonstrated that graph convolution broadens the
regime in which a multi-layer network can classify nodes, compared to methods that do not utilize
the graph structure, especially when the graph is dense and exhibits homophily. Yang et al. (2022)
attribute the major performance gains of GNNs to their inherent generalization capability through
graph neural tangent kernel (GNTK) and extrapolation analysis . As for neural network theory, these
works either gleaned insights from GNTK (Du et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021; Sabanayagam et al.,
2022) or studied the role of graph convolution within a linear neural network setting. Unlike them,
our work is beyond NTK and investigates a more realistic setting concerning the convergence and
generalization of neural networks in terms of feature learning.

Feature Learning in Neural Networks. This work builds upon a growing body of research on
how neural networks learn features. Allen-Zhu & Li (2020) formulated a theory illustrating that
when data possess a вҖңmulti-viewвҖқ feature, ensembles of independently trained neural networks can
demonstrably improve test accuracy. Further, Allen-Zhu & Li (2022) demonstrated that adversarial


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


training can purge certain small dense mixtures from the hidden weights during the training pro-
cess of a neural network, thus refining the hidden weights. Ba et al. (2022) established that the
initial gradient update contains a rank-1 вҖҳspikeвҖҷ, which leads to an alignment between the first-layer
weights and the linear component feature of the teacher model. Cao et al. (2022) investigated the
benign overfitting phenomenon in training a two-layer convolutional neural network (CNN), illus-
trating that under certain conditions related to the signal-to-noise ratio, a two-layer CNN trained by
gradient descent can achieve exceedingly low test loss through feature learning. Alongside related
works (Yang & Hu, 2020; Zou et al., 2021; Wen & Li, 2021; Damian et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2023; Jelassi et al., 2022; Kou et al., 2023), all these studies have
highlighted the existence of feature learning in neural networks during gradient descent training,
forming a critical line of inquiry that this work continues to explore.

3     P ROBLEM S ETUP AND P RELIMINARY

3.1   N OTATIONS

We use lower bold-faced letters for vectors, upper bold-faced letters for matrices, and non-bold-
faced letters for scalars. For a vector v, its в„“2 -norm is denoted as вҲҘvвҲҘ2 . For a matrix A, we use
вҲҘAвҲҘ2 to denote its spectral norm and вҲҘAвҲҘF for its Frobenius norm. We employ standard asymptotic
notations such as O(В·), o(В·), в„Ұ(В·), and Оҳ(В·) to describe the limiting behavior. We use O(В·),
                                                                                       e     в„Ұ(В·),
                                                                                             e     and
Оҳ(В·)
e to hide logarithmic factors in these notations respectively. Moreover, we denote an = poly(bn )
if an = O((bn )p ) for some positive constant p and an = polylog(bn ) if an = poly(log(bn )). Lastly,
sequences of integers are denoted as [m] = {1, 2, . . . , m}.

3.2   DATA MODEL

In our approach, we utilize a signal-noise model for feature generation, combined with a stochastic
block model for graph structure generation. Specifically, we define the feature matrix as X вҲҲ
RnГ—2d , with n representing the number of samples and 2d being the feature dimensionality. Each
feature associated with a data point is generated from a signal-noise model (SNM), conditional on
the Rademacher random variable y вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}, and a latent vector Вө вҲҲ Rd :

                                     x = [x(1) , x(2) ] = [yВө, Оҫ],                                 (1)

where x(1) , x(2) вҲҲ Rd , and Оҫ вҲј N (0, Пғp2 В· (I вҲ’ вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2              вҠӨ                        2
                                                           2 В· ВөВө )) is a Gaussian with Пғp as the
                             вҲ’2      вҠӨ
variance. The term I вҲ’ вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 В· ВөВө is employed to guarantee that the noise vector is orthogonal to
the signal vector Вө. The signal-noise model we have adopted is inspired by the structure of an image
composed of multiple patches, where we consider a two-patch model for simplicity. The first patch
x(1) , represented by the signal vector, corresponds to the target in an image. The second patch x(2) ,
represented by the noise vector, corresponds to the background. ItвҖҷs worth mentioning that a series
of recent works (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020; Cao et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022) have
explored similar signal-noise models to illustrate the feature learning process of neural networks.
Moreover, we implement a stochastic block model with inter-class edge probability p and intra-
class edge probability s. Specifically, the entry of adjacency matrix A = (aij )nГ—n is Bernoulli
distributed, with aij вҲј Ber(p) when yi = yj , and aij вҲј Ber(s) when yi = вҲ’yj . The
combination of a stochastic block model with the signal-noise model (1) is represented as
SNM вҲ’ SBM(n, p, s, Вө, Пғp , d). Note that when p = s = 0, SNM вҲ’ SBM reduces to a SNM,
and its samples are used in MLP. In the SBM framework, the inter-class probability p and intra-class
probability s are explicitly modeled, allowing us to analyze different graph structures based on the
relationship between p and s. When p is significantly greater than s, the graph structure exhibits
homophily. This means that the labels of neighboring nodes are likely to be similar to the label
of the central node. Conversely, a heterophily graph structure is observed when s is significantly
greater than p. In this situation, nodes are more likely to connect with nodes of different labels.

3.3   N EURAL NETWORK MODEL

In this section, we present two distinct types of neural network models: a two-layer convolutional
neural network (CNN), and a Graph Convolutional Neural Network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a).

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CNN. We introduce a two-layer CNN model, denoted as f , which utilizes a non-linear activation
function, Пғ(В·). Specifically, we employ a polynomial ReLU activation function defined as Пғ(z) =
max{0, z}q , where q > 2 is a hyperparameter. Mathematically, given the input data x, the CNNвҖҷs
output is represented as f (W, x) = F+1 (W+1 , x) вҲ’ FвҲ’1 (WвҲ’1 , x), where F+1 (W+1 , x) and
FвҲ’1 (W+1 , x) are defined as follows:
                                         m
                                      1 Xh       вҠӨ (1)         вҠӨ (2)
                                                                       i
                        Fj (Wj , x) =         Пғ(wj,r x ) + Пғ(wj,r x ) ,                      (2)
                                      m r=1
where m is the width of hidden layer, the second layer parameters are fixed as either +1 or вҲ’1,
and wj,r вҲҲ Rd refers to the weight of the first layerвҖҷs r-th. The symbol W collectively represents
the modelвҖҷs weights. Moreover, each weight in the first layer is initialized from a random draw of
a Gaussian random variable, wj,r вҲј N (0, Пғ02 В· IdГ—d ) for all r вҲҲ [m] and j вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}, with Пғ0
regulating the initialization magnitude for the first layerвҖҷs weight.
Upon receiving training data S вүң {xi , yi }ni=1 drawn from SNM вҲ’ SBM(n, p = 0, s = 0, Вө, Пғp , d),
we aim to learn the parameter W by minimizing the empirical cross-entropy loss function:
                                                  n
                                               1X
                              LCNN
                               S   (W) =             в„“(yi В· f (W, xi )),                      (3)
                                               n i=1
where в„“(y В· f (W, x)) = log(1 + exp(вҲ’f (W, x) В· y)). The update rule for the gradient descent used
in the CNN is then given as:
    (t+1)       (t)
  wj,r      = wj,r вҲ’ О· В· вҲҮwj,r LCNN
                                S   (W(t) )
                           n                                       n
                (t)     О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ      (t)                     О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ    (t)
            = wj,r вҲ’          в„“i В· Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , Оҫi вҹ©) В· jyi Оҫi вҲ’       в„“ В· Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , yi Вөвҹ©) В· jВө, (4)
                       nm i=1                                  nm i=1 i
                                                                exp(вҲ’yi В·fi )
where we define the loss derivative as в„“вҖІi вүң в„“вҖІ (yi В· fi ) = вҲ’ 1+exp(вҲ’y  i В·fi )
                                                                                 . ItвҖҷs important to clarify that
the model we use for the MLP part is a CNN. We categorize it as an MLP for comparison purposes.

GCN. Graph neural network (GNNs) fuse graph structure information and node features to learn
representation of nodes. Consider a two-layer GCN f with graph convolution operation on the
first layer. The output of the GCN is given by f (W, xМғ) = F+1 (W+1 , xМғ) вҲ’ FвҲ’1 (WвҲ’1 , xМғ), where
F+1 (W+1 , xМғ) and FвҲ’1 (W+1 , xМғ) are defined as follows:
                                          m
                                       1 Xh        вҠӨ (1)        вҠӨ (2)
                                                                         i
                        Fj (Wj , xМғ) =        Пғ(wj,r  xМғ ) + Пғ(wj,r xМғ ) .                    (5)
                                       m r=1

Here, XМғ вүң [xМғ1 , xМғ2 , В· В· В· , xМғn ]вҠӨ = DМғвҲ’1 AМғX вҲҲ RnГ—2d with AМғ = A + In representing the adjacency
       with self-loop, and DМғ is a diagonal matrix that records the degree of each node, namely,
matrix P
DМғii = j AМғij . For simplicity we denote Di вүң DМғii . Therefore, in contrast to the CNN model (2),
the GCNs (5) incorporate the normalized adjacency matrix DМғвҲ’1 AМғ, also termed as graph convolu-
tion, which serves as a pivotal component.
Note that the use of a polynomial ReLU activation function and fixing the second layer aligns with
related studies (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020; 2022; Cao et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2021; Kou et al., 2023)
that investigate neural network feature learning.
With the training data S вүң {xi , yi }ni=1 and A вҲҲ RnГ—n drawn from SNM вҲ’ SBM(n, p, s, Вө, Пғp , d),
we consider to learn the parameter W by optimizing the empirical cross-entropy loss function:
                                                  n
                                               1X
                              LGCN
                                 S     (W)   =       в„“(yi В· f (W, xМғi )).                     (6)
                                               n i=1
The gradient descent update for the first layer weight W in GCN can be expressed as:
    (t+1)       (t)
  wj,r      = wj,r вҲ’ О· В· вҲҮwj,r LGCN
                                S   (W(t) )
                           n                                         n
                (t)     О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ     (t)                        О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ  (t)
            = wj,r вҲ’          в„“i Пғ (вҹЁwbj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ©) В· j yМғi Вө вҲ’       в„“ Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©) В· jyi ОҫМғi , (7)
                       nm i=1                                    nm i=1 i


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we define вҖңaggregated labelвҖқ yМғi = DiвҲ’1 kвҲҲN (i) yk and вҖңaggregated noise vectorвҖқ ОҫМғi =
                                                 P

DiвҲ’1 kвҲҲN (i) Оҫk , with N (i) being a set that contains all the neighbor of node i.
    P

In this study, our primary objective is to demonstrate the enhanced feature learning capabilities of
GNNs in comparison to CNNs. This is achieved by examining the generalization ability of the GNN
model through the lens of test error (population loss), which is defined based on unseen test data.
Given n training data points and the corresponding graph structure, we train a GNN model. We
then generate a new test data point following the SNM вҲ’ SBM distribution. Its connection in the
graph to the training data points are still following the stochastic block model, forming an adjacency
matrix AвҖІ вҲҲ R(n+1)Г—(n+1) . We specifically study the population loss by taking the expectation over
the randomness of the new test data, which is formulated as follows:
                              LGCN
                               D   (W) = E(x,y,AвҖІ )вҲјSNMвҲ’SBM в„“(y В· f (W, x)).                                 (8)

4       T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
In this section, we introduce our key theoretical findings that explain the optimization and general-
ization processes of feature learning in GCNs. Through the application of the gradient descent rule
                                                                         (t)
outlined in Equation (7), we observe that the gradient descent iterate wj,r is a linear combination of
                                (0)
its random initialization wj,r , the signal vector Вө and the noise vectors in the training data Оҫi 1 for
i вҲҲ [n] (Cao et al., 2022). Consequently, for r вҲҲ [m], the decomposition of weight can be expressed:
                                                  n                          n
           (t)         (0)      (t)                  (t)
                                                  X                          X
         wj,r = wj,r + j В· Оіj,r В· вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2
                                     2 В·Вө+          ПҒj,r,i В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                  2  В· Оҫ i +   ПҒ(t)
                                                                                j,r,i
                                                                                      В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                             2 В· Оҫi .        (9)
                                                  i=1                        i=1
          (t)           (t)           (t)
where Оіj,r and ПҒj,r,i = {ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(t)
                                   j,r,i
                                         } serve as coefficients. To facilitate a fine-grained anal-
                                                                             (t)        (t)      (t)
ysis for the evolution of coefficients, we introduce the notations ПҒj,r,i вүң ПҒj,r,i 1(ПҒj,r,i вүҘ 0),
            (t)         (t)                                                                                  (t)
ПҒ(t)
 j,r,i
       вүң ПҒj,r,i 1(ПҒj,r,i вүӨ 0). We refer to Equation (9) as the signal-noise decomposition of wj,r .
                                                                                      (t)        (t)
The normalization factors вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2         вҲ’2
                             2 and вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ2 are introduced to ensure that Оіj,r вүҲ вҹЁwj,r , Вөвҹ©, and
 (t)             (t)                        (t)                                                 (t)
ПҒj,r,i вүҲ вҹЁwj,r , Оҫi вҹ©. We employ Оіj,r to characterize the process of signal learning and ПҒj,r,i to char-
                                                   (t)                                                 (t)
acterize the noise memorization. If certain Оіj,r values are sufficiently large while all |ПҒj,r,i | are
relatively small, this indicates that the neural network is primarily learning the label through signle
                                   (t)                                         (t)
learning. Conversely, if some |ПҒj,r,i | values are relatively large while all Оіj,r are small, the neural
network will focus on noise memorization. Our analysis is based on the following assumptions:
Assumption 4.1. Suppose that

        1. The dimension d is sufficiently large: d = в„ҰМғ(m2вҲЁ[4/(qвҲ’2)] n4вҲЁ[(2qвҲ’2)/(qвҲ’2)] ).
        2. The size of training sample n and width of GCNs m adhere to n, m = в„Ұ(polylog(d)).

        3. The learning rate О· satisfies О· вүӨ OМғ(min{вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2   вҲ’2 вҲ’1
                                                       2 , Пғp d   }).

        4. The edge probability p, s = в„Ұ( log(n)/n) and Оһ вүң pвҲ’s
                                           p
                                                              p+s is a positive constant.

      5. The standard deviation of Gaussianp initialization Пғ0 is chosen such that Пғ0 вүӨ
         OМғ(mвҲ’2/(qвҲ’2) nвҲ’[1/(qвҲ’2)]вҲЁ1 В· min{(Пғp d/(n(p + s)))вҲ’1 , ОһвҲ’1 вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’1       2 }.
Remark 4.2. (1) The requirement for a high dimension in our assumptions is specifically aimed
at ensuring that the learning occurs in a sufficiently over-parameterized setting when the second
layer remains fixed. (2) This condition ensures certain statistical properties of the training data and
weight initialization hold with a probability of at least 1 вҲ’ dвҲ’1 . (3) The condition on О· is to ensure
that gradient descent can effectively minimize the training loss. (4) The assumption regarding edge
probability guarantees a sufficient level of concentration in the degree and an adequate display
    1
    By referring to Equation (7), we assert that the gradient descent update moves in the direction of ОҫМғi for
each i вҲҲ [n]. Then we can apply the definition of ОҫМғi = DiвҲ’1 kвҲҲN (i) Оҫk .
                                                            P



                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of homophily of graph data. (5) Lastly, the conditions imposed on initialization strength Пғ0 are
intended to guarantee that the training loss can effectively converge to a sufficiently small value and
to discern the differential learning speed between signal and noise.

Finally, we introduce a critical quantity called signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which can measureвҲҡthe
relative learning speed between signal and noise, as is calculated through SNR = вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 /(Пғp d).
To prepareвҲҡfor our main result, we provide an effective SNR for GNNs, defiend as SNRG =
вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 /(Пғp d) В· (n(p + s))(qвҲ’2)/(2q) . Given the above assumptions and definitions of SNR, we
present our main result for GNN as follows:
                                    вҲ’(qвҲ’2)
Theorem 4.3. Let T = ОҳМғ(О· вҲ’1 mПғ0         ОһвҲ’q вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’q 2 +О·     Пө m вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2
                                                         вҲ’1 вҲ’1 3
                                                                       2 ). Under Assumption 4.1,
          q                                              вҲ’1
if n В· SNRG = в„ҰМғ(1), then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ d , there exists a 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T such that:
                                       (t)
вҖў The GCN learns the signal: maxr Оіj,r = в„ҰМғ(1) for j вҲҲ {Вұ1}.
                                                                                             (T )
вҖў The GCN does not memorize the noises in the training data:                     maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i |   =
          p
  OМғ(Пғ0 Пғp d/n(p + s)).

вҖў The training loss converges to Пө, i.e., LGCN
                                           S   (W(t) ) вүӨ Пө.

вҖў The trained GCN achieves a small test loss: LGCN
                                               D   (W(t) ) вүӨ c1 Пө + exp(вҲ’c2 n2 ).

where c1 and c2 are positive constants.

Theorem 4.3 reveals that, provided n В· SNRqG = в„ҰМғ(1), the
                                               (t)
GCN can learn the signal by achieving maxr Оіj,r = в„Ұ(1),
and on the other hand, the noise memorization during gra-
                                                    (T )
dient descent training is suppressed by maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i | =
         p                                p
OМғ(Пғ0 Пғp d/n(p + s)), given that Пғ0 Пғp d/n(p + s) вүӘ
1 according to assumption 4.1. Because the signal learned
by the network is large enough and much stronger than
the noise memory, it can generalize well to test sam-
ple. Consequently, the learned neural network can achieve
both small training and test losses. ItвҖҷs worth noting that
when the graphвҖҷs degree is reduced to 1, the effective
SNR for GNNs converges to the vanilla SNR, namely
SNRG = SNR. This reduces to the CNN, whose feature Figure 2: Illustration of performance
learning is established by Cao et al. (2022).                comparison between GNN and CNN.
                                                             The orange band highlights where
Our result show that whether a neural network learns the GNN can outperform CNN.
signal or noise depends on the SNR, and the number of
samples n. According to Cao et al. (2022), CNNs can focus on the signal learning and generalize
well on the unseen data when n В· SNRq = в„ҰМғ(1). On the other hand, when n В· SNRq = OМғ(1), CNNs
mainly memorize the noise from data, thus achieve a large test error. To highlight the differences in
generalization between GNNs and CNNs, we show that, if n В· SNRqG = в„ҰМғ(1) and n В· SNRq = OМғ(1),
then the trained GNNs achieve small test error, given by LGCN D    (W(t) ) = o(1). In contrast, the
trained CNNs achieve large test error, LD (W ) вүҘ C. The first condition n В· SNRqG = в„ҰМғ(1) is
                                           CNN     (t)

by Theorem 4.3, while second the condition n В· SNRqG = в„ҰМғ(1) is based on the findings of Cao et al.
(2022) for CNN. As a conclusion, we clearly provide a condition that GNNs can generalize better
than CNNs. This observation is further visualized in Figure 2. Through the precise characterization
of feature learning from optimization to generalization for GNN, we have successfully demonstrated
that the graph neural network can gain superiority with the help of graph convolution.

5   P ROOF S KETCHES
In this section, we present proof sketches inspired by the study of feature learning in CNNs (Cao
et al., 2022). This foundation allows us to extend and adapt these concepts to a novel context for


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GNNs. We discuss the primary challenges encountered during the study of GNN, and illustrate the
key techniques we employed in our proofs to overcome these challenges. These main techniques are
elaborated in the following sections, and detailed proofs can be found in the appendix.

5.1   I TERATIVE OF COEFFICIENTS UNDER GRAPH CONVOLUTION

To analyze the feature learning process of graph neural networks during gradient descent training, we
introduce an iterative methodology, based on the signal-noise decomposition in decomposition (9)
and gradient descent update (7). The following lemma offers us a means to monitor the iteration of
the signal learning and noise memorization under graph convolution:
                                  (t)   (t)
Lemma 5.1. The coefficients Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(t)
                                             j,r,i
                                                   in decomposition (9) adhere to the following equa-
tions:
        (0) (0)
       Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(0)
                        j,r,i
                              = 0,                                                               (10)
                                    n
            (t+1)      (t)   О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ           (t)
          Оіj,r      = Оіj,r вҲ’    В·     в„“ Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөi вҹ©)yi yМғi вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ,                             (11)
                            nm i=1 i
           (t+1)     (t)      О·       X             вҖІ(t)       (t)
          ПҒj,r,i = ПҒj,r,i вҲ’       В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = j),     (12)
                             nm
                                    kвҲҲN (i)
                              О·       X             вҖІ(t)       (t)
          ПҒ(t+1)
           j,r,i
                 = ПҒ (t)
                     j,r,i
                           +      В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = вҲ’j).    (13)
                             nm
                                    kвҲҲN (i)

Lemma 5.1 simplifies the analysis of the feature learning in GCNs by reducing it to the examination
of the discrete dynamical system expressed by Equations (11 - 13). Our proof strategy emphasizes
                                                       (t) (t)
an in-depth evaluation of the coefficient values Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(t)
                                                                  j,r,i
                                                                        throughout the training. Note that
graph convolution aggregates information from neighboring nodes to the central node, which often
leads to the loss of statistical stability for the aggregated noise vectors and labels. To overcome this
challenge, we utilize a dense graph input, achieved by setting the edge probability as stated in 4.1.

5.2   A TWO - PHASE DYNAMICS ANALYSIS

We then provide a two-stage dynamics analysis based on the behavior of loss derivative to track the
trajectory of coefficients for signal learning and noise memorization:

Stage 1. Intuitively, the initial neural network weights are small enough so that the neural network
                                                                                                      вҖІ(0)
at initialization has constant level cross-entropy loss derivatives on all the training data: в„“i           =
в„“вҖІ [yi В· f (W(0) , xМғi )] = Оҳ(1) for all i вҲҲ [n]. This is guaranteed under Condition 4.1 on Пғ0 . Motivated
by this, the dynamics of the coefficients in Equations (11 - 13) can be greatly simplified by replacing
       вҖІ(t)
the в„“i factors by their constant upper and lower bounds. The following lemma summarizes our
main conclusion at stage 1 for signal learning:
Lemma 5.2. Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, there exists T1                                       =
OМғ(О· вҲ’1 mПғ02вҲ’q ОһвҲ’q вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’q
                                                       (T1 )                                       (t)
                              )
                            2    such   that  max  r Оі j,r   =   в„Ұ(1)  for j  вҲҲ   {Вұ1},   and   |ПҒ j,r,i | =
            вҲҡ p
O Пғ0 Пғp d/ n(p + s) for all j вҲҲ {Вұ1}, r вҲҲ [m], i вҲҲ [n] and 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 .

The proof can be found in Appendix C.1. Lemmas 5.2 leverages the period of training when the
derivatives of the loss function are of a constant order. ItвҖҷs important to note that graph convolution
plays a significant role in diverging the learning speed between signal learning and noise memoriza-
tion in this first stage. Note that graph convolution can potentially cause unstable iterative dynamics
of coefficients during the feature learning process. To mitigate this issue, we introduce вҖңhomophilyвҖқ
by setting p > s, which helps in stabilizing the coefficient iterations.
Originally, the learning speeds are roughly determined by вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 and вҲҘОҫвҲҘ2 respectively without graph
convolution (Cao et al., 2022). Instead, with graph convolution, the learning speeds are approxi-
mately determined by |yМғ|вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 and вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘ2 respectively. Here, |yМғ|вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 is close to вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 , but вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘ2 is
much smaller than вҲҘОҫвҲҘ2 (see Figure 6 for an illustration). This means that graph convolution can
slow down noise memorization, thus enabling GNNs to focus more on signal learning.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stage 2. Building on the results from the first stage, we then move to the second stage of the
training process. In this stage, the loss derivatives are no longer constant, and we demonstrate that
the training error can be minimized to an arbitrarily small value. Importantly, the scale differences
established during the first stage of learning continue to be maintained throughout the second stage:
Lemma 5.3. Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, for any t вҲҲ [T1 , T ], it holds that
        (T )                             (t)            p
maxr Оіj,r1 вүҘ 2, вҲҖj вҲҲ {Вұ1} and |ПҒj,r,i | вүӨ Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)) for all j вҲҲ {Вұ1}, r вҲҲ [m]
and i вҲҲ [n]. Moreover, we have LGCN S    (W(t) ) вүӨ Пө.

Lemma 5.3 presents two primary outcomes. Firstly, throughout this training phase, it ensures that
                                               (t)
the coefficients of noise vectors, denoted as ПҒj,r,i , retain a significantly small value while coefficients
                                 (t)
of feature vector, denoted as Оіj,r can achieve large value. Furthermore, it offers a convergence for
GNN, showing the training loss will tend to receive an arbitrarily small value.

5.3   T EST ERROR ANALYSIS

Finally, it is a challenge for the generalization analysis of graph neural networks. To address this
issue, we introduce an expectation over the distribution for a single data point. We consider a new
data point (x, y) drawn from the distribution SNM-SBM. The lemma below further gives an upper
bound on the test loss of GNNs post-training:
Lemma 5.4. Let T be defined in Theorem 4.3. Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, for any
t вүӨ T with LGCNS    (W(t) ) вүӨ 1, it holds that LGCN
                                                D   (W(t) ) вүӨ c1 В· LGCN
                                                                    S   (W(t) ) + exp(вҲ’c2 n2 ).

The proof is presented in the appendix. Lemma 5.4 demonstrates that GNNs achieve a small test
error (benign overfitting) and completes the last step of feature learning theory.

6     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate our theoretical findings through numerical simulations using synthetic
data, specifically generated according to the SNM-SBM model. We set the signal vector, Вө, to
drawn from a standard normal distribution N (0, I). The noise vector, Оҫ, is drawn from a Gaussian
distribution N (0, Пғp2 I). We train a two-layer CNN defined as per equation (2) and a two-layer GNN
as per equation (5) with polynomial ReLU q = 3. We used the gradient descent method with a
learning rate of О· = 0.03. The primary task we focused on was node classification, where the goal
was to predict the class labels of nodes in a graph.

Feature learning dynamics. Firstly, we display the training loss, test loss, training accuracy, and
test accuracy for both the CNN and GNN in Figure 3. In this case, we further set the training data
size to n = 250, input dimension to d = 500, noise strength to Пғp = 20, and edge probability
to p = 0.5, s = 0.08. We observe that both the GNN and CNN can achieve zero training error.
However, while the GNN obtains nearly zero test error, the CNN fails to generalize effectively to
the test set. This simulation result serves to validate our theoretical results in Theorem 4.3.


Figure 3: Training loss, testing loss, training accuracy, and testing accuracy for both CNN and
GNN over a span of 100 training epochs. Five experimental runs are conducted, with shaded areas
highlighting error bars for variability.

Verification via real-world data. We conducted an experiment using real-world data, specifically
by replacing the synthetic feature with MNIST input features. We select numbers 1 and 2 from the
ten digital numbers, and applied both CNN and GNN models as described in our paper. Detailed


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


results and visualizations can be found in the Figure 4. The results were consistent with our theoret-
ical conclusions, reinforcing the insights derived from our analysis. We believe that this experiment
adds a valuable dimension to our work, bridging the gap between theory and practice.

Phase diagram. We then explore a range of Signal-to-Noise Ratios (SNRs) from 0.045 to 0.98,
and a variety of sample sizes, n, ranging from 200 to 7200. Based on our results, we train the neural
network for 200 steps for each combination of SNR and sample size n. After training, we calculate
the test accuracy for each run. The results are presented as a heatmap in Figure 5. Compared to
CNNs, GCNs demonstrate a perfect accuracy score of 1 across a more extensive range in the SNR
and n plane, indicating that GNNs have a broader benign overfitting regime with high test accuracy.
This further validates our theoretical findings.


Figure 4: The verification of our theoretical result with a real-world data. The input feature is form
MNIST dataset, where we select number 1 and 2 as two classes. The graph structure is sampled
form stochastic block model, with edge probability p = 0.75, s = 0.05. We show the training loss,
testing loss, training accuracy, and testing accuracy for both CNN and GNN over a span of 100
training epochs. The results confirm the benefit of GNN over CNN on the real world dataset. Five
experimental runs are conducted, with shaded areas highlighting error bars for variability.


                     (a) CNN                                          (b) GCN

               Figure 5: Test accuracy heatmap for CNNs and GCNs after training.

7   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
This paper utilizes a signal-noise decomposition to study the signal learning and noise memoriza-
tion process in training a two-layer GCN. We provide specific conditions under which a GNN will
primarily concentrate on signal learning, thereby achieving low training and testing errors. Our re-
sults theoretically demonstrate that GCNs, by leveraging structural information, outperform CNNs
in terms of generalization ability across a broader benign regime. As a pioneering work that studies
feature learning of GNNs, our theoretical framework is constrained to examining the role of graph
convolution within a specific two-layer GCN and a certain data generalization model. In fact, the
feature learning of a neural network can be influenced by a myriad of other factors, such as the depth
of GNN, activation function, optimization algorithm, and data model (Kou et al., 2023; Zou et al.,
2021; 2023). Future work can extend our framework to consider the influence of a wider array of
factors on feature learning within GCNs.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Afonso S Bandeira, and Georgina Hall. Exact recovery in the stochastic block
  model. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 62(1):471вҖ“487, 2015.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09816, 2020.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pp. 977вҖ“988. IEEE, 2022.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, Denny Wu, and Greg Yang. High-
  dimensional asymptotics of feature learning: How one gradient step improves the representation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01445, 2022.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Graph convolution for semi-
  supervised classification: Improved linear separability and out-of-distribution generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06966, 2021.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Effects of graph convolutions in
  multi-layer networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Yuan Cao, Zixiang Chen, Mikhail Belkin, and Quanquan Gu. Benign overfitting in two-layer con-
  volutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06526, 2022.
Yongqiang Chen, Wei Huang, Kaiwen Zhou, Yatao Bian, Bo Han, and James Cheng. Towards under-
  standing feature learning in out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11327,
  2023.
Zhengdao Chen, Xiang Li, and Joan Bruna. Supervised community detection with line graph neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08415, 2017.
Alexandru Damian, Jason Lee, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Neural networks can learn representations
  with gradient descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5413вҖ“5452. PMLR, 2022.
Yash Deshpande, Andrea Montanari, Elchanan Mossel, and Subhabrata Sen. Contextual stochastic
  block models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.09596, 2018.
Simon S Du, Kangcheng Hou, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Barnabas Poczos, Ruosong Wang, and Keyulu
  Xu. Graph neural tangent kernel: Fusing graph neural networks with graph kernels. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01212, 2017.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1024вҖ“1034, 2017.
Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. Lightgcn:
  Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In Proceedings of the
  43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval,
  pp. 639вҖ“648, 2020.
Yifan Hou, Jian Zhang, James Cheng, Kaili Ma, Richard TB Ma, Hongzhi Chen, and Ming-Chang
  Yang. Measuring and improving the use of graph information in graph neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.13170, 2022.
Wei Huang, Yayong Li, Weitao Du, Richard Yi Da Xu, Jie Yin, Ling Chen, and Miao Zhang.
 Towards deepening graph neural networks: A gntk-based optimization perspective. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2103.03113, 2021.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and CleМҒment Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Samy Jelassi, Michael Sander, and Yuanzhi Li. Vision transformers provably learn spatial structure.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37822вҖ“37836, 2022.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016a.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling.              Variational graph auto-encoders.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.07308, 2016b.
Yiwen Kou, Zixiang Chen, Yuanzhou Chen, and Quanquan Gu. Benign overfitting for two-layer
  relu networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04145, 2023.
Ajay Kumar, Shashank Sheshar Singh, Kuldeep Singh, and Bhaskar Biswas. Link prediction tech-
  niques, applications, and performance: A survey. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Appli-
  cations, 553:124289, 2020.
Junhyun Lee, Inyeop Lee, and Jaewoo Kang.            Self-attention graph pooling.   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.08082, 2019.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. In Thirty-Second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Neil Shah, and Jiliang Tang. Is homophily a necessity for graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06134, 2021.
Xuran Meng, Yuan Cao, and Difan Zou. Per-example gradient regularization improves learning
  signals from noisy data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17940, 2023.
Mahalakshmi Sabanayagam, Pascal Esser, and Debarghya Ghoshdastidar. Representation power of
 graph convolutions: Neural tangent kernel analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09809, 2022.
Oleksandr Shchur, Maximilian Mumme, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan GuМҲnnemann. Pitfalls
  of graph neural network evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.05868, 2018.
Ruoqi Shen, Sebastien Bubeck, and Suriya Gunasekar. Data augmentation as feature manipulation.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19773вҖ“19808. PMLR, 2022.
Petar VelicМҢkovicМҒ, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Kun Wang, Guohao Li, Shilong Wang, Guibin Zhang, Kai Wang, Yang You, Xiaojiang Peng, Yuxuan
  Liang, and Yang Wang. The snowflake hypothesis: Training deep gnn with one node one receptive
  field. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10051, 2023.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112вҖ“11122.
  PMLR, 2021.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  6861вҖ“6871. PMLR, 2019.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon S Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11848, 2020.
Chenxiao Yang, Qitian Wu, Jiahua Wang, and Junchi Yan. Graph neural networks are inherently
  good generalizers: Insights by bridging gnns and mlps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09034, 2022.
Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Feature learning in infinite-width neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.14522, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hao Yuan and S. Ji. Structpool: Structured graph pooling via conditional random fields. In ICLR,
  2020.
Muhan Zhang and Yixin Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Si Zhang, Hanghang Tong, Jiejun Xu, and Ross Maciejewski. Graph convolutional networks: a
  comprehensive review. Computational Social Networks, 6(1):1вҖ“23, 2019.
Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,
   Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applica-
   tions. AI open, 1:57вҖ“81, 2020.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Yuanzhi Li, and Quanquan Gu. Understanding the generalization of adam in
  learning neural networks with proper regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11371, 2021.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Yuanzhi Li, and Quanquan Gu. The benefits of mixup for feature learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08433, 2023.


A     P RELIMINARY L EMMAS
In this section, we present preliminary lemmas which form the foundation for the proofs to be
detailed in the subsequent sections. The proof will be developed after the lemmas presented.

A.1   P RELIMINARY L EMMAS WITHOUT G RAPH C ONVOLUTION

In this section, we introduce necessary lemmas that will be used in the analysis without graph con-
volution, following the study of feature learning in CNN (Cao et al., 2022). In particular, Lemma
A.1 states that noise vectors are вҖңalmost orthogonalвҖқ to each other and Lemma A.2 indicates that
random initialization results in a controllable inner product between the weights at initialization and
the data vectors.
Lemma A.1. (Cao et al., 2022) Suppose that Оҙ > 0 and d = в„Ұ(log(4n/Оҙ)). Then with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                 Пғp2 d/2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 вүӨ 3Пғp2 d/2,
                                                       p
                                 |вҹЁОҫi , ОҫiвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 2Пғp2 В· d log(4n2 /Оҙ),
for all i, iвҖІ вҲҲ [n].
Lemma A.2. (Cao et al., 2022) Suppose that d = в„Ұ(log(nm/Оҙ)), m = в„Ұ(log(1/Оҙ)). Then with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                               (0)
                                             p
                            |вҹЁwj,r , Вөвҹ©| вүӨ 2 log(8m/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 ,
                               (0)
                                              p                  вҲҡ
                            |вҹЁwj,r , Оҫi вҹ©| вүӨ 2 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d,
for all r вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n]. Moreover,
                                             (0)
                                                        p
                   Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 /2 вүӨ max j В· вҹЁwj,r , Вөвҹ© вүӨ        2 log(8m/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 ,
                                 rвҲҲ[m]
                       вҲҡ                (0)
                                                      p                  вҲҡ
                  Пғ0 Пғp d/4 вүӨ max j В· вҹЁwj,r , Оҫi вҹ© вүӨ 2 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d,
                                 rвҲҲ[m]

for all j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n].

A.2   P RELIMINARY L EMMAS ON G RAPH P ROPERTIES

We now introduce important lemmas that are critical to our analysis. The key idea to ensure a
relatively dense graph. In a sparser graph, the concentration properties of graph degree (Lemma
A.3), the graph convoluted label (A.4), the graph convoluted noise vector (Lemma A.7 and Lemma
A.5) are no longer guaranteed. This lack of concentration affects the behavior of coefficients during
gradient descent training, leading to deviations from our current main results.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                               q
                                                                      log(n/Оҙ)
Lemma A.3 (Degree concentration). Let p, s = в„Ұ                            n          and Оҙ > 0, then with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                     n(p + s)/4 вүӨ Di вүӨ 3n(p + s)/4.

Proof. It is known that the degrees are sums of Bernoulli random variables.
                                                              n
                                                              X
                                               Di = 1 +              aij ,
                                                              jМё=i

where aij = [A]ij . Hence, by the HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/n
                                               p
                               |Di вҲ’ E[Di ]| < log(n/Оҙ)(n вҲ’ 1).
Note that aii = 1 is a fixed value, which means that it is not a random variable, thus the denominator
in the exponential part is n вҲ’ 1 instead of n. Now we calculate the expectation of degree:
                                       n      n
                        E[Dii ] = 1 + s + ( вҲ’ 1)p = n(p + s)/2 + 1 вҲ’ p,
                                       2      2
then we have
                                                                        p
                         |Di вҲ’ n(p + s)/2 + 1 вҲ’ p| вүӨ                     n log(n/Оҙ).
                       q
                         log(n/Оҙ)
Because that p, s = в„Ұ        n      , we further have,

                                     n(p + s)/4 вүӨ Di вүӨ 3n(p + s)/4.
Applying a union bound over i вҲҲ [n] conclude the proof.
                                         p+s
Lemma A.4. Suppose that Оҙ > 0 and n вүҘ 8 (pвҲ’s) 2 log(4/Оҙ). Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,


                                      1pвҲ’s                  3pвҲ’s
                                           |yi | вүӨ |yМғi | вүӨ      |yi |.
                                      2p+s                  2p+s

Proof of Lemma A.4. By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, we have
                                                       s
                          1 X             pвҲ’s             log(4/Оҙ)
                                     yk вҲ’       yi вүӨ                  .
                         Di               p+s            2n(p + s)
                                     kвҲҲN (i)

                             p+s
Therefore, as long as n вүҘ 8 (pвҲ’s)2 log(4/Оҙ), we have:


                                      1pвҲ’s                  3pвҲ’s
                                           |yi | вүӨ |yМғi | вүӨ      |yi |.
                                      2p+s                  2p+s
This proves the result for the stability of sign of graph convoluted label.
Lemma A.5. Suppose that Оҙ > 0 and d = в„Ұ(n2 (p + s)2 log(4n2 /Оҙ)). Then with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                              Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)) вүӨ вҲҘОҫМғi вҲҘ22 вүӨ 3Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)),
for all i вҲҲ [n].

Proof of Lemma A.5. It is known that:
                                 d  Di
                                               !2            d Di            d  Di
                            1 X X                       1 XX            1 XX
               вҲҘОҫМғi вҲҘ22 =              Оҫjk          =             Оҫ 2
                                                                   jk +              ОҫjkвҖІ Оҫjk .
                            Di2 j=1                     Di2 j=1         Di2 j=1    вҖІ
                                     k=1                             k=1                   kМё=k



                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/(2n) we have
                           Di
                         d X
                         X
                                    2
                                                               p
                                   Оҫjk вҲ’ Пғp2 dDi = O(Пғp2 В·      dDi log(4n/Оҙ)).
                         j=1 k=1

Therefore, as long as d = в„Ұ(log(4n/Оҙ)/(n(p + s))), we have
                                                Di
                                              d X
                                              X
                              3Пғp2 dDi /4 вүӨ                2
                                                          Оҫjk вүӨ 5Пғp2 dDi /4.
                                              j=1 k=1

By Lemma A.3, we have,
                                                 d  i D
                                            1 XX
                    2Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)) вүӨ               2
                                                      Оҫjk вүӨ 6Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)).
                                            Di2 j=1
                                                      k=1


Moreover, clearly вҹЁОҫk , ОҫkвҖІ вҹ© has mean zero. For any k, k вҖІ with k Мё= k вҖІ , by BernsteinвҖҷs inequality,
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/(2n2 ) we have
                                                       p
                                 |вҹЁОҫk , ОҫkвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 2Пғp2 В· d log(4n2 /Оҙ).
Applying a union bound we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                   p
                             |вҹЁОҫk , ОҫkвҖІ вҹ©| вүӨ 2Пғp2 В· d log(4n2 /Оҙ).

Therefore, as long as d = в„Ұ(n2 (p + s)2 log(4n2 /Оҙ)), we have

                          Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)) вүӨ вҲҘОҫМғi вҲҘ22 вүӨ 3Пғp2 d/(4n(p + s)).
Remark A.6. We compare the noise vector both before and after applying graph convolution. By
examining Lemma A.1 and Lemma   p A.5, we discover that the expectation of the в„“2 norm of noise
vector is reduced by a factor of n(p + s)/2. This factor represents the square root of the expected
degree of the graph, indicating a significant change in the noise characteristics as a result of the
graph convolution process. We provide a demonstrative visualization in Figure 6.


Figure 6: An illustrative example of noise vector before and after graph aggregation. In this example,
we consider d = 3 and all degree are 1. The black vectors stand for noise vectors Оҫ before graph
convolution. Each of them are orthogonal to each other. The red vectors represent noise vectors
after graph convolution ОҫМғ. They are graph convoluted noise vectors   вҲҡ
                                                                         of two original noise vectors.
                                                                        2
Note that the в„“2 norm between two kinds of vector follows вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘ2 = 2 вҲҘОҫвҲҘ2 . This plot demonstrates
how graph convolution shrinks the в„“2 norm of noise vectors.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma A.7. Suppose that d = в„Ұ(n(p + s) log(nm/Оҙ)), m = в„Ұ(log(1/Оҙ)). Then with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                   (0)
                                   p                  p
                |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©| вүӨ 4 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)),
                                          (0)
           p                                          p                  p
      Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))/4 вүӨ max j В· вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ 2 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)),
                                        rвҲҲ[m]

for all j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n].

Proof of Lemma A.7. According to the fact that the weight wj,r (0) and noise vector Оҫ are sampled
                                            (0)
from Gaussian distribution, we know that вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© is also Gaussian. By Lemma A.5, with proba-
bility at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/4, we have that
                       p              вҲҡ                 p          p
                     Пғp d/(n(p + s))/ 2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫМғi вҲҘ2 вүӨ 3/2 В· Пғp d/(n(p + s))
holds for all i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, applying the concentration bound for Gaussian variable, we obtain
that
                           (0)
                                           p                  p
                        |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©| вүӨ 4 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)).
Next we finish the argument for the lower bound of maximum through the follow expression:
          (0)                                               (0)
                           p                                                  p
P (maxвҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүҘ Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))/4) = 1 вҲ’ P (maxвҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© < Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))/4)
                                                            (0)
                                                                              p
                                             = 1 вҲ’ P (maxвҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© < Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))/4)2m
                                                   вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/4.
Together with Lemma A.5, we finally obtain that
                                          (0)
          p                                          p                  p
     Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))/4 вүӨ max j В· вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ 2 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)).
                                        rвҲҲ[m]


B     G ENERAL L EMMAS FOR I TERATIVE C OEFFICIENT A NALYSIS
In this section, we deliver lemmas that delineate the iterative behavior of coefficients under gradient
descent. We commence with proving the coefficient update rules as stated in Lemma 5.1 in Section
B.1. Subsequently, we establish the scale of training dynamics in Section B.2.

B.1   C OEFFICIENT UPDATE RULE
                                                                  (t)   (t)
Lemma B.1 (Restatement of Lemma 5.1). The coefficients Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(t)
                                                                        j,r,i
                                                                              defined in Eq. (9) satisfy
the following iterative equations:
           (0)     (0)
          Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(0)
                           j,r,i
                                 = 0,
                                    n
           (t+1)         (t) О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ           (t)
          Оіj,r     = Оіj,r вҲ’     В·     в„“ Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ©)yi yМғi вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ,
                            nm i=1 i
           (t+1)     (t)      О·       X             вҖІ(t)       (t)
          ПҒj,r,i = ПҒj,r,i вҲ’       В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = j),
                             nm
                                    kвҲҲN (i)
                              О·       X             вҖІ(t)       (t)
          ПҒ(t+1)
           j,r,i
                 = ПҒ (t)
                     j,r,i
                           вҲ’      В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = вҲ’j),
                             nm
                                         kвҲҲN (i)

for all r вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n].
Remark B.2. This lemma serves as a foundational element in our analysis of dynamics. Initially,
the study of neural network dynamics under gradient descent required us to monitor the fluctuations
in weights. However, this Lemma enables us to observe these dynamics through a new lens, focusing
on two distinct aspects: signal learning and noise memorization. These are represented by the


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (t)            (t)
variables Оіj,r and ПҒj,r,i , respectively. Furthermore, the selection of our data model was a conscious
decision, designed to clearly separate the signal learning from the noise memorization aspects of
learning. By maintaining a clear distinction between signal and noise, we can conduct a precise
analysis of how each model learns the signal and memorizes the noise. This approach not only
simplifies our understanding but also enhances our ability to dissect the underlying mechanisms of
learning.

 Proof of Lemma B.1. Basically, the iteration of coefficients is derived based on gradient descent
                                                                          (0) (0)
rule equation 7 and weight decomposition equation 9. We first consider ОіМӮj,r , ПҒМӮj,r,i = 0 and
                                            n
                   (t+1)             О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ
                                      (t)             (t)
                 ОіМӮj,r      = ОіМӮj,r вҲ’   В·     в„“ Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөi вҹ©)yi yМғi вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ,
                                    nm i=1 i
                   (t+1)     (t)      О·       X         вҖІ(t)           (t)
                 ПҒМӮj,r,i = ПҒМӮj,r,i вҲ’      В·     DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· yk ,
                                     nm
                                                     kвҲҲN (i)

Taking above equations into Equation equation 7, we can obtain that
                                                                                n
                                (t)         (0)         (t)                         (t)
                                                                                X
                          wj,r = wj,r + j В· ОіМӮj,r В· вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2
                                                       2 В·Вө+                      ПҒМӮj,r,i вҲҘОҫi вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                               2 В· Оҫi .
                                                                                i=1

This result verifies that the iterative update of the coefficients is directly driven by the gradient
descent update process. Furthermore, the uniqueness of the decomposition leads us to the precise
                (t)     (t)      (t)      (t)
relationships Оіj,r = ОіМӮj,r and ПҒj,r,i = ПҒМӮj,r,i . Next, we examine the stability of the sign associated
with noise memorization by employing the following telescopic analysis. This method allows us
to investigate the continuity and consistency of the noise memorization process, providing insights
into how the system behaves over successive iterations.
                                       tвҲ’1 X
                    (t)
                                       X                       О·   вҖІ(s)          (s)
                   ПҒj,r,i = вҲ’                        DkвҲ’1        В·в„“     В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· jyk .
                                       s=0 kвҲҲN (i)
                                                              nm k

                                                                                                                  вҖІ(t)
Recall the sign of loss derivative is given by the definition of the cross-entropy loss, namely, в„“i                      <
0. Therefore,
                            tвҲ’1
             (t)
                            X    О·   X         вҖІ(t)       (t)
           ПҒj,r,i = вҲ’              В·   DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = j),                       (14)
                            s=0
                                nm
                                              kвҲҲN (i)
                            tвҲ’1
                            X    О·   X         вҖІ(t)       (t)
           ПҒ(t)
            j,r,i
                  =вҲ’               В·   DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 В· 1(yk = вҲ’j).                      (15)
                            s=0
                                nm
                                              kвҲҲN (i)

Writing out the iterative versions of equation 14 and equation 15 completes the proof.
Remark B.3. The proof strategy follows the study of feature learning in CNN as described in (Cao
et al., 2022). However, compared to CNNs, the decomposition of weights in GNN is notably more
intricate. This complexity is particularly evident in the dynamics of noise memorization, as repre-
sented by Equations 14) and 15). The reason for this increased complexity lies in the additional
graph convolution operations within GNNs. These operations introduce new interaction and depen-
dencies, making the analysis of weight dynamics more challenging and nuanced.

B.2   S CALE OF TRAINING DYNAMICS
                                                                                                  (t)   (t)
Our proof hinges on a meticulous evaluation of the coefficient values Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i , ПҒ(t)
                                                                                       j,r,i
                                                                                             throughout
the entire training process. In order to facilitate a more thorough analysis, we first establish the
following bounds for these coefficients, which are maintained consistently throughout the training
period.
Consider training the Graph Neural Network (GNN) for an extended period up to T вҲ— . We aim to
investigate the scale of noise memorization in relation to signal learning.


                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let T вҲ— = О· вҲ’1 poly(ПөвҲ’1 , вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’1
                              2 ,d    Пғp , Пғ0вҲ’1 , n, m, d) be the maximum admissible iterations. De-
                                   вҲ’1 вҲ’2

note Оұ = 4 log(T вҲ— ). In preparation for an in-depth analysis, we enumerate the necessary conditions
that must be satisfied. These conditions, which are essential for the subsequent examination, are
also detailed in Condition 4.1:

           О· = O min{nm/(qПғp2 d), nm/(q2q+2 ОұqвҲ’2 Пғp2 d), nm/(q2q+2 ОұqвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 )} ,                                   (16)
                                     n                                     o
           Пғ0 вүӨ [16 log(8mn/Оҙ)]вҲ’1 min ОһвҲ’1 вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’1
                   p                                     p              вҲ’1
                                               2  , (Пғ p   d/(n(p + s)))     ,                                       (17)
           d вүҘ 1024 log(4n2 /Оҙ)Оұ2 n2 .                                                                               (18)

                                  (0)              (0)
Denote ОІ = 2 maxi,j,r {|вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©|, |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©|}, it is straightforward to show the following
inequality:
                                                   r
                                                       log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                                    4 max ОІ, 8n                    Оұ       вүӨ 1.                                      (19)
                                                            d
                                                                              p
                A.4 with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we can upper bound ОІ by 4 log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 В·
First, by Lemma p
max{ОһвҲҘВөвҲҘ2 , Пғp d/(n(p + s))}.q    Combined with the condition equation 17, we can bound ОІ by 1.
                                          log(4n2 /Оҙ)
Second, it is easy to check that 8n            d      Оұ вүӨ 1 by inequality equation 18.
Having established the values of Оұ and ОІ at hand, we are now in a position to assert that the following
proposition holds for the entire duration of the training process, specifically for 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T вҲ— .
Proposition B.4. Under Condition 4.1, for 0                 вүӨ               t         вүӨ        T вҲ—,   where T вҲ—        =
О· вҲ’1 poly(ПөвҲ’1 , вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’1
                   2 ,d  Пғp , Пғ0вҲ’1 , n, m, d), we have that
                       вҲ’1 вҲ’2



                                                   (t)    (t)
                                             0 вүӨ Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i вүӨ Оұ,                                                  (20)
                                             0 вүҘ ПҒ(t)
                                                  j,r,i
                                                        вүҘ вҲ’Оұ,                                                        (21)

for all r вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n], where Оұ = 4 log(T вҲ— ).

To establish Proposition B.4, we will employ an inductive approach. Before proceeding with the
proof, we need to introduce several technical lemmas that are fundamental to our argument.
We note that although the setting is slightly different from the case in (Cao et al., 2022). With the
same analysis, we can obtain the following result.
                                                                                (t)           (0)              (t)
Lemma B.5 ((Cao et al., 2022)). For any t вүҘ 0, it holds that вҹЁwj,r вҲ’ wj,r , Вөвҹ© = j В· Оіj,r for all
r вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ {Вұ1}.

In the subsequent three lemmas, our proof strategy is guided by the approach found in (Cao et al.,
2022). However, we extend this methodology by providing a fine-grained analysis that takes into
account the additional complexity introduced by the graph convolution operation.
Lemma B.6. Under Condition 4.1, suppose equation 20 and equation 21 hold at iteration t. Then
                         r                                                                r
            (t)              log(4n2 /Оҙ)       (t)    (0)             (t)                     log(4n2 /Оҙ)
          ПҒМӮj,r,i вҲ’ 8n                   Оұ вүӨ вҹЁwj,r вҲ’ wj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ ПҒМӮj,r,i + 8n                          Оұ,
                                  d                                                                d
                  P        вҲ’1 P        (t)
where ПҒМӮj,r,i вүң   kвҲҲN (i) Di   iвҖІ Мё=k ПҒj,r,iвҖІ , for all r вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and i вҲҲ [n].

Remark B.7. Lemma B.6 asserts that the inner product between the updated weight and the graph
convolution operation closely approximates the graph-convoluted noise memorization.


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma B.6. It is known that,
                         n                                                  n
   (t)      (0)                   (t)
                         X                                                  X
вҹЁwj,r вҲ’ wj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© =           ПҒj,r,iвҖІ вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                               2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғi вҹ© +                   ПҒ(t)
                                                                                     j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                            вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                                  2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғi вҹ©
                         iвҖІ =1                                              iвҖІ =1
                         n                                                                    n
                                                       (t)
                         X X                                                                  X X
                    =                         DiвҲ’1 ПҒj,r,iвҖІ вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                 2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , Оҫk вҹ© +                            DiвҲ’1 ПҒ(t)
                                                                                                                    j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                                                           вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                                                                 2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , Оҫk вҹ©
                         iвҖІ =1 kвҲҲN (i)                                                        iвҖІ =1 kвҲҲN (i)
                          r                                          r
                       log(4n2 /Оҙ) X        вҲ’1
                                               X (t)                    log(4n2 /Оҙ) X           X
                    вүӨ4                    Di          |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ | + 4                       DiвҲ’1        |ПҒ(t)
                                                                                                         j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                                                |
                            d                                                d
                                  kвҲҲN (i)      iвҖІ Мё=k                              kвҲҲN (i)      iвҖІ Мё=k
                       X         X (t)          X               X
                     +      DiвҲ’1    ПҒj,r,iвҖІ +           DiвҲ’1         ПҒ(t)
                                                                      j,r,iвҖІ
                           kвҲҲN (i)                iвҖІ Мё=k               kвҲҲN (i)            iвҖІ Мё=k
                                              r
                          (t)   log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                    вүӨ ПҒМӮj,r,i + 8n          Оұ,
                                     d
                                               (t)
where we define ПҒМӮj,r,i вүң kвҲҲN (i) DiвҲ’1 iвҖІ Мё=k ПҒj,r,iвҖІ the second inequality is by Lemma A.1 and
                         P             P
                                 (t)           (t)
the last inequality is by |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ |, |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ | вүӨ Оұ in equation 20.
Similarly, we can show that:
                         n                                                  n
  (t)    (0)                      (t)
                         X                                                  X
вҹЁwj,r вҲ’ wj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© =           ПҒj,r,iвҖІ вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                               2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғi вҹ© +                   ПҒ(t)
                                                                                     j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                            вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                                  2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғi вҹ©
                         iвҖІ =1                                              iвҖІ =1
                            n                                                                 n
                                                       (t)
                         X        X                                                           X X
                    =                         DiвҲ’1 ПҒj,r,iвҖІ вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                 2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , Оҫk вҹ© +                            DiвҲ’1 ПҒ(t)
                                                                                                                    j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                                                           вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                                                                 2 В· вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , Оҫk вҹ©
                         iвҖІ =1 kвҲҲN (i)                                                        iвҖІ =1 kвҲҲN (i)
                             r                                          r
                          log(4n2 /Оҙ) X         вҲ’1
                                                   X (t)                    log(4n2 /Оҙ) X           X
                    вүҘ вҲ’4                      Di         |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ | вҲ’ 4                        DiвҲ’1       |ПҒ(t)
                                                                                                            j,r,iвҖІ
                                                                                                                   |
                               d                    вҖІ
                                                                                 d                   вҖІ
                                     kвҲҲN (i)       i Мё=k                               kвҲҲN (i)      i Мё=k
                         X         X (t)         X              X
                      +      DiвҲ’1     ПҒj,r,iвҖІ +          DiвҲ’1        ПҒ(t)
                                                                       j,r,iвҖІ
                           kвҲҲN (i)                iвҖІ Мё=k               kвҲҲN (i)            iвҖІ Мё=k
                                              r
                          (t)                     log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                    вүҘ ПҒМӮj,r,i вҲ’ 8n                            Оұ,
                                                       d
                                                                                                                 (t)         (t)
where the first inequality is by Lemma A.1 and the second inequality is by |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ |, |ПҒj,r,iвҖІ | вүӨ Оұ in
equation 20, which completes the proof.

Lemma B.8. Under Condition 4.1, suppose equation 20 and equation 21 hold at iteration t. Then
                                        (t)                      (0)
                                 вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ©,
                                                                                    r
                                        (t)             (0)                             log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                      вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + 8n                            Оұ,
                                                                                             d
                                                     (t)     (t)                                                       (t)
for all r вҲҲ [m] and j Мё= yi . If max{Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i } = O(1), we further have that Fj (Wj , xМғi ) = O(1).
Remark B.9. Lemma B.8 further establishes that the update in the direction of ОҫМғ can be constrained
within specific bounds when j Мё= yi . As a result, the output function remains controlled and does
not exceed a constant order.


Proof of Lemma B.8. For j Мё= yi , we have that
                                (t)                        (0)                          (t)        (0)
                         вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© = вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© + yМғi В· j В· Оіj,r вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ©,                                          (22)


                                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     (t)
where the inequality is by Оіj,r вүҘ 0 and Lemma A.4 stating that sign(yi ) = sign(yМғi ) with a high
probability. In addition, we have
                                                                   n
               (t)             (0)
                                                X                  X
            вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© = вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© +              DiвҲ’1              ПҒj,r,iвҖІ вҹЁОҫk , ОҫiвҖІ вҹ©вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘвҲ’2
                                                                                                    2
                                              kвҲҲN (i)              iвҖІ =1
                                                    пЈ«                                             пЈ¶       r
                            (0)
                                                          X                       X        (t)                log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                        вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + DiвҲ’1 пЈӯ                   ПҒ(t)
                                                                    j,r,i
                                                                          +               ПҒj,r,i пЈё + 8n                   Оұ
                                                                                                                   d
                                                          yk Мё=j                  yk =j
                                                    r
                               (0)                      log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                        вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + 8n                        Оұ,                                                        (23)
                                                             d
                                                                                                                  (t)
where the first inequality is by Lemma B.6 and the second inequality is due to ПҒМӮj,r,i вүӨ 0 based on
Lemma A.4. Then we can get that
                              m
             (t)          1 X        (t)                   (t)
   Fj (Wj , xМғi ) =             [Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©) + Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©)]
                          m r=1
                             m
                          1 X        (t)                   (t)
                                                                      X
                      =         [Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©) + Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , DiвҲ’1   Оҫk вҹ©)]
                          m r=1
                                                                                            kвҲҲN (i)
                             m
                         1   X       (0)                  (0)              (t)      (0)
                                                                                              X
                      =       [Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©) + Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + вҹЁwj,r вҲ’ wj,r , DiвҲ’1            Оҫk вҹ©)]
                        m r=1
                                                                                             kвҲҲN (i)
                           m
                                                                          r
                         1 X         (0)                  (0)                  log(4n2 /Оҙ)       (t)
                      вүӨ       [Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©) + Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + 8n                  Оұ + ПҒМӮj,r,i )]
                        m r=1                                                       d
                                                                         r                 q
                                                                           log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                         q+1             (0)            (0)
                      вүӨ2     max |вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©|, |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©|, 8n                Оұ
                             j,r,i                                                d
                      вүӨ 1,
where the first inequality is by equation 22, equation 23 and the second inequality is by equation 19
            (t) (t)
and max{Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i } = O(1).

Lemma B.10. Under Condition 4.1, suppose equation 20 and equation 21 hold at iteration t. Then
                               (t)                  (0)                     (t)
                           вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© = вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© + Оіj,r ,
                                                                                          r
                               (t)             (0)             (t)                              log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                             вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + ПҒМӮj,r,i + 8n                                   Оұ
                                                                                                     d
                                                                               (t)        (t)
for all r вҲҲ [m], j = yi and i вҲҲ [n]. If max{Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i } = O(1), we further have that
      (t)
Fj (Wj , xМғi ) = O(1).
Remark B.11. Lemma B.10 further establishes that the update in the direction of Вө and ОҫМғ can be
constrained within specific bounds when j = yi . As a result, the output function remains controlled
and does not exceed a constant order with an additional condition.

Proof of Lemma B.10. For j = yi , we have that
                                              (t)                     (0)                       (t)
                                           вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© = вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© + Оіj,r ,                                           (24)
where the equation is by Lemma B.5. We also have that
                                                                                      r
                              (t)             (0)             (t)                           log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                            вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© + ПҒМӮj,r,i + 8n                                Оұ,                    (25)
                                                                                                 d


                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        (t)       (t)
where the inequality is by Lemma B.6. If max{Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i } = O(1), we have following bound

                           m
           (t)        1 X           (t)                  (t)
   Fj (Wj , xМғi ) =          [Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вө) + Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©)]
                     m r=1
                                                                                           r                q
                                                                                             log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                          q          (t)     (t)     (0)                  (0)
                   вүӨ 2 В· 3 max Оіj,r , |ПҒМӮj,r,i |, |вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вө)вҹ©|, |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©|, 8n               Оұ
                            j,r,i                                                                 d
                   = O(1),

        (t)                        (t)                      (t)
where ПҒМӮj,r,i = D1i
                       P
                          kвҲҲN (i) ПҒj,r,k 1(yk   = j) + ПҒj,r,k 1(yk Мё= j), the first inequality is by equa-
                                                                                                        (0)
tion 24, equation 25. Then the second inequality is by equation 19 where ОІ = 2 maxi,j,r {|вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В·
        (0)                                       (t) (t)
Вөвҹ©|, |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©|} вүӨ 1 and condition that max{Оіj,r , ПҒj,r,i } = O(1).


Equipped with Lemmas B.5 - B.10, we are now prepared to prove Proposition B.4. These lemmas
provide the foundational building blocks and insights necessary for our proof, setting the stage for a
rigorous and comprehensive demonstration of the proposition


Proof of Proposition B.4. Following a similar approach to the proof found in (Cao et al., 2022), we
employ an induction method. This technique allows us to build our argument step by step, drawing
on established principles and extending them to our specific context, thereby providing a robust and
systematic demonstration.
At the initial time step t = 0, the outcome is clear since all coefficients are set to zero.
Next, we hypothesize that there exists a time TМғ less that T вҲ— during which Proposition B.4 holds true
for every moment within the range 0 вүӨ t вүӨ TМғ вҲ’ 1. Our objective is to show that this proposition
remains valid at t = TМғ .
We aim to validate that equation equation 21 is applicable at t = TМғ , meaning that,
                                                   r
                                 (t)                  log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                ПҒj,r,i вүҘ вҲ’ОІ вҲ’ 16n                 Оұ,
                                                           d

for the given parameters. ItвҖҷs important to note that ПҒ(t)
                                                       j,r,i
                                                             = 0 when j = yi . So we only need to
consider instances where j Мё= yi .
1) Under condition
                                                              r
                                      TМғ вҲ’1)                       log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                   ПҒ(j,r,i   вүӨ вҲ’0.5ОІ вҲ’ 8n                      Оұ,
                                                                        d
Lemma B.6 leads us to the following relationships:
                                                                         r
                    (TМғ вҲ’1)          (TМғ вҲ’1)   (0)                           log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                  вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© вүӨ ПҒМӮj,r,i + вҹЁwj,r , yМғi Вөвҹ© + 8n                         Оұ вүӨ 0,
                                                                                  d
and thus
                             О· X вҲ’1 вҖІ(TМғ вҲ’1) вҖІ
                        TМғ вҲ’1)                         (TМғ вҲ’1)
           ПҒ(j,r,i
              TМғ )
                   = ПҒ(j,r,i   +   Dk В· в„“k      В· Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = вҲ’j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                            nm
                                k
                                     r
                    (TМғ вҲ’1)            log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                 = ПҒj,r,i вүҘ вҲ’ОІ вҲ’ 16n               Оұ,
                                            d
with the final inequality being supported by the induction hypothesis.


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                     q
                          TМғ вҲ’1)                                         log(4n2 /Оҙ)
2) Given the condition ПҒ(j,r,i   вүҘ вҲ’0.5ОІ вҲ’ 8n                                 d      Оұ, we can derive the following:

                            О·      X            вҖІ(TМғ вҲ’1)          (T вҲ’1)
       ПҒ(j,r,i
          TМғ )      TМғ вҲ’1)
               = ПҒ(j,r,i   +    В·         DkвҲ’1 в„“k        В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = вҲ’j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                           nm
                                  kвҲҲN (i)
                              r                         2                         r
                                 log(4n2 /Оҙ)             О·Пғp d вҖІ                     log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                 вүҘ вҲ’0.5ОІ вҲ’ 8n                ОұвҲ’O                  Пғ 0.5ОІ + 8n                    Оұ
                                      d                   nm                              d
                              r                                 2
                                                                                 r
                                        2                О·qПғp d                     log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                                 log(4n /Оҙ)
                 вүҘ вҲ’0.5ОІ вҲ’ 8n                ОұвҲ’O                     0.5ОІ + 8n                  Оұ
                                      d                    nm                            d
                            r
                              log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                 вүҘ вҲ’ОІ вҲ’ 16n                Оұ,
                                    d
                                                         вҖІ(TМғ вҲ’1)
where we apply the inequalities в„“i      вүӨ 1 and вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ2 = O(Пғp2 d), and use the conditions О· =
                              q
                                     2
O nm/(qПғp2 d) and 0.5ОІ + 8n log(4n     /Оҙ)

                                   d       Оұ вүӨ 1, as specified in equation 16.

Next, we aim to show that equation 20 is valid for t = TМғ . We can express:

                                вҖІ(t)                                            1
                             |в„“i | =                                 (t)              (t)
                                            1 + exp{yi В· [F+1 (W+1 , xМғi ) вҲ’ FвҲ’1 (WвҲ’1 , xМғi )]}
                                                                 (t)              (t)
                                          вүӨ exp{вҲ’yi В· [F+1 (W+1 , xМғi ) вҲ’ FвҲ’1 (WвҲ’1 , xМғi )]}
                                          вүӨ exp{вҲ’Fyi (Wy(t)i
                                                             , xМғi ) + 1}.                                                       (26)

with the last inequality being a result of Lemma B.8. Additionally, we recall the update rules for
 (t+1)       (t+1)
Оіj,r and ПҒj,r,i :
                                          n
                  (t+1)            О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ
                                    (t)                (t)
                 Оіj,r        = Оіj,r вҲ’ В·     в„“ В· Пғ (вҹЁwj,r , yМғi В· Вөвҹ©)yi yМғi вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ,
                                  nm i=1 i
                  (t+1)    (t)      О·       X       вҖІ(t)          (t)
                 ПҒj,r,i = ПҒj,r,i вҲ’      В·     DkвҲ’1 в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 .
                                   nm
                                                           kвҲҲN (i)

                                                                              (t)
We define tj,r,i as the final moment t < T вҲ— when ПҒj,r,i вүӨ 0.5Оұ.
                        (TМғ )
We can express ПҒj,r,i as follows:

         (TМғ )          (t      )           О·    X              вҖІ(t    )         (t      )
                    j,r,i
        ПҒj,r,i = ПҒj,r,i   вҲ’                   В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k j,r,i В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,rj,r,i , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                                          nm
                                                kвҲҲN (i)
                                          |                                   {z                                   }
                                                                                         I1
                                    X   О·    X              вҖІ(t)       (t)
                         вҲ’                В·         DkвҲ’1 В· в„“k В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 .                         (27)
                                       nm
                           tj,r,i <t<T      kвҲҲN (i)
                           |                                   {z                                   }
                                                                                    I2

Next, we aim to establish an upper bound for I1 :
                                                                                              r                    qвҲ’1
                                                                                                  log(4n2 /Оҙ)

                                    вҲ’1      вҲ’1                 (tj,r,i )
                 |I1 | вүӨ 2qn              m      О·       max ПҒМӮj,r,k     + 0.5ОІ + 8n                          Оұ          Пғp2 d
                                                          k                                            d
                        вүӨ q2q nвҲ’1 mвҲ’1 О·ОұqвҲ’1 Пғp2 d вүӨ 0.25Оұ,

          q Lemmas B.6 and A.1 for the first inequality, utilize the conditions ОІ вүӨ
where we apply
                                2
0.1Оұ and 8n log(4n
                 d
                   /Оҙ)
                       Оұ вүӨ 0.1Оұ for the second inequality, and finally, the constraint О· вүӨ
       q+2 qвҲ’2 2
nm/(q2 Оұ Пғp d) for the last inequality.


                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         (t)
Second, we bound I2 . For tj,r,i < t < TМғ and yk = j, we can lower bound вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© as follows,
                                                                               r
                                  (t)             (0)             (t)log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© вүҘ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + ПҒМӮj,r,k вҲ’ 8n     Оұ
                                                                          d
                                                                    r
                                                        1pвҲ’s          log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                              вүҘ вҲ’0.5ОІ +      Оұ вҲ’ 8n               Оұ
                                                        4p+s               d
                                              вүҘ 0.25Оұ,
                                                                                          (t)      1 pвҲ’s
where the first inequality is by Lemma B.6, the second inequality is by ПҒМӮj,r,i >                  4 p+s Оұ and
     (0)
вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ© вүҘ вҲ’0.5ОІ due to the definition of tj,r,i and ОІ, the last inequality is by ОІ вүӨ 0.1Оұ and
  q
               2 /Оҙ)
8n log(4n    d       Оұ вүӨ 0.1Оұ. Similarly, for tj,r,i < t < TМғ and yk = j, we can also upper bound
     (t)
вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© as follows,
                                                                                r
                                   (t)             (0)             (t) log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                 вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© вүӨ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + ПҒМӮj,r,k + 8n      Оұ
                                                                            d
                                                                   r
                                                       3pвҲ’s          log(4n2 /Оҙ)
                                              вүӨ 0.5ОІ +      Оұ + 8n               Оұ
                                                       4p+s               d
                                              вүӨ 2Оұ,
                                                                                                        (t)
where the first inequality is by Lemma B.6, the second inequality is by induction hypothesis ПҒМӮj,r,i вүӨ
                                             q
                                                     2 /Оҙ)
Оұ, the last inequality is by ОІ вүӨ 0.1Оұ and 8n log(4nd       Оұ вүӨ 0.1Оұ.
Hence, we can derive the following expression for I2 :
                  X            О·   X               (t)                        (t)
    |I2 | вүӨ                      В·   DkвҲ’1 exp(вҲ’Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) + 1) В· Пғ вҖІ (вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ©) В· 1(yk = j)вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                              nm
               tj,r,i <t<TМғ         kвҲҲN (i)
                     q   вҲ—
             eq2 О·T
           вүӨ           exp(вҲ’Оұq /4q )ОұqвҲ’1 Пғp2 d
                 n
           вүӨ 0.25T вҲ— exp(вҲ’Оұq /4q )Оұ
           вүӨ 0.25T вҲ— exp(вҲ’ log(T вҲ— )q )Оұ
           вүӨ 0.25Оұ,

where we apply equation 26 for the first inequality,
                                                       utilize Lemma A.1 for the second, employ the
constraint О· = O nm/(q2q+2 ОұqвҲ’2 Пғp2 d) in equation 16 for the third, and finally, the conditions
Оұ = 4 log(T вҲ— ) and log(T вҲ— )q вүҘ log(T вҲ— ) for the subsequent inequalities. By incorporating the
bounds of I1 and I2 into equation 27, we conclude the proof for ПҒ.
                                               (TМғ )
In a similar manner, we can establish that Оіj,r вүӨ Оұ by using О· = O nm/(q2q+2 ОұqвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ) in
equation 16. Thus, Proposition B.4 is valid for t = TМғ , completing the induction process. As a corol-
lary to Proposition B.4, we identify a crucial characteristic of the loss function during training within
the interval 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T вҲ— . This characteristic will play a vital role in the subsequent convergence
analysis.



C      T WO S TAGE DYNAMICS A NALYSIS

In this section, we employ a two-stage dynamics analysis to investigate the behavior of coefficient
iterations. During the first stage, the derivative of the loss function remains almost constant due to
the small weight initialization. In the second stage, the derivative of the loss function ceases to be
constant, necessitating an analysis that meticulously takes this into account.


                                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1    F IRST STAGE : FEATURE LEARNING VERSUS NOISE MEMORIZATION

Lemma C.1 (Restatement of Lemma 5.2). Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, in particular
if we choose
            n В· SNRq В· (n(p + s))q/2вҲ’1 вүҘ C log(6/Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 )22q+6 [4 log(8mn/Оҙ)](qвҲ’1)/2 ,                             (28)
                                                                                              q+1
                                                                        0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 )2
where C = O(1) is a positive constant, there exists time T1 = C log(6/Пғ
                                                                   О·Пғ qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq Оһq
                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                        such that
                                                                                  0       2


                   (T )
        вҖў maxr Оіj,r1 вүҘ 2 for j вҲҲ {Вұ1}.
             (t)              p
        вҖў |ПҒj,r,i | вүӨ Пғ0 Пғp       d/(n(p + s))/2 for all j вҲҲ {Вұ1}, r вҲҲ [m], i вҲҲ [n] and 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1 .
Remark C.2. In this lemma, we establish that the rate of signal learning significantly outpaces that
of noise memorization within GNNs. After a specific number of iterations, the GNN is able to learn
the signal from the data at a constant or higher order, while only memorizing a smaller order of
noise.

Proof of Lemma C.1. Let us define
                                       nmО· вҲ’1 Пғ02вҲ’q ПғpвҲ’q dвҲ’q/2 (n(p + s))(qвҲ’2)/2
                              T1+ =                                              .                                  (29)
                                            2q+4 q[4 log(8mn/Оҙ)](qвҲ’2)/2
We will begin by establishing the outcome related to noise memorization. Let ОЁ(t) be the maximum
                            (t)                                 (t)
value over all j, r, i of |ПҒj,r,i |, that is, ОЁ(t) = maxj,r,i {ПҒj,r,i , вҲ’ПҒ(t)
                                                                          j,r,i
                                                                                }. We will employ an inductive
argument to demonstrate that
                                                       p
                                           ОЁ(t) вүӨ Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))                                      (30)

is valid for the entire range 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T1+ . By its very definition, it is evident that ОЁ(0) = 0. Assuming
that there exists a value TМғ вүӨ T1+ for which equation equation 30 is satisfied for all 0 < t вүӨ TМғ вҲ’ 1,
we can proceed as follows.
                             О· X                  вҖІ(t)
       ОЁ(t+1) вүӨ ОЁ(t) +                  DkвҲ’1 В· |в„“k |В·
                            nm
                                kвҲҲN (i)
                                       n                                n
                                                                                                 !
                          (0)                (t) |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©|               (t) |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©|
                                     X                               X
                   вҖІ
                  Пғ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© +        ОЁ В·                    +        ОЁ В·                        В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                                     вҖІ
                                                     вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘ22         вҖІ
                                                                                      вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘ22
                                    i =1                             i =1
                                                                               n
                                                                                                         !
                             О·                            (0)                        (t) |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©|
                                   X                                         X
                     (t)                     вҲ’1 вҖІ
                вүӨОЁ +            В·         Dk Пғ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + 2 В·                ОЁ В·                2       В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                            nm                                                               вҲҘОҫ   вҖІ
                                                                                                i 2 вҲҘ
                                  kвҲҲN (i)                                   iвҖІ =1
                             О·     X
                = ОЁ(t) +        В·         DkвҲ’1 В·
                            nm
                                  kвҲҲN (i)
                                                        n
                                                                                                      !
                          (0)
                                                     X                        X |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫkвҖІ вҹ©|
                   вҖІ                     (t)                  (t)       вҲ’1
                  Пғ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + 2ОЁ + 2 В·                ОЁ В· Dk                              2        В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                                                                                        вҲҘОҫ  iвҖІвҲҘ
                                                                                                2
                                                    iвҖІ Мё=kвҖІ                kвҖІ вҲҲN (k)
                                                "
                            О·q     X
                                          DkвҲ’1 2 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))
                                                        p                           p
                вүӨ ОЁ(t) +        В·
                            nm
                                  kвҲҲN (i)
                                    p                     !          #qвҲ’1
                             4nПғp2 В· d log(4n2 /Оҙ)               (t)
                  + 2+                                      В·ОЁ              В· 2Пғp2 d
                                       Пғp2 d
                            О·q        p                             p                                  qвҲ’1
                вүӨ ОЁ(t) +        В· 2 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)) + 4ОЁ(t)                                В· 2Пғp2 d
                            nm
                            О·q        p                             p                    qвҲ’1
                вүӨ ОЁ(t) +        В· 4 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))                           В· 2Пғp2 d,
                            nm


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   вҖІ(t)
where the second inequality is due to the constraint |в„“i | вүӨ 1, the third inequality is de-
rived from Lemmas A.1 and A.7, the fourth inequality is a consequence of the condition d вүҘ
16Dn2 log(4n2 /Оҙ), and the final inequality is a result of the inductive assumption equation 30.
Summing over the sequence t = 0, 1, . . . , TМғ вҲ’ 1, we obtain
                          О·q      p                        p             qвҲ’1
            ОЁ(TМғ ) вүӨ TМғ В·    В· 4 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))           В· 2Пғp2 d
                          nm
                           О·q       p                        p             qвҲ’1
                   вүӨ T1+ В·     В· 4 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))           В· 2Пғp2 d
                           nm
                           p
                     Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))
                   вүӨ                         ,
                               2
                               justified by TМғ вүӨ T1+ in our inductive argument. Hence, by induction,
where the second inequality is p
we conclude that ОЁ вүӨ Пғ0 Пғp d/n(p + s)/2 for all t вүӨ T1+ .
                   (t)

Next, we can assume, without loss of generality, that j = 1. Let T1,1 represent the final time for t
                                              (t)
within the interval [0, T1+ ] such that maxr Оі1,r вүӨ 2, given Пғ0 вүӨ n(p + s)/d/Пғp . For t вүӨ T1,1 ,
                                                                 p
                      (t)                p                                  (t)
we have maxj,r,i {|ПҒj,r,i |} = O(Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))) = O(1) and maxr Оі1,r вүӨ 2. By applying
                                                     (t)                  (t)
Lemmas B.8 and B.10, we deduce that FвҲ’1 (WвҲ’1 , xМғi ), F+1 (W+1 , xМғi ) = O(1) for all i with yi = 1.
                                                              вҖІ(t)
Consequently, there exists a positive constant C1 such that вҲ’в„“i вүҘ C1 for all i with yi = 1.
By equation 11, for t вүӨ T1,1 we have
                                        n
                (t+1)  (t)        О· X вҖІ(t) вҖІ               (0)              (t)
               Оі1,r = Оі1,r вҲ’         В·    в„“ В· Пғ (yМғi В· вҹЁw1,r , Вөвҹ© + yМғi В· Оі1,r ) В· yМғi вҲҘВөвҲҘ22
                                 nm i=1 i
                           (t)   C1 О· X вҖІ              (0)                (t)     pвҲ’s
                        вүҘ Оі1,r +      В·    Пғ (yi Оһ В· вҹЁw1,r , Вөвҹ© + yi Оһ В· Оі1,r ) В·        вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 .
                                 nm y =1                                          p+s
                                          i


         (t)      (t)        (0)                             (t)
Denote ОіМӮ1,r = Оі1,r + вҹЁw1,r , Вөвҹ© and let A(t) = maxr ОіМӮ1,r . Then we have
                                               C1 О· X вҖІ
                              A(t+1) вүҘ A(t) +       В·     Пғ (ОһA(t) ) В· ОһвҲҘВөвҲҘ22
                                               nm y =1
                                                       i
                                                                   qвҲ’1
                                               C1 О·qвҲҘВөвҲҘ22

                                      вүҘ A(t) +             ОһA(t)       Оһ
                                                   4m
                                              C1 О·qвҲҘВөвҲҘ22   (0)  qвҲ’2 q

                                      вүҘ 1+                A        Оһ A(t)
                                                  4m
                                              C1 О·qПғ0qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq2 q

                                      вүҘ 1+                    Оһ A(t) ,
                                                    2q m

where the second inequality arises from the lower bound on the quantity of positive data as estab-
lished in Lemma A.4, the third inequality is a result of the increasing nature of the sequence A(t) , and
                                                       (0)
the final inequality is derived from A(0) = maxr вҹЁw1,r , Вөвҹ© вүҘ Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 /2, as proven in Lemma A.7.
Consequently, the sequence A(t) exhibits exponential growth, and we can express it as
                                                                 t
                                           C1 О·qПғ0qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq2 q

                             A(t) вүҘ 1 +                       Оһ     A(0)
                                                 2q m
                                           C1 О·qПғ0qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq2 q

                                   вүҘ exp                      Оһ t A(0)
                                                2q+1 m
                                           C1 О·qПғ0qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq2 q Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2

                                   вүҘ exp                      Оһ t           ,
                                                2q+1 m                 2
where the second inequality is justified by the relation 1 + z вүҘ exp(z/2) for z вүӨ 2 and our specific
conditions on О· and Пғ0 as listed in Condition 4.1. The last inequality is a consequence of Lemma A.7


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the definition of A(0) . Thus, A(t) will attain the value of 2 within T1 iterations, defined as
                                                            log(6/Пғ0 вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 )2q+1 m
                                                  T1 =                            .
                                                              C1 О·qПғ0qвҲ’2 вҲҘВөвҲҘq2 Оһq
                   (t)                               (t)
Since maxr Оі1,r вүҘ A(t) вҲ’ 1, maxr Оі1,r will reach 2 within T1 iterations. Next, we can confirm that
                                         nmО· вҲ’1 Пғ02вҲ’q ПғpвҲ’q dвҲ’q/2 (n(p + s))(qвҲ’2)/2
                                T1 вүӨ                                               = T1+ /2,
                                              2q+5 q[4 log(8mn/Оҙ)](qвҲ’1)/2
where the inequality is consistent with our SNR condition in equation 28. Therefore, by the defini-
tion of T1,1 , we deduce that T1,1 вүӨ T1 вүӨ T1+ /2, utilizing the non-decreasing property of Оі. The
                                                                                  (T1,вҲ’1 )
proof for j = вҲ’1 follows a similar logic, leading us to the conclusion that maxr ОівҲ’1,r     вүҘ 2 while
                  +
T1,вҲ’1 вүӨ T1 вүӨ T1 /2, thereby completing the proof.



C.2      S ECOND STAGE : CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS

After the first stage and at time step T1 we know that:
                                                                  n                   n
                   (T )            (0)            (T )      Вө     X  (T1 )    Оҫi      X           Оҫi
              wj,r1 = wj,r + j В· Оіj,r1 В·                      2 +   ПҒj,r,i В·      2 +   ПҒ(T 1)
                                                                                               В·         .
                                                           вҲҘВөвҲҘ2 i=1          вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ2 i=1  j,r,i   вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
And at the beginning of the second stage, we have following property holds:
                         (T )
         вҖў maxr Оіj,r1 вүҘ 2, вҲҖj вҲҲ {Вұ1}.
                         1  (T )                                 p
         вҖў maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i | вүӨ ОІМӮ where ОІМӮ = Пғ0 Пғp                    d/(n(p + s))/2.
                                                                 (t)
Lemma 5.1 implies that the learned feature Оіj,r will not get worse, i.e., for t вүҘ T1 , we have that
 (t+1)       (t)                                    (t)
Оіj,r     вүҘ Оіj,r , and therefore maxr Оіj,r вүҘ 2. Now we choose WвҲ— as follows:
                                           вҲ—             (0)                         Вө
                                          wj,r = wj,r + 2qm log(2q/Пө) В· j В·               .
                                                                                    вҲҘВөвҲҘ22

While the context of CNN presents subtle differences from the scenario described in CNN (Cao
et al., 2022), we can adapt the same analytical approach to derive the following two lemmas:
Lemma C.3 ((Cao et al., 2022)). Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, we have that вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’
WвҲ— вҲҘF вүӨ OМғ(m3/2 вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’12 ).
Lemma C.4 ((Cao et al., 2022)). Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, we have that
                     вҲҘW(t) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F вҲ’ вҲҘW(t+1) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F вүҘ (2q вҲ’ 1)О·LS (W(t) ) вҲ’ О·Пө
for all T1 вүӨ t вүӨ T вҲ— .
Lemma  j C.5  (Restatement   of Lemma 5.3). Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, let T =
         вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’WвҲ— вҲҘ2F
                         k
                                                                                 (t)
T1 +          2О·Пө          = T1 + OМғ(m3 О· вҲ’1 ПөвҲ’1 вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’2
                                                    2 ). Then we have maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i | вүӨ 2ОІМӮ =
     p
Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)) for all T1 вүӨ t вүӨ T . Besides,
                                            t
                               1     X                вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F       Пө
                                       LS (W(s) ) вүӨ                      +
                          t вҲ’ T1 + 1                (2q вҲ’ 1)О·(t вҲ’ T1 + 1) 2q вҲ’ 1
                                           s=T1

for all T1 вүӨ t вүӨ T , and we can find an iterate with training loss smaller than Пө within T iterations.

Proof of Lemma C.5. We adapt the convergence proof for CNN(Cao et al., 2022) to extend the anal-
ysis to GNN. By invoking Lemma C.4, for any given time interval t вҲҲ [T1 , T ], we can deduce
that
                    вҲҘW(s) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F вҲ’ вҲҘW(s+1) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F вүҘ (2q вҲ’ 1)О·LS (W(s) ) вҲ’ О·Пө,


                                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is valid for s вүӨ t. Summing over this interval, we arrive at


                      t
                      X                             вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F + О·Пө(t вҲ’ T1 + 1)
                                 LS (W(s) ) вүӨ                                         .                                (31)
                                                               (2q вҲ’ 1)О·
                      s=T1


This inequality holds for all T1 вүӨ t вүӨ T . Dividing both sides of equation 31 by (t вҲ’ T1 + 1), we
obtain


                                     t
                       1     X                вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F       Пө
                               LS (W(s) ) вүӨ                      +       .
                  t вҲ’ T1 + 1                (2q вҲ’ 1)О·(t вҲ’ T1 + 1) 2q вҲ’ 1
                                   s=T1


By setting t = T , we find that


                          T
             1      X                вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F       Пө       3Пө
                      LS (W(s) ) вүӨ                      +       вүӨ        < Пө,
         T вҲ’ T1 + 1                (2q вҲ’ 1)О·(T вҲ’ T1 + 1) 2q вҲ’ 1   2q вҲ’ 1
                      s=T1


                                                                                            вҲ’WвҲ— вҲҘ2F
                                                                                    j (T1 )         k
                                                                                      вҲҘW
where we utilize the condition that q > 2 and the specific choice of T = T1 +             2О·Пө        .
Since the mean value is less than Пө, it follows that there must exist a time interval T1 вүӨ t вүӨ T for
which LS (W(t) ) < Пө.
                                                             (t)
Finally, we aim to demonstrate that maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i | вүӨ 2ОІМӮ holds for all t вҲҲ [T1 , T ]. By inserting
                   вҲ’WвҲ— вҲҘ2F
          j (T1 )          k
            вҲҘW
T = T1 +          2О·Пө        into equation equation 31, we obtain



                     T
                     X                             2вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘ2F
                                LS (W(s) ) вүӨ                         = OМғ(О· вҲ’1 m3 вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ),                             (32)
                                                      (2q вҲ’ 1)О·
                     s=T1


where the inequality is a consequence of вҲҘW(T1 ) вҲ’ WвҲ— вҲҘF вүӨ OМғ(m3/2 вҲҘВөвҲҘвҲ’1
                                                                      2 ) as shown in
Lemma C.3.
                                         (t)
LetвҖҷs define ОЁ(t) = maxj,r,i |ПҒj,r,i |. We will employ induction to prove ОЁ(t) вүӨ 2ОІМӮ for all t вҲҲ
[T1 , T ]. At t = T1 , by the definition of ОІМӮ, it is clear that ОЁ(T1 ) вүӨ ОІМӮ вүӨ 2ОІМӮ.
Assuming that there exists TМғ вҲҲ [T1 , T ] such that ОЁ(t) вүӨ 2ОІМӮ for all t вҲҲ [T1 , TМғ вҲ’ 1], we can consider
t вҲҲ [T1 , TМғ вҲ’ 1]. Using the expression:


             (t+1)        (t)       О·   X       вҖІ(t)
           ПҒj,r,i = ПҒj,r,i вҲ’          В·   DkвҲ’1 в„“k
                                   nm
                                               kвҲҲN (i)
                                                 n                            n
                                                                                                       !
                                (0)                     (t) вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©                вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©
                                                 X                         X
                     ПғвҖІ       вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© +          ПҒj,r,iвҖІ        2  +       ПҒ(t)
                                                                                  j,r,iвҖІ вҲҘОҫ вҖІ вҲҘ2
                                                                                                           В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22   (33)
                                                               вҲҘОҫ  вҖІ
                                                                  i 2вҲҘ                      i 2
                                                 iвҖІ =1                     iвҖІ =1



                                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we can proceed to analyze:
                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                        !
                                          О·   X        вҖІ(t)        (0)
                                                                                   X          |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫМғk вҹ©|
ОЁ   (t+1)
            вүӨОЁ       (t)
                           + max            В·   DkвҲ’1 |в„“k | В· Пғ вҖІ вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + 2     ОЁ(t) В·                                               В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                             j,r,i       nm                                        вҖІ
                                                                                                вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘ22
                                                kвҲҲN (i)                                                     i =1

                                          О·       X                 вҖІ(t)
            = ОЁ(t) + max                    В·             DkвҲ’1 |в„“k |В·
                             j,r,i       nm
                                                kвҲҲN (i)
                                                          n
                                                                                                                    !
                        (0)
                                                          X                              X         |вҹЁОҫiвҖІ , ОҫkвҖІ вҹ©|
             Пғ   вҖІ
                      вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғk вҹ© + 2ОЁ(t) + 2                     ОЁ   (t)
                                                                              В· DkвҲ’1                                    В· вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22
                                                                                                     вҲҘОҫiвҖІ вҲҘ22
                                                          iвҖІ Мё=kвҖІ                      kвҖІ вҲҲN (k)
                                                                              "
                     О·q         X             вҖІ(t)
                                       DkвҲ’1 |в„“k | В· 2 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))
                                                         p                       p
            вүӨ ОЁ(t) +     В· max
                     nm     i
                               kвҲҲN (i)
                               p                 !        #qвҲ’1
                            2
                        4nПғp В· d log(4n2 /Оҙ)          (t)
                + 2+                               В·ОЁ          В· 2Пғp2 d
                                Пғp2 d/2
                     О·q         X             вҖІ(t)
            вүӨ ОЁ(t) +     В· max         DkвҲ’1 |в„“k |В·
                     nm     i
                               kвҲҲN (i)
                 p                     p                            qвҲ’1
              2 В· log(8mn/Оҙ) В· Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s)) + 4 В· ОЁ(t)            В· 2Пғp2 d.

The second inequality is derived from Lemmas A.1 and A.7, while the final inequality is based
on the assumption that d вүҘ 16n2 log(4n2 /Оҙ). By taking a telescoping sum, we can express the
following:

                                     (i)                 TМғ вҲ’1
                                                      О·q X         X        вҖІ(t)
                             ОЁ(T ) вүӨ ОЁ(T1 ) +                  max   DkвҲ’1 |в„“k |OМғ(Пғp2 d)ОІМӮ qвҲ’1
                                                      nm        i
                                                              s=T1                kвҲҲN (i)

                                     (ii)                                TМғ вҲ’1
                                                      О·q                 X         X       (s)
                                     вүӨ ОЁ(T1 ) +          OМғ(Пғp2 d)ОІМӮ qвҲ’1       max   DkвҲ’1 в„“k
                                                      nm                        i
                                                                                       s=T1          kвҲҲN (i)

                                     (iii)                                                TМғ
                                                                                          X  вҲ’1
                                         вүӨ ОЁ(T1 ) + OМғ(О·mвҲ’1 Пғp2 d)ОІМӮ qвҲ’1                           LS (W(s) )
                                                                                          s=T1
                                     (iv)
                                         вүӨ ОЁ(T1 ) + OМғ(m2 SNRвҲ’2 )ОІМӮ qвҲ’1
                                     (v)
                                     вүӨ ОІМӮ + OМғ(m2 n2/q (n(p + s))1вҲ’2/q ОІМӮ qвҲ’2 )ОІМӮ
                                     (vi)
                                         вүӨ 2ОІМӮ,

where (i) follows from our induction assumption that ОЁ(t) вүӨ 2ОІМӮ, (ii) is derived from the relationship
                                                                    P (s)
|в„“вҖІ | вүӨ в„“, (iii) is obtained by the sum of maxi kвҲҲN (i) DkвҲ’1 вүӨ                = nLS (W(s) ), (iv) is
                                                  P
                                                                        i в„“i
                            PTМғ вҲ’1                 T
due to the summation of s=T1 LS (W(s) ) вүӨ s=T1 LS (W(s) ) = OМғ(О· вҲ’1 m3 вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 ) as shown in
                                                 P
                                                 q         q/2вҲ’1
equation 32, (v) is basedpon the condition nSNR В·(n(p+s))          вүҘ в„ҰМғ(1), and (vi) follows from the
definition of ОІМӮ =
                 p Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(pqвҲ’2 + s))/2 and OМғ(m n (n(p+s))1вҲ’2/q ОІМӮ qвҲ’2 ) = OМғ(m2 n2/q (n(p+
                                                   2 2/q
     1вҲ’2/q
s))        (Пғ0 Пғp d/(n(p + s))) ) вүӨ 1.

Thus, we conclude that ОЁ(TМғ ) вүӨ 2ОІМӮ, completing the induction and establishing the desired result.

C.3     P OPULATION LOSS

Consider a new data point (x, y) drawn from the SNM-SBM distribution. Without loss of generality,
we suppose that the first patch is the signal patch and the second patch is the noise patch, i.e., x =


                                                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[y В· Вө, Оҫ]. Moreover, by the signal-noise decomposition, the learned neural network has parameter:
                                                 n                 n
                 (t)     (0)        (t)    Вө     X   (t)   Оҫi      X         Оҫi
              wj,r = wj,r + j В· Оіj,r В·         +   ПҒ     В·       +   ПҒ(t) В·
                                          вҲҘВөвҲҘ22 i=1 j,r,i вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22 i=1 j,r,i вҲҘОҫi вҲҘ22

for j вҲҲ {Вұ1} and r вҲҲ [m].
Although the framework of CNN diverges in certain nuances from the situation of CNN outlined in
(Cao et al., 2022), we are able to employ a similar analytical methodology to deduce the subsequent
two lemmas:
                                                                                              (t)
Lemma C.6. Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, we have that maxj,r |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©| вүӨ 1/2
for all 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T , and i вҲҲ [n].
Lemma C.7. Under the same conditions as Theorem 4.3, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 4mT В·
                                                          (t)
exp(вҲ’C2вҲ’1 Пғ0вҲ’2 ПғpвҲ’2 dвҲ’1 n(p + s)), we have that maxj,r |вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғвҹ©| вүӨ 1/2 for all 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T , where
C2 = OМғ(1).
Lemma C.8 (Restatement of Lemma 5.4). Let T be defined in Lemma 5.2 respectively. Under the
same conditions as Theorem 4.3, for any 0 вүӨ t вүӨ T with LS (W(t) ) вүӨ 1, it holds that LD (W(t) ) вүӨ
c1 В· LS (W(t) ) + exp(вҲ’c2 n2 ).

Proof of Lemma C.8. Consider the occurrence of event E, defined as the condition under which
Lemma C.7 is satisfied. We can then express the loss LD (W(t) ) as a sum of two components:


           E в„“ yf (W(t) , xМғ) = E[1(E)в„“ yf (W(t) , xМғ) ] + E[1(E c )в„“ yf (W(t) , xМғ) ] .

                                                                                                      (34)
                                |        {z            } |             {z            }
                                                 Term I1                      Term I2


Next, we proceed to establish bounds for I1 and I2 .
Bounding I1 :  Given that LS (W(t) ) вүӨ 1, there must be an instance (xМғi , yi ) for which
в„“ yi f (W(t) , xМғi ) вүӨ LS (W(t) ) вүӨ 1, leading to yi f (W(t) , xМғi ) вүҘ 0. Hence, we obtain:


                         (i)
exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғi )) вүӨ 2 log 1 + exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғi )) = 2в„“ yi f (W(t) , xМғi ) вүӨ 2LS (W(t) ),


                                                                                               (35)
where (i) follows from the inequality z вүӨ 2 log(1 + z), вҲҖz вүӨ 1. If event E occurs, we deduce:


                                           (2)        1 X                      1 X
        |yf (W(t) , xМғ(2) ) вҲ’ yi f (W(t) , xМғi )| вүӨ         Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғi вҹ©) +       Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғвҹ©)
                                                      m j,r                    m j,r
                                                  вүӨ 1.                                                (36)

Here, f (W(t) , xМғ(2) ) refers to the input xМғ = [0, xМғ(2) ]. The second inequality is justified by Lem-
mas C.7 and C.6. Consequently, we have:


               I1 вүӨ E[1(E) exp(вҲ’yf (W(t) , xМғ))]
                  = E[1(E) exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғ(1) )) exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғ(2) ))]
                                                             (1)                        (2)
                  вүӨ 2e В· C В· E[1(E) exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғi )) exp(вҲ’yi f (W(t) , xМғi ))]
                  вүӨ 2e В· E[1(E)LS (W(t) )],

where the inequalities follow from the properties of cross-entropy loss, equation 36, Lemma A.4,
and equation 35. The constant c1 encapsulates the factors in the derivation.


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Estimating I2 : We now turn our attention to the second term I2 . By selecting an arbitrary training
data point (xiвҖІ , yiвҖІ ) with yiвҖІ = y, we can derive the following:


        в„“ yf (W(t) , xМғ) вүӨ log(1 + exp(FвҲ’y (W(t) , xМғ)))


                          вүӨ 1 + FвҲ’y (W(t) , xМғ)
                                1     X             (t)           1                    X              (t)
                          =1+                   Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , yМғВөвҹ©) +                               Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғвҹ©)
                                m                                 m
                                          j=вҲ’y,rвҲҲ[m]                            j=вҲ’y,rвҲҲ[m]
                                                                   1      X               (t)
                          вүӨ 1 + FвҲ’yi (WвҲ’yiвҖІ , xМғiвҖІ ) +                              Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғвҹ©)
                                                                   m
                                                                       j=вҲ’y,rвҲҲ[m]
                              1               X              (t)
                          вүӨ2+                            Пғ(вҹЁwj,r , ОҫМғвҹ©)
                              m
                                          j=вҲ’y,rвҲҲ[m]
                                      вҲҡ
                          вүӨ 2 + OМғ((Пғ0 d)q )вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘq ,                                                              (37)

where the inequalities follow from the properties of the cross-entropy loss and the constraints defined
in Lemma B.8. The last inequality is a result of the boundedness of the inner product with ОҫМғ.
Continuing, we have:

                                                        r h
                                    p                                       2 i
                          I2 вүӨ          E[1(E c )] В·     E в„“ yf (W(t) , xМғ)
                                                    q          вҲҡ
                                                     4 + OМғ((Пғ0 d)2q )E[вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘ2q
                                    p
                                вүӨ       P(E c ) В·                           2 ]
                                          "                      !              #
                                                        вҲ’2 вҲ’2
                                                       Пғ0 Пғp
                                вүӨ exp вҲ’в„ҰМғ                          + polylog(d)
                                                    dвҲ’1 n(p + s)
                                вүӨ exp(вҲ’c1 n2 ),

where c1 is a constant, the first inequality is by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, the sec-
ond
q inequality      is by equation 37, the third inequality is by Lemma C.7 and the fact that
              вҲҡ
   4 + OМғ((Пғ0 d)2q )E[вҲҘОҫМғвҲҘ2q ] = O(poly(d)), and the last inequality is by our condition Пғ0 вүӨ
     вҲ’2/(qвҲ’2) вҲ’1
                         p2
OМғ(m          n ) В· (Пғp d/(n(p + s)))вҲ’1 in Condition 4.1. Plugging the bounds of I1 , I2 com-
pletes the proof.

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL P ROCEDURES AND R ESULTS
D.1   DATASET IN N ODE C LASSIFICATION

In Figure 1, we execute node classification experiments on three frequently used citation networks:
Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed Kipf & Welling (2016a). Detailed information about these datasets is
provided below and summarized in Table 1.

                                          Table 1: Details of Datasets

                     Dataset     Nodes        Edges      Classes   Features    Train/Val/Test
                      Cora       2,708        5,429         7          1,433   0.05/0.18/0.37
                     Citeseer    3,327        4,732         6          3,703   0.04/0.15/0.30
                     Pubmed      19,717       44,338        3           500    0.003/0.03/0.05


       вҖў The Cora dataset includes 2,708 scientific publications, each categorized into one of seven
         classes, connected by 5,429 links. Each publication is represented by a binary word vector,
         which denotes the presence or absence of a corresponding word from a dictionary of 1,433
         unique words.


                                                          29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Figure 7: Test accuracy heatmap for GCNs after training.


      вҖў The Citeseer dataset comprises 3,312 scientific publications, each classified into one of six
        classes, connected by 4,732 links. Each publication is represented by a binary word vector,
        indicating the presence or absence of a corresponding word from a dictionary that includes
        3,703 unique words.
      вҖў The Pubmed Diabetes dataset includes 19,717 scientific publications related to diabetes,
        drawn from the PubMed database and classified into one of three classes. The citation
        network is made up of 44,338 links. Each publication is represented by a TF-IDF weighted
        word vector from a dictionary consisting of 500 unique words.

D.2   PARALLELS BETWEEN OUR DATA MODEL AND REAL - WORLD DATASET

These datasets (Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed) employ a bag-of-words feature representation, typ-
ically represented by one-hot vectors, thereby ensuring orthogonality between features. We can
conceptually divide words into two categories: label-relevant and label-irrelevant. For example,
words like вҖңalgorithmвҖқ or вҖңneural networkвҖқ are label-relevant to the subject of computer science,
while general words like вҖңstudyвҖқ or вҖңapproachвҖқ are label-irrelevant. In our SNM, Вө represents
label-relevant features, while Оҫ represents label-irrelevant ones.
Furthermore, the datasets Wiki-CS, Amazon-Computers, Amazon-Photo, Coauthor-CS, and
Coauthor-Physics Shchur et al. (2018) also parallels with our theoretical model and we provide
the more discussion as follows:

      вҖў Coauthor CS (Computer Science) & Coauthor Physics (Coauthor Phy.): The dataset typi-
        cally includes features based on the keywords of an authorвҖҷs papers, and the task is often
        to predict each authorвҖҷs research field or interests based on their publication record and
        collaboration network.
      вҖў Amazon Computers & Amazon Photo: Node features are derived from product reviews,
        and the classification task involves predicting product categories based on the co-purchase
        relationships and review data.
      вҖў WikiCS Node features could be derived from the text of the articles, such as word vectors.
        The classification task usually involves categorizing articles into different areas or subjects
        within Computer Science based on their content and the article network structure.

We have broadened our analysis to include the measurement of cosine similarity between two equal-
sized parts of node features (excluding the final feature for odd-sized representations) across a di-
verse range of datasets. This extended analysis bolsters the orthogonality relation posited in our
model. The results are presented in Table 2.


                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Dataset            Feature Dimension      Cossin Similarity
                   Cora                     1433                  1.57 Г— 10вҲ’5
                   Citeseer                 3703                  3.99 Г— 10вҲ’6
                   Pubmed                    500                  2.00 Г— 10вҲ’4
                   Coauthor CS              6805                  2.28 Г— 10вҲ’6
                   Coauthor Phy.            8451                  1.08 Г— 10вҲ’6
                   Amazon Comp.              767                  9.00 Г— 10вҲ’4
                   Amazon Photo              745                  9.00 Г— 10вҲ’4
                   WikiCS                    300                  1.00 Г— 10вҲ’4

           Table 2: Cosine similarity analysis of node features across various datasets.


D.3   P HASE TRANSITION IN GCN

In Figure 5, we illustrated the variance in test accuracy between CNN and GCN within a chosen
range of SNR and sample numbers, where GCN was shown to achieve near-perfect test accuracy.
Here, we broaden the SNR range towards the smaller end and display the corresponding phase
diagram of GCN in Figure 7. When the SNR is exceedingly small, we observe that GCNs return
lower test accuracy, suggesting the possibility of a phase transition in the test accuracy of GCNs.

D.4   S OFTWARE AND HARDWARE

We implement our methods with PyTorch. For the software and hardware configurations, we ensure
the consistent environments for each datasets. We run all the experiments on Linux servers with
NVIDIA V100 graphics cards with CUDA 11.2.


                                                31
