Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NFO C ON : C ONCEPT D ISCOVERY WITH G ENERATIVE
AND D ISCRIMINATIVE I NFORMATIVENESS

 Ruizhe Liu1,2∗ , Qian Luo1 , Yanchao Yang1,3
 1
   HKU Musketeers Foundation Institute of Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
 2
   School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
 3
   Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
 lrz360@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yanchaoy,qianluo}@hku.hk



                                                    A BSTRACT
             We focus on the self-supervised discovery of manipulation concepts that can
             be adapted and reassembled to address various robotic tasks. We propose that
             the decision to conceptualize a physical procedure should not depend on how
             we name it (semantics) but rather on the significance of the informativeness in
             its representation regarding the low-level physical state and state changes. We
             model manipulation concepts – discrete symbols – as generative and discrimi-
             native goals and derive metrics that can autonomously link them to meaningful
             sub-trajectories from noisy, unlabeled demonstrations. Specifically, we employ a
             trainable codebook containing encodings (concepts) capable of synthesizing the
             end-state of a sub-trajectory given the current state – generative informativeness.
             Moreover, the encoding corresponding to a particular sub-trajectory should dif-
             ferentiate the state within and outside it and confidently predict the subsequent
             action based on the gradient of its discriminative score – discriminative informa-
             tiveness. These metrics, which do not rely on human annotation, can be seam-
             lessly integrated into a VQ-VAE framework, enabling the partitioning of demon-
             strations into semantically consistent sub-trajectories, fulfilling the purpose of dis-
             covering manipulation concepts and the corresponding sub-goal (key) states. We
             evaluate the effectiveness of the learned concepts by training policies that utilize
             them as guidance, demonstrating superior performance compared to other base-
             lines. Additionally, our discovered manipulation concepts compare favorably to
             human-annotated ones while saving much manual effort. Our code is available at:
             https://zrllrz.github.io/InfoCon /


1       I NTRODUCTION
Conceptual development is of core importance to the emergence of human-like intelligence, ranging
from primary perceptual grouping to sophisticated scientific terminologies (Sloutsky, 2010). We
focus on embodied tasks that require interaction with the physical environment and seek the ma-
nipulation concepts that are critical for learning efficient and generalizable action policies (Lázaro-
Gredilla et al., 2019; Shao et al., 2021). Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have enabled
many interesting robotic applications with their reasoning capabilities that can break complex em-
bodied tasks into short-horizon interactions or manipulation concepts (Singh et al., 2023). However,
LLMs are trained with an internet-scale corpus, representing a vast amount of linguistic knowledge
of manipulations, but lack embodied experiences that ground these manipulation concepts to spe-
cific physical states (Brohan et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). In contrast, it is worth noting that in
human development, infants initially acquire physical skills, e.g., crawling, grasping, and walking,
before delving into the complexities of language, which grant the manipulation concepts described
in language with groundingness in the first place (Walle & Campos, 2014; Libertus & Violi, 2016).
Drawing inspiration from the human developmental process, we aim to equip embodied agents
with manipulation concepts intrinsically connected to physical states without relying on additional
grounding techniques. Specifically, we seek algorithms that allow agents to abstract or identify
    ∗
        Work done as a research assistant at HKU.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The proposed generative and discriminative informativeness and the derived InfoCon al-
gorithm can discover manipulation concepts from noisy, unlabeled demonstrations. Each identified
concept relates to a sub-goal and defines the partitioning of a whole trajectory into sub-trajectories,
showing the process governed by the concept for achieving the sub-goal. Concepts from InfoCon
share similarities with human-annotated ones while having more fine-grained semantics, which can
be more beneficial for physical interactions but are time-consuming to label manually.

manipulation concepts from their embodied experiences, such as demonstration trajectories, with-
out humans specifying and annotating the involved concepts. The discovery process serves a dual
purpose. Firstly, it generates a set of discrete symbols that hold semantic meaning, with some po-
tentially representing concepts like “grasping a block” or “aligning a block with a hole on the wall.”
Furthermore, the discovery process should explicitly establish correspondences between the con-
cepts and physical states, thereby achieving the grounding for low-level actions while minimizing
annotation efforts.
Therefore, we propose to model manipulation concepts as generative and discriminative goals.
Specifically, as a generative goal, a manipulation concept should help predict the goal state even
though it has not been achieved yet. For example, when given the manipulation concept “grasp the
block,” one can already (roughly) synthesize how the scene looks when the robotic gripper grasps
the block. We formulate it as the informativeness between the manipulation concept and the syn-
thesized ending state when the interaction implied by the manipulation concept is accomplished,
which we name generative informativeness. On the other hand, given a manipulation concept as
a discriminative goal, one could tell if the current state is within the process of achieving the goal
state implied by the concept. For example, with the concept “place the cup under the faucet,” one
would assign low compatibility to the state of “pouring water to the mug” compared to the correct
one. Similarly, we can formulate it as the informativeness between the manipulation concept and
the binary variable, indicating whether the state falls within the manipulation process, which we call
discriminative informativeness. Moreover, as a discriminative goal, a manipulation concept should
inform the following action. If an action incurs a higher discriminative score (compatibility), then
it should be executed to accomplish the task. Accordingly, we formulate it as the informativeness
between the gradient of the discriminative function (conditioned on the manipulation concept) and
the next action in the demonstration.
With the proposed metrics, we can train a VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) architecture to learn
the discrete representations of potential manipulation concepts from the demonstration, as well as
the assignment (grounding) between the learned concepts and the physical states, even though no
concept descriptions are available in any form. We examine the quality of the learned manipula-
tion concepts through the automatically acquired grounding, and verify that these concepts do come
with semantic meaning in terms of human linguistics Fig 1. We further demonstrate the usefulness
of the learned manipulation concepts by using the grounded states as guidance to train manipulation
policies. Experimental results show that the discovered manipulation concepts from unannotated
demonstrations enable policies that surpass the state-of-the-art counterparts, while achieving com-
parable performance with respect to the oracle trained with human labels, which verifies the effec-
tiveness of the proposed metrics and training for self-supervised manipulation concept discovery.


2   M ETHOD

Problem Setup We aim to characterize the multi-step nature of low-level manipulation tasks.
More explicitly, we assume access to a set of pre-collected demonstrations or trajectories, i.e.,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: We characterize a manipulation concept from two conjugate perspectives. As a generative
goal, a manipulation concept helps synthesize the state when the physical process meant by the
concept is accomplished. On the other, as a discriminative goal, a manipulation concept indicates
(through a scoring function) whether a state lies within the process governed by it. Moreover, it
informs the next action with the gradient of the scoring function, as the action taken should maximize
the discriminative utility.
                                    T (i)
D = {τi }N                    i i
           i=1 and τi = {(st , at )}t=1 , which is a sequence of state-action pairs. Our goal is to
partition each trajectory into semantically meaningful segments (continuous in time), while main-
taining consistency between trajectories of the same task without resorting to human annotations.
We call what governs the actions within a particular trajectory segment the manipulation concept.
And the “semantic meaning” of the manipulation concept lies in its generative and discriminative
informativeness, which we discuss in Sec. 2.1. We further name the state at the boundary of two
segments as the key state (Jia et al., 2023). We examine how the learned manipulation concepts align
with human semantics, as well as the quality of the partitions, by evaluating the effectiveness of the
derived key states on physical manipulation benchmarks. We adopt the CoTPC Jia et al. (2023)
framework to train concept-guided policies across different benchmarks. Next, we elaborate on the
proposed partitioning metrics.

2.1   M ANIPULATION C ONCEPT AS G ENERATIVE AND D ISCRIMINATIVE G OALS

Suppose a task can be described by K manipulation concepts {αk }K                       M
                                                                       k=1 with αk ∈ R . Or equiv-
alently, a trajectory τ = {(st , at )}t=1 from this task could be divided into K segments {βk }K
                                      T
                                                                                                  k=1 ,
with each β a continuous short-horizon trajectory and τ = ∪K     k=1 β k . Note that we do not endow
αk with any specific linguistic descriptions at this moment (e.g., “pick up a cup” or “place the cup
under the faucet”). Instead, we treat them as symbols grounded in the segments with consistency
across different trajectories of the same task. In other words, we assume the existence of a partition-
ing function (neural network) Φ such that {βk }K   k=1 = Φ(τ ). We detail the structure of Φ later and
enable the training of Φ by proposing the following criteria.
As a generative goal, a manipulation concept αk shall, given the current state, inform the end state
                                          Pk
of βk , i.e., the key state stk with tk = j=1 |βj |, where | · | is the length of a (sub)sequence. For
example, with the manipulation concept that resembles “grasp the mug handle,” one can imagine
the picture depicting when the handle is firmly grasped. We formalize this metric using Shannon’s
mutual information:
                             Lgen (α) = I(α; skey |s), skey ∈ ∪τi {stk (τi )}k .                   (1)
We name the above the generative informativeness since knowing the manipulation concept can
help confidently synthesize the imminent key state after s. Please note that the manipulation concept,
key state, and state are random variables depending on the trajectory, which is omitted for simplicity.
As a discriminative goal, a manipulation concept αk should tell whether the current state is within
the process described by αk or not. For example, in the task to get water to drink, if αk resembles
“approach the faucet,” then the state before a cup is grasped or the state “drinking water” should
have low compatibility with αk in contrast to the states within the corresponding sub-trajectory of
approaching the faucet. Thus, the knowledge of the manipulation concept αk helps distinguish the
states governed by it from the other states. We characterize this phenomenon by instantiating a
compatibility function:
                                        C : α × s → [0, 1],                                       (2)
such that values close to 1 imply high compatibility of the state s with the process described by the
manipulation concept α. We can also write C α (·) to reflect the fact that the manipulation concept


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


indexes a discrimination function, hence the role of α as a discriminative goal and we call Eq. 2 the
discriminative informativeness of the manipulation concept.
Furthermore, we propose that the gradient of the compatibility function C α should be informative of
the next action a. We believe, as a densely defined function, it is beneficial that C α not only indicates
“what” the agent is doing but also “how” to do it by modulating the fluctuations of the compatibil-
ity function around s. Still, considering the concept of “filling the cup with water,” the action of
putting the cup under the faucet shall be assigned higher compatibility than the action of moving the
cup toward a microwave. This illustrates that the compatibility function shall inform state changes
(induced by actions) via the changes in its value, depicted through its gradient. Accordingly, we
formulate this characteristic of C α as:
                                       Ldis (∇C) = I(∇C; a|α),                                        (3)
                 α
              ∂C
where ∇C =        , given the manipulation concept α. Consequently, we name Eq. 3 the actionable
               ∂s
informativeness of the manipulation concept as a discriminative goal. We illustrate the idea of a
manipulation concept as both generative and discriminative goals in Fig. 2, which shows different
aspects during a manipulation process as represented by the proposed informativeness criteria.
In summary, we propose that a manipulation concept α should 1). inform the imminent key (physi-
cal) state given the current state as a generative goal; 2). indicate whether the current state is within
the process governed by itself as a discriminative goal, as well as 3). inform the action with the
gradient of the instantiated discriminative function C α . Please note that these metrics do not count
on human supervision. In other words, as long as we have a network Φ that takes in a manipulation
trajectory and outputs a set of continuous segments, we can train Φ using the proposed metrics to
discover manipulation concepts (consistent partitions) shared across trajectories of different tasks.
Next, we operationalize the self-supervised manipulation concept discovery by specifying the train-
ing architecture and the objectives.

2.2   S ELF -S UPERVISED M ANIPULATION C ONCEPT D ISCOVERY

Network Structure of Φ We adapt the basic structure proposed in VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al.,
2017) to accommodate the sequential nature of a state-action sequence and the need for continuous
sub-trajectories. Specifically, we employ a transformer encoder ϕ that maps state st to a latent zt in
an autoregressive manner:
                                     zt = ϕ(st |{(sj , aj )}t−1
                                                            j=1 ).                                 (4)
This autoregressive design alleviates the ambiguity in predicting the latent by supplying rich history
information. Moreover, it helps smooth out noise in zt to facilitate the partitioning of the trajectory
into continuous sub-trajectories. To further enhance the segmentation continuity, we devise a posi-
tional encoding scheme for time t and apply it to the latent zt . The proposed positional encoding can
capture the fact that nearby latents have a good chance of being assigned to the same manipulation
concept without causing over-smoothing. Please refer to Sec. A.1 for more details. In the following,
we abuse zt for the latent appended with the proposed positional encoding.

Trajectory Partitioning with Manipulation Concepts To further process {zt }Tt=1 and derive the
partitioning, we instantiate K trainable vectors, which serve as the manipulation concepts {αk }K  k=1 .
We then assign the state or latent zt to the concept that shares the largest similarity. More explicitly,
denote η as the concept assignment function, then we have:
                                                           exp(⟨zt , αk ⟩/τ )
                  η(zt ) = arg max p(zt ) αk ) = arg max PK                      ,                    (5)
                               k                     k    k=1 exp(⟨zt , αk ⟩/τ )

where p(zt ) αk ) is the probability of assigning latent zt to the concept αk , and ⟨·, ·⟩ is the cosine
similarity between two vectors. This assignment process allows us to group the states into segments
{βk }Kk=1 , i.e., binding states corresponding to the same concept, and serves as a ground to elaborate
the training objectives. Note that we also need to ensure the gradient flow during training, thus, we
use a technique similar to the gradient preserving proposed in VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017).
Please see Sec. A.5 for more details.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Training pipeline of InfoCon. Features extracted from the state-action trajectory (using
ϕ) are compared with learnable concepts, which are grounded according to Eq. 5. The generative
informative loss (Eq. 6) trains θg to predict the key (end) state of a sub-trajectory. The discriminative
informative loss trains a compatibility function C conditioned on the concept (Eq. 7), which tells
whether a state is compatible with the concept. Moreover, the actionable informativeness loss trains
a policy π for action prediction (Eq. 8). Together, these components enforce the grounding to be
physically and semantically meaningful.

Training Objectives With the derived sub-trajectories, we first locate the key state for every single
state. Let αti be the predicted concept – for trajectory i at time step t – from {αk }K         k=1 , and let
                                                                                         T (i)
sit(αi ) be the (to be achieved) key state of sit from the trajectory τi = {(sit , ait )}t=1 . Then sit(αi ) is
     t                                                                                                   t
determined by setting t(αti ) = arg minu {u ≥ t, αui ̸= αu+1 i
                                                                 }. Next, we detail the loss terms.
Generative Goal Loss. To maximize the generative informativeness (Eq. 1), we employ a recon-
struction loss that is related to maximizing the mutual information (Hjelm et al., 2018). We in-
stantiate a network θg that predicts the key state from the current conditioned on the associated
manipulation concept αti :
                                        N        T (i)
                                     1 X 1 X g i i
            Lgen (α, ϕ; θg ) =                         ∥θ (st ; αt |{(siu , aiu , αui )}t−1      i        2
                                                                                        u=1 ) − st(αit ) ∥2 ,   (6)
                                     N i=1 T (i) t=1
with ∥ · ∥2 the L-2 norm. This term encourages αti to be informative of the to-be-achieved key state
by minimizing the prediction error.
Discriminative Goal Loss. According to the defining term (Eq. 2) of a manipulation concept as a
discriminative goal, we instantiate a network C (·) as a hyper-classifier, which can decode manipu-
lation concepts from {αk }Kk=1 into compatibility functions representing the discriminative goal of
                                      i
these concepts. More specifically, C αt should assign high scores to states in a trajectory τ i that are
               i
governed by αt . We formulate it as a binary classification and employ the cross entropy loss to
maximize the discriminative informativeness (Eq. 2):
                       K
                     1 X        1       X                         1       X
Ldis
 c (α, ϕ; C) = −         ⟨    i
                                          log C αk (sit ) +    i
                                                                            log(1 − C αk (sit ))⟩.
                     K     |{αt = αk }| i                   |{αt ̸= αk }| i
                        k=1                       αt =αk                                   αt ̸=αk
                                                                                                      (7)
Note that the quantity inside ⟨·⟩ is the classification error for a manipulation concept’s classifier but
is normalized to account for the imbalance between the positive and negative samples. Please see
Sec. A.7 for details of the hyper-classifier C.
To derive the loss for maximizing the actionable informativeness (Eq. 3), we instantiate a policy
network π, which minimizes the prediction error of the action conditioned on the manipulation
concept:
                                      N       T (i)          αit
                  dis              1 X 1 X              i ∂C
                La (α, ϕ; C, π) =                   ∥π(st ,         ; hi ) − ait ∥22 ,        (8)
                                  N i=1 T (i) t=1           ∂s s=sit t
                               αiu
                          ∂C
where hit = {(siu , aiu ,         )}t−1 is the history, and we use L-2 norm for the discrepancy.
                         ∂s s=siu u=1
Please note that the policy employed here is mainly for the purpose of manipulation concept dis-


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Examples of the manually defined key states (concepts) in different manipulation tasks.
From left to right: P&P Cube and its two key states (“Grasp”, “End”). Stack Cube and its three
key states (“Grasp A”, “A on B”, “End”). Turn Faucet and its two key states (“Contacted”, “End”).
Peg Insertion and its three key states (“Grasp”, “Align”, “End”).
covery, which is different from the policy in downstream manipulation tasks (Please see Sec. 3.1 for
more details). By minimizing the above quantity, the information in the partial derivative about the
next action should be maximized. Further, following Van Den Oord et al. (2017), we add a term that
encourages more confident assignments by Eq. 5, i.e.,
                                        K
                                      1 X      1       X
                    Lent (α, ϕ) = −          i
                                                         log(p(zti ) αk )),                           (9)
                                      K   |{αt = αk }| i
                                         k=1                   αt =αk

which is similar to minimizing the entropy of the assignment probability function p(zt ) αk ).
Finally, the total training loss for self-supervised manipulation concept discovery with the proposed
generative and discriminative informativeness metrics can be summarized as:
            L = Lgen (α, ϕ; θg ) + Ldis                 dis
                                    a (α, ϕ; C, π) + λ(Lc (α, ϕ; C) + L
                                                                        ent
                                                                            (α, ϕ)),      (10)
with λ balancing the importance between the prediction and the classification terms. More im-
plementation details can be found in Sec. A and Sec. B, and we study the effectiveness of each
component in the experiments.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

We evaluate the effectiveness of InfoCon and the derived key states on four robot manipulation tasks
from ManiSkill2 (Gu et al., 2023), an extended version of ManiSkill (Mu et al., 2021): P&P Cube:
To pick up a cube, move it to a specific location, and keep it still for a short while. Stack Cube:
To pick up a cube and put it on the top of another cube. Turn Faucet: To turn different faucets for
enough angle values. Peg Insertion: To pick up a cuboid-shaped peg and insert it into a hole in
a given object. We visualize the manipulation tasks with the manually defined and grounded key
states from CoTPC (Jia et al., 2023) in Fig. 4.
Training details. Following the setup of CoTPC, we choose the same sets of trajectories (without
ground truth key states) for the four tasks above for training and evaluation. Specifically, we collect
500 training trajectories for each task, 100 evaluation trajectories for P&P Cube and Stack Cube,
100 evaluation trajectories for seen faucets, 400 trajectories for unseen faucets, and 400 evaluation
trajectories for Peg Insertion. With the pipeline shown in Fig. 3, we train the model and use the state
encoder (Eq. 4) along with the concept assignment module (Eq. 5) to perform the partitioning and
grounding of all trajectories. We choose the last state (of a sub-trajectory) as the key state of the
corresponding manipulation concept. After collecting the discovered key states, we train a CoTPC
policy optimizing the action prediction with the key states as guidance. We leave out the key state
prediction in the policy training when the key state does not appear in the trajectory (e.g., concepts
discovered for one task may not appear in another). Please see Sec. A and Sec. B for more details.
Evaluation metrics. The efficacy of our approach is mainly assessed by the task success rate of
policies that are trained utilizing the key states identified via InfoCon. Additionally, for curiosity, we
introduce a metric for a rough understanding of whether there are similarities between the predicted
key states and the ground truth key states (designed by humans). Suppose the time steps of ground
                           K′
truth key states are {tgt                                                            K             ′
                        k }k=1 , and the time steps of predicted key states are {tj }j=1 (here K is not
always equal to K). We propose the Human Intuition Similarity, or HIS, as in the following:
                                                        ′
                                                     K
                                       gt K ′
                                                     X
                      HIS({tj }K
                               j=1 , {tk }k=1 ) =           (targ minj (tj ≥tgt ) − tgt
                                                                                     k )             (11)
                                                                            k
                                                     k=1


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Success rate (%) of different methods. For the task Turn-Faucet, we provide results on three
kinds of situations: seen environments (s.&sf.), unseen environments with seen faucet types (u.&sf.),
and unseen environments with unseen faucet types (u.&uf.)1 . ⋆ marks key state labeling methods
dependent on human semantics (zero-shot), and • marks key state labeling methods intrinsically
related to the inherent properties of the data.
                                       P&P Cube              Stack Cube                   Turn Faucet                 Peg Insertion
              SR(%)
                                     seen     unseen       seen      unseen       s.&sf.     u.&sf.       u.&uf.      seen   unseen
  Decision Transformer               65.4       50.0       13.0        7.0         39.4        32.0         9.0        5.6    2.0
          Last State⋆                70.8       60.0       12.0         4.0        47.8        46.0        21.0        9.6     5.3
            AWE•                     96.2       78.0       45.4        18.0        53.4        50.0        14.5       31.6     4.3
         LLM+CLIP⋆                   92.2       71.0       44.6        21.0        35.8        31.0        18.0       63.2    13.5
        GT Key States⋆               75.2       70.0       58.8        46.0        56.4        57.0        31.0       52.8    16.8
          InfoCon•                   96.6       81.0       63.0        47.0        53.8        52.0        17.8       63.6    17.8

             Table 2: Human Intuition Score (HIS) of different discovery/grounding methods.
                          HIS             P&P Cube          Stack Cube          Turn Faucet           Peg Insertion
                      LLM+CLIP               57.51               93.19               84.39                164.29
                        AWE                  0.003                2.49               14.72                 9.25
                       InfoCon                2.60                8.98               18.03                 9.05


The HIS metric quantifies the temporal distance between a given ground truth key state and the
nearest subsequent predicted key state. Thus, the HIS metric measures similarity without being
affected by the number of discovered key states.

3.2      M AIN R ESULTS

Baselines. We first consider several popular baselines without Chain-of-Thought key state predic-
tion: Vanilla BC (Torabi et al., 2018), Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021), Behavior Trans-
former (Shafiullah et al., 2022), MaskDP (Liu et al. 2022, use ground truth key states differently),
Decision Diffuser (Ajay et al., 2022). We further consider the baselines with different key state
labeling techniques (all these baselines are trained with the CoTPC framework; see Sec. B for more
training details): (1) Last State only includes the very last state of the trajectory as the key state.
(2) AWE (Shi et al., 2023) (3) LLM+CLIP (Di Palo et al., 2023) first uses Large Language Model
(LLM) to generate subgoals for a task, then uses CLIP to target the image frame scoring highest
regarding each subgoal, which will serve as the key states. (4) GT Key States uses ground truth
key states, which is the oracle as in (Jia et al., 2023). Here, labeling methods (1), (3), and (4) can
be regarded as zero-shot, which are dependent on human semantics, while methods (2) and InfoCon
are intrinsically linked to the inherent properties of the data.
Performance of InfoCon. We report the success rate of all baselines in Tab. 1 (additional results
of the methods without Chain-of-Thought key state prediction, except Decision Transformer, can be
found in Sec. C since their performance is much worse than Decision Transformer according to Jia
et al. 2023). Also, as reported in Jia et al. (2023), some of the methods above, which do not use
Chain-of-Thought key state prediction strategies, cannot even achieve reasonably good results in
seen environments during training (overfitting). Thus, we follow CoTPC to comprehensively com-
pare different baselines and report results on the seen and unseen environment seeds. As observed
in Tab. 1, the policies trained with our discovered manipulation key states can achieve competi-
tive performance compared with CoTPC policies using ground-truth key states and other key state
grounding methods. Notably, the generalization of InfoCon is also evidenced by delivering top
success rates across different tasks. We further provide human intuition similarity of key states
grounded by LLM+CLIP, discovered by AWE and InfoCon in Tab. 2. We find that the HIS score
seems to have a weak correlation with the policy performance presented in Tab. 1. Therefore, we
treat this as a signal that the effectiveness of the manipulation concepts may not align well with what
human semantics endorse, which justifies the need to develop discovery and grounding methods that
can learn from unannotated trajectories.
   1
       Policies with key states labeled by AWE and LLM+CLIP are trained by us. Other results are from (Jia et al., 2023).



                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Key states discovered and grounded by InfoCon. From top-left to bottom-right are vi-
sualizations of key states of tasks: P&P Cube, Stack Cube, Turn Faucet, and Peg Insertion. Each
subfigure contains frames of ground-truth key states at the upper part and key states discovered by
InfoCon below. We align frames of ground-truth key states with the nearest subsequent key states
from InfoCon by checking their timesteps.

Visualization of key states. We visualize the discovered manipulation concepts and grounded key
states with InfoCon in Fig. 5. As shown, the identified key states consist of states similar to the
ground-truth key states from Jia et al. (2023) (Fig. 4) as well as more fine-grained ones. We provide
additional visualizations in Sec. D. We also perform an experiment to assign discovered concepts
with semantically meaningful descriptions for the Peg-Insertion task in Sec. E.

3.3      A BLATION S TUDY

We perform an ablation study to investigate the characteristics of both generative and discriminative
goals. Keeping other hyper-parameters constant, we separately omit the loss terms associated with
the discriminative goal (Eq. 7 and Eq. 8) and the loss terms related to the generative goal (Eq. 10).
Our evaluation considers two primary metrics: the success rate of CoTPC policies on the four ma-
nipulation tasks and the Human Intuition Similarity (HIS, Eq. 11) on those tasks.
Table 3: Ablation study of the policy performance with only generative loss or discriminative losses.
Here, “All” means the InfoCon trained with both the generative and discriminative goal losses.
                                            P&P Cube              Stack Cube                      Turn Faucet          Peg Insertion
                SR(%)
                                          seen      unseen       seen        unseen     s.&sf.      u.&sf.   u.&uf.    seen    unseen
            All                           96.6       81.0        63.0         47.0       53.8        52.0       17.8   63.6     17.8
   Generative Goal Only                   69.8       61.0        46.8         25.0       34.8        31.0       19.8   50.2     5.5
  Discriminative Goal Only                72.0       62.0        57.4         23.0       39.2        43.0       17.8   64.2     10.5


The success rates of different variants are reported in Tab. 3. When only employing the generative
loss or the discriminative losses, the policies tend to be worse than those trained with states dis-
covered by both types of losses 2 . While some models might perform well in seen environments,
they often fail to deliver comparable results in unseen scenarios. This reaffirms the pivotal role of
proper key state identification and underscores the indispensable synergy between the generative
and discriminative informativeness losses.

Table 4: Ablation study with the human intuition similarity for either the generative or discriminative
losses. Here, “All” means the InfoCon trained with both generative and discriminative losses.
                       HIS                        P&P Cube              Stack Cube            Turn Faucet         Peg Insertion
                  All                                  2.60                   8.98                  18.03               9.05
         Generative Goal Only                          11.15                  23.11                 38.79              37.11
        Discriminative Goal Only                       3.40                   6.06                  28.55              11.05

   2
       In this context, we select the best policies achievable under the ablated configurations



                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The ablations with HIS are reported in Tab. 4. When employing only the generative loss, the iden-
tified key states exhibit reduced similarity to human intuition. Interestingly, the effect on intuition
similarity appears less prominent when relying solely on the discriminative goal loss. We postulate
that this might be attributed to the noise in the manipulation concept assignment during the initial
training phase. Particularly, at the beginning of training, the groundings of key states are not always
accurate. The key states may not faithfully represent goal states, rendering them suboptimal as pre-
diction targets in the generative goal loss (Eq. 6). Practically, during the initial training phase, we
can temporally turn off the optimization of the generative goal loss (Eq. 6) and let the discriminative
goal loss run for a few epochs. More details on this part can be found in Sec. B.2.


4   R ELATED W ORK

Behavior Cloning in Manipulation Tasks. Training robots through demonstration-driven behavior
cloning continues to be a key research area (Argall et al., 2009). Within this realm, various tech-
niques have evolved to harness the potential of imitation learning (Zhang et al., 2018; Rahmatizadeh
et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2019). Approaches range from employing clear-cut strategies (Zeng et al.,
2021; Shridhar et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2022) and more subtle methods to adopting models based on
diffusion principles (Chi et al., 2023; Pearce et al., 2023). Some methodologies manage to sidestep
the necessity of task-specific labels throughout training and discover robot skills (Shankar & Gupta,
2020; Tanneberg et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). Different from prior research, our work prioritizes the
autonomous extraction and understanding of manipulation concepts from unlabeled demonstrations,
taking a step beyond mere replication toward genuine conceptual understanding.
Hierarchical Planning and Manipulation Concept Discovery. Hierarchical planning is crucial in
interaction and manipulation scenarios, as it underscores the need for blending broad strategies with
specific, detailed actions to achieve optimal results (Hutsebaut-Buysse et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022;
Xu et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2023). Recent years, the Chain of Thought (CoT) prompting methodology,
as depicted in (Wei et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022), further emphasizes the value of
breaking down intricate tasks into a succession of more straightforward sub-tasks. By doing so, the
complexity of the policies is significantly reduced, paving the way for simpler learning processes
and resulting in more reliable policies. However, most hierarchical planning methods lean heavily
on human semantic intuition. This can manifest as direct human input or systems mimicking hu-
man reasoning like LLMs (Di Palo et al., 2023). Some studies (Zambelli et al., 2021; von Hartz
et al., 2022; Sermanet et al., 2018; Morgan et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2020; Weng et al., 2023) employ
self-supervised discovery of manipulation concepts to circumvent such manual semantic interven-
tions, leveraging mutual information (Hausman et al., 2018; Gregor et al., 2016), significant points
of time (Neitz et al., 2018; Jayaraman et al., 2018; Pertsch et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022; Caldarelli
et al., 2022), and geometry (Shi et al., 2023; Morgan et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022) or physics (Yan
et al., 2020) constraints. Recent method AWE (Shi et al., 2023) has been proposed to mitigate the
compounding error problem inherent to behavioral cloning and automatically determine waypoints
based on trajectory segments that can be approximated by linear motion. However, the interpretabil-
ity of discovered manipulation skills in these methods remains inadequate. Our proposed InfoCon
broadens the scope beyond mere planning or trajectory partitioning, with a deeper understanding
and abstraction of underlying manipulation concepts. InfoCon ensures not just task completion but
also a richer conceptual grasp of the task itself.


5   C ONCLUSION

We propose InfoCon, a self-supervised learning method capable of discovering task-specific manip-
ulation concepts based on generative and discriminative informativeness. The concepts discovered
by InfoCon share similarities with human intuition and are able to be utilized for training manipu-
lation policies with comparable performance to oracles. Our work provides an idea of constructing
embodied agents discovering concepts themselves other than struggling with the grounding of con-
cepts that are manually specified. We hope it is received as an attempt to develop an automatic
mechanism for discovering useful abstract concepts. In the future, we will consider exploring the
possibility of methods for discovering relationships between manipulation concepts and forming
structures of discovered concepts.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by the HKU-100 Award, donation from the Musketeers Foundation, the
Microsoft Accelerate Foundation Models Research Program, and in part by the JC STEM Lab of
Robotics for Soft Materials funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. We also like to
thank Qihang Fang for helping with the human motion concept discovery experiments.


R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
  Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making?    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.15657, 2022.

Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.

Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Edoardo Caldarelli, Philippe Wenk, Stefan Bauer, and Andreas Krause. Adaptive gaussian pro-
  cess change point detection. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2542–2571.
  PMLR, 2022.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.

Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, Chengzu Li, Rahul Nadkarni, Yushi Hu, Caiming Xiong,
  Dragomir Radev, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, et al. Binding language models in symbolic
  languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02875, 2022.

Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shu-
  ran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.

Ha David, Dai Andrew, and VL Quoc. Hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv, 1609, 2016.

Norman Di Palo, Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Markus Wulfmeier, Nicolas Heess,
  and Martin Riedmiller. Towards a unified agent with foundation models. In Workshop on Rein-
  carnating Reinforcement Learning at ICLR 2023, 2023.

Bin Fang, Shidong Jia, Di Guo, Muhua Xu, Shuhuan Wen, and Fuchun Sun. Survey of imitation
  learning for robotic manipulation. International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications,
  3:362–369, 2019.

Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.

Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone
   Tao, Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, et al. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manip-
   ulation skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04659, 2023.

Karol Hausman, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Ziyu Wang, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Learning an embedding space for transferable robot skills. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
  Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
  and maximization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06670, 2018.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Dhruv Shah, Danny Driess, Andy Zeng, Yao Lu, Pete Florence, Igor
 Mordatch, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, et al. Grounded decoding: Guiding text generation
 with grounded models for robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00855, 2023.
Matthias Hutsebaut-Buysse, Kevin Mets, and Steven Latré. Hierarchical reinforcement learning:
 A survey and open research challenges. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction, 4(1):
 172–221, 2022.
Dinesh Jayaraman, Frederik Ebert, Alexei A Efros, and Sergey Levine. Time-agnostic prediction:
  Predicting predictable video frames. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07784, 2018.
Zhiwei Jia, Fangchen Liu, Vineet Thumuluri, Linghao Chen, Zhiao Huang, and Hao Su. Chain-of-
  thought predictive control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00776, 2023.
Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Dianhuan Lin, J Swaroop Guntupalli, and Dileep George. Beyond imi-
 tation: Zero-shot task transfer on robots by learning concepts as cognitive programs. Science
 Robotics, 4(26):eaav3150, 2019.
Junnan Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven CH Hoi. Mopro: Webly supervised learning with momentum
  prototypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07995, 2020.
Klaus Libertus and Dominic A Violi. Sit to talk: Relation between motor skills and language
  development in infancy. Frontiers in psychology, 7:475, 2016.
Fangchen Liu, Hao Liu, Aditya Grover, and Pieter Abbeel. Masked autoencoding for scalable and
  generalizable decision making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:12608–
  12618, 2022.
Andrew S. Morgan, Walter G. Bircher, and Aaron M. Dollar. Towards generalized manipulation
  learning through grasp mechanics-based features and self-supervision. IEEE Transactions on
  Robotics, 37(5):1553–1569, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2021.3057802.
Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang, Zhi-
  wei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill: Generalizable manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale
  demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.14483, 2021.
Alexander Neitz, Giambattista Parascandolo, Stefan Bauer, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Adaptive skip
  intervals: Temporal abstraction for recurrent dynamical models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu, Ser-
  gio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating human
  behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.
Karl Pertsch, Oleh Rybkin, Jingyun Yang, Shenghao Zhou, Konstantinos Derpanis, Kostas Dani-
  ilidis, Joseph Lim, and Andrew Jaegle. Keyframing the future: Keyframe discovery for visual
  prediction and planning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 969–979. PMLR, 2020.
Yuzhe Qin, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. From one hand to multiple hands: Imitation learning
  for dexterous manipulation from single-camera teleoperation. IEEE Robotics and Automation
  Letters, 7(4):10873–10881, 2022.
Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi, Ladislau Bölöni, and Sergey Levine. Vision-based
  multi-task manipulation for inexpensive robots using end-to-end learning from demonstration. In
  2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 3758–3765. IEEE,
  2018.
Aurko Roy, Ashish Vaswani, Arvind Neelakantan, and Niki Parmar. Theory and experiments on
  vector quantized autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11063, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, Sergey
  Levine, and Google Brain. Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. In
  2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 1134–1141. IEEE,
  2018.

Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 35:22955–22968, 2022.

Tanmay Shankar and Abhinav Gupta. Learning robot skills with temporal variational inference. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8624–8633. PMLR, 2020.

Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2robot: Learn-
  ing manipulation concepts from instructions and human demonstrations. The International Jour-
  nal of Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1419–1434, 2021.

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Archit Sharma, Tony Z Zhao, and Chelsea Finn. Waypoint-based imitation
  learning for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14326, 2023.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.

Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.

Vladimir M Sloutsky. From perceptual categories to concepts: What develops? Cognitive science,
  34(7):1244–1286, 2010.

Daniel Tanneberg, Kai Ploeger, Elmar Rueckert, and Jan Peters. Skid raw: Skill discovery from raw
  trajectories. IEEE robotics and automation letters, 6(3):4696–4703, 2021.

Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral cloning from observation, 2018.

Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jan Ole von Hartz, Eugenio Chisari, Tim Welschehold, and Abhinav Valada. Self-supervised learn-
  ing of multi-object keypoints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08316, 2022.

Eric A Walle and Joseph J Campos. Infant language development is related to the acquisition of
  walking. Developmental psychology, 50(2):336, 2014.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Yijia Weng, Kaichun Mo, Ruoxi Shi, Yanchao Yang, and Leonidas Guibas. Towards learning geo-
  metric eigen-lengths crucial for fitting tasks. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 36958–36977, 2023.

Danfei Xu, Suraj Nair, Yuke Zhu, Julian Gao, Animesh Garg, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. Neural
  task programming: Learning to generalize across hierarchical tasks. In 2018 IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3795–3802. IEEE, 2018.

Mengda Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Cheng Chi, Manuela Veloso, and Shuran Song. Xskill: Cross embodiment
 skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09955, 2023.

Mengyuan Yan, Yilin Zhu, Ning Jin, and Jeannette Bohg. Self-supervised learning of state esti-
 mation for manipulating deformable linear objects. IEEE robotics and automation letters, 5(2):
 2372–2379, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Dale Schuurmans, Pieter Abbeel, and Ofir Nachum. Chain of thought im-
 itation with procedure cloning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36366–
 36381, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Martina Zambelli, Yusuf Aytar, Francesco Visin, Yuxiang Zhou, and Raia Hadsell. Learning rich
 touch representations through cross-modal self-supervision. In Jens Kober, Fabio Ramos, and
 Claire Tomlin (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Robot Learning, volume 155 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1415–1425. PMLR, 16–18 Nov 2021. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v155/zambelli21a.html.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Re-
  arranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 726–
  747. PMLR, 2021.
Tianhao Zhang, Zoe McCarthy, Owen Jow, Dennis Lee, Xi Chen, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel.
  Deep imitation learning for complex manipulation tasks from virtual reality teleoperation. In
  2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5628–5635. IEEE,
  2018.
Yifeng Zhu, Peter Stone, and Yuke Zhu. Bottom-up skill discovery from unsegmented demonstra-
  tions for long-horizon robot manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):4126–
  4133, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M ORE D ETAILS OF A RCHITECTURE

A.1    T IME - STEP EMBEDDING .

For the feature z extracted (Eq. 4) from state s at time-step t, we always normalize z to proceed the
latter concept assignment (Eq. 5). In Eucild Space, z is on a high dimensional unit ball. In order
to maintain this “spherical” characteristic and embed z using time-steps, we design the time-step
embedding method below:
                                 (2t/T − 1)π           (2t/T − 1)π
                            z ← [sin         , z · cos             ]
                                    2 + 2A                2 + 2A                                     (12)
                            1≤t≤T
where A > 0 and T is the total number of time-steps.
We give an intuition explanation at Fig. 6. This embedding operation will influence more on z with
time step t close to the beginning and the end of the manipulation trajectory, making it focus more
on the absolute time-step (original weight in z will be relatively small), while for z with time-steps
in the middle, they will receive weaker influence from this embedding operation. Reflecting on our
intuition, when learning a manipulation task, the information of absolute passing time is informative
at the beginning and the end, but in the middle we will focus more on relative time-step order instead
of absolute current time.
In Eq. 12 A is a positive hyper parameter controlling the usage of area of the whole spherical surface.
When A = 0, the whole spherical surface will be used for time step embedding, but when the unified
time-step Tt of z is 0 or 1, the embedded vector will always be (−1, ⃗0) or (1, ⃗0), which will annihilate
the feature of original vector. So we use coefficient A to avoid this. The inclusion of A will still
maintain the characteristic of focusing more on absolute time at the beginning or the end.


Figure 6: An example of our time-step embedding method. Here we use an example of 2
dimension z = (x, y). When z is at time-step t, the embedded feature vector is z ′ =
           −1)π      (2t/T −1)π      (2t/T −1)π
(sin (2t/T
        2+2A , x cos    2+2A , y cos    2+2A ).


This embedding method can also restrict the upper bound of cosine similarity between two feature
vector when time step is different:
                                 ⟨[sin t1 , z1 cos t1 ], [sin t2 , z2 cos t2 ]⟩
                                = sin t1 sin t2 + ⟨z1 , z2 ⟩ cos t1 cos t2
                                                                                                     (13)
                                ≤ sin t1 sin t2 + cos t1 cos t2
                                = cos(t1 − t2 )

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here t1 , t2 ∈ [− π2 , π2 ] when using the embedding method in Eq. 12. ⟨·, ·⟩ is cos similarity (since the
vectors here are all unit vectors, it is same as inner product). Larger difference between t1 and t2
leads to smaller value of cos(t1 − t2 ), which means smaller cosine similarity.

A.2    W HY VQ-VAE?

When discovering key states, we need to give every state in the trajectory a label and decide the key
states based on the labels. VQ-VAE naturally provides a process of assigning symbols for inputs,
which is suitable for partition and segmentation. The remaining task involves assigning meanings to
the vectors in the codebook using self-supervised learning, which is achieved through the proposed
generative and discriminative goal losses.

A.3    D ETAILS OF C ONCEPT

The concepts {αk }K k=1 is detailed model as two vectors, one for generative goal and one for dis-
criminative goal:
                                             {(αk , pk )}K
                                                         k=1
αk will be used for concept assignment (Eq. 5) and prediction of states that achieve the goal in
generative goal loss (Eq. 6), and pk is the compressed parameters for compatibility function (Eq. 2).
pk is able to be transformed into a simple MLP network using hyper-network (David et al. 2016,
detailed design in Sec. A.7). See Sec. A.4, Sec. A.5 also for more details of usage and update of the
parameters in concepts during training.

A.4    U PDATE OF P ROTOTYPES

We use EMA moving (Li et al., 2020) to update the prototype of features representing concepts.
when training and αk is assigned with a set of extracted features (Eq. 4). We will update αk using
the average of the extracted features:
                                                     1          X
                             z̄ = Normalize(                         z)
                                             |{z : η(z) = k}|                                 (14)
                                                              η(z)=k

                              αk ← Normalize(cema αk + (1 − cema )z̄)
Here 0 < cema < 1. Notice that we did not update αk based on each single feature z, since we find
it is inefficient when training. Our experiments use cema = 0.9.

A.5    P RESERVE G RADIENT F LOW

When assigning concepts (Eq. 5), the gradient cannot naturally propagate back to the encoder
(Eq. 4). We use technique similar to VQ-VAE to achieve this. If we have a set of concept fea-
tures {αk }K
           k=1 , and the extracted feature from current state is z. We calculate the probability of
choosing a certain concept using cosine similarity:
                                                 exp(⟨z, αk ⟩/τ )
                                p(z ) αk ) = PK                      ,                         (15)
                                                k=1 exp(⟨z, αk ⟩/τ )
So we can use the soft version to preserve gradient:
                              K
                              X
              αsof t =              p(z ) αk ) SG(αk ) , αη(z) = αsof t + SG(αη(z) − αsof t )
                              k=1
                                                                                                          (16)
                              K
                              X
              p   sof t
                          =         p(z ) αk ) SG(pk ) , pη(z) = p   sof t
                                                                             + SG(pη(z) − p   sof t
                                                                                                      )
                              k=1
Where η(z) is the same concept assignment function as in Eq. 5, SG(·) is the stop gradient operation,
and the definition of αk and pk is same as concept vectors in Sec. A.4. We only hope the gradient to
adjust the selection of concept, so we stop the gradient of prototype αk and compressed parameters
pk . αk will be updated using the gradient from generative goal loss (Eq. 6), EMA (Sec. A.4), and
reconstruction regularization at next Sec. A.6 .pk will be updated using the gradient from discrimi-
native goal loss (Eq. 7 and Eq. 8).


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6    R ECONSTRUCTION R EGULARIZATION

To prevent over smoothing of discovered concepts (always one concept) similar to VQ-VAE, we
add in a reconstruction process from extracted features α to original states: ŝit = ϕ−1 (αti |{αji }t−1
                                                                                                     j=1 ).
                                                                                   T (i)
(Here αti is the assigned concept from {αk }K             i               i i
                                            k=1 to state st in τi = {(st , at )}t=1 from data). Since
the maximum number of concepts is an hyper-parameter and we would not choose a very large
number, we do not hope the reconstruction process to be trained well enough. The training loss for
reconstruction:
                                        N        T (i)
                        rec −1       1 X 1 X i
                       L (ϕ ) =                       ∥s − ϕ−1 (αti |{αji }t−1
                                                                           j=1 )∥                (17)
                                     N i=1 T (i) t=1 t
We “pretrain” InfoCon with only the reconstruction loss above and the classification entropy loss
(Eq. 9) before using generative and discriminative goal loss:
                                   Lpre = Lrec (ϕ−1 ) + λLent (α, ϕ)                                  (18)
During experiments, we find that the above loss can be used to warm up the concept discovery
VQ-VAE structure via pertaining to provide a good initialization. The initialization can then help
achieve better convergence when the proposed generative and discriminative losses are employed for
self-supervised concept discovery. To show the effectiveness of the initialization above, we provide
counts of activated manipulation concepts (within the codebook of the VQ-VAE) with and without
the usage of this initialization when discovering key concepts. Our observation is that the above
initialization can help discover more fined-grained manipulation concepts, as shown by the number
of activated concepts. Detailed results are in Tab. 5 below.

Table 5: The counts of activated manipulation concepts (within the VQ-VAE codebook) of InfoCon
when it is trained with (w) and without (w/o) the usage of the initialization in Eq. 18

                           P&P Cube        Stack Cube      Turn Faucet      Peg Insertion
            .    w rec.      4.5±0.5         7.0±2.0          5.0±2.0           7.5±2.5
                w/o rec.     1.5±0.5         2.0±1.0          2.5±1.5           1.5±0.5

Notice that there are also other methods that can alleviate over-smoothing in VQ-VAE (Roy et al.,
2018), but these methods focus on the geometry clustering characteristic of VQ-VAE, which may
conflict with our design of generative goal and discriminative goal. On the other hand, regularization
with construction is empirically reasonable according to self-supervised learning.

A.7    H YPER -N ETWORK

We provide details of our hyper-network for compatibility function (Eq. 2) at Fig. 7.

B     T RAINING D ETAILS

B.1   P SEDUO C ODE

See 1 for the training scheme of our method.

B.2   H YPER PARAMETERS

InfoCon. We use the structure of Transformer used in (Jia et al., 2023), which refers the design of
(Brown et al., 2020). The state encoder (Eq. 4) and state re-constructor in A.6 both use a 4-layer
causal Transformer. The goal based policy in Eq. 8 use a 1-layer causal Transformer. The predictor
for generative goal in Eq. 6 use a 2-layer causal Transformer. For hyper-network in A.7, we also use
only one hidden layer in the generated goal function. The number of concepts is fixed, maximum
number of 10 manipulation concepts for all the tasks. The temperature τ in Eq. 5 and Fig. 7 is 0.1.
A in Eq. 12 is 0.2. All the size of hidden features output by Transformers and concept features
{αk }Kk=1 is 128. When training, the coefficient λ, λ
                                                      rec
                                                          in Eq. 18, Eq. 10 is 0.001, 0.1, and we will


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Structure of our hyper-network for compatibility function (Eq. 2). The hyper-network
generate hidden layers in the compatibility function, with same shape of weight and bias. We use
a two layer hyper-network structure. First set of layers (HNiw ) transform different segments of
compressed parameter vectors into medium weight vectors. The weight vectors then pass through
the same layer (HN p ) and become concatenated flattened weight matrix (Wif lat ) and bias (bi ) for
different hidden layers in the compatibility function. The compatibility score will be represent as a
sigmoid-activated value of the cosine similarity between the final hidden feature and the last segment
of the compressed parameter vector (we will weight them by the temperature τ , which is equal to τ
in Eq. 5).


defer optimization of Lgen until half of iteration for training is done. We pretrain InfoCon according
to Eq. 18 for 1×104 iteration with base learning rate 1.0×10−4 . Then we train the InfoCon for each
of the task with 1.6×106 iterations based on the pretrained model with base learning rate 1.0×10−4 .
After labeling the original data with key states using trained InfoCon models, we train our CoTPC
policies for 1.8 × 106 iterations with base learning rate 5.0 × 10−4 . For the three training stages,
we all use AdamW optimizer and warm-up cosine annealing scheduler which linearly increases
learning rate from 0.1 of base learning rate to the base learning rate for 1000 iteration, and then
decreases learning rate from base learning rate to 0.1 of base learning rate. The weight decay is
always 1.0 × 10−3 , and batch size is 256. For practice, we would only use a segment of 60 states
(along with actions) for every item (trajectory) in the batch.
Baselines. Here we only give some essential implementation details of the two baseline methods:
CoTPC with LLM sub-goal and CLIP detection of key states, CoTPC with key states discovered by
AWE Shi et al. (2023). Notice that after the discover of key states, the training of CoTPC policies
are same as description in B.2.

       • CoTPC (LLM+CLIP). We discover that the CLIP scores of different key states in a ma-
         nipulation trajectory are close to each other. Thus, it is hard for us to set a reasonable
         threshold to decide whether some of the states have already achieved the sub-goal. for each
         text description of the key states, we will use the average of the minimum and maximum
         value of CLIP scores to decide the threshold, and select the state with minimum temporal
         step and is larger than this threshold to be the key states of this sub-goal. (Notice that it is
         not reasonable to select the maximum score, since the states after achieving the goal still
         have the feature in the description of key states. Like “grasp the cube”, after this sub-goal
         is achieved, most of the states after it are also suitable for this description in tasks like P&P
         Cube and Stack Cube.).

       • CoTPC (AWE). In AWE research, they set thresholds for end condition of the dynamic
         programming of finding way-points with different manipulation tasks. Here we modify the
         method so that it can discover a fix number (here we choose 10 to align with InfoCon)
         of key states for all trajectories, which is more suitable since current implementation of
         CoTPC needs to fix the number of key states.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 InfoCon
                                                      T (i)
 Input:      demo trajectories Dτ = {τi = (sit , ait )t=1 }Ni=1
 Modules: state encoder ϕ, achieved state predictor θg ,
             compatilbility function hyper-network C, discriminative goal policy π
             concepts {αk }K k=1
 Output:     trained state encoder ϕ
    for i = 1, 2, ..., N, t = 1, 2, ..., T (i) do
        zti = ϕ(sit |{(sij , aij )}t−1
                                    j=1 )
        for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
                                     exp(⟨zti , SG(αk )⟩/τ )
             p(zti ) αk ) = PK
                                                 i
                                    k=1 exp(⟨zt , SG(αk )⟩/τ )
        end for
        αti = αarg maxk p(zti )αk )
    end for
    for k = 1, 2, ..., K do
        z̄k = Normalize( |αi :α1i =αk | αi =αk zti )
                                             P
                                  t   t            t
        αk ← Normalize(cema αk + (1 − cema )z̄k )
    end for
    for i = 1, 2, ..., N, t = 1, 2, ..., T (i) do
        for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
                                     exp(⟨zti , SG(αk )⟩/τ )
             p(zti ) αk ) = PK                                                 ▷ Recalculate with updated αk .
                                                 i
                                    k=1 exp(⟨zt , SG(αk )⟩/τ )
        end for
        sikt = siarg min {u≥t,αi ̸=αi }                             ▷ Last state of sub-trajectory as key state
                         u           u    u+1
    end for
    Calculate Lgen (α, ϕ; θg ), Ldis                    dis
                                        c (α, ϕ; C), La (α, ϕ; C, π), L
                                                                        ent
                                                                            (α, ϕ), Lrec (ϕ−1 )
                                                                            ▷ Eq. 6, Eq. 7, Eq. 8, Eq. 9, Eq. 17
    L = Lgen + Ldis  a + λ(Lc + L
                                    dis     ent
                                                ) + λrec Lrec
    Back propagation from L



C      M ORE E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

C.1     OVER - FITTING I SSUE

In Table 1, a noticeable discrepancy is observed in the performance of policies between seen and
unseen environments, indicative of an over-fitting issue. Employing the CoTPC with key states of
InfoCon, we conducted experiments to evaluate the influence of scaling the training dataset on over-
fitting. The results of these experiments are presented in Tab. 6. From these results, it is evident that
the impact of augmenting the training data on mitigating over-fitting varies across different tasks.

Table 6: Success rate (%) when varying scale of training set. The policy is CoTPC with key states
by InfoCon. For the task Turn-Faucet, we provide results on three kinds of situations: seen environ-
ments (s.&sf.), unseen environments with seen faucet types (u.&sf.), and unseen environments with
unseen faucet types (u.&uf.).

                     P&P Cube           Stack Cube                  Turn Faucet          Peg Insertion
       SR(%)
                   seen     unseen     seen    unseen        s.&sf.   u.&sf.   u.&uf.    seen    unseen
       200 traj.   98.5      31.0      92.0      9.0         57.0      40.0       14.0   66.0       8.5
       500 traj.   96.6      81.0      63.0     47.0         53.8      52.0       17.8   63.6      17.8
       800 traj.   94.4      75.0      90.6     43.0         59.2      53.0       25.3   64.3      27.0


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   M ORE BASELINE M ETHODS

We provide the results of baseline methods without the usage of concepts or semantic information in
seen environment in Tab. 7. The data is borrowed from (Jia et al., 2023). According to this source,
Decision Transformer exhibits the best performance in unseen environments among all methods
evaluated. Consequently, the performance of other methods in unseen environments is not provided,
except for that of Decision Transformer.

       Table 7: More results of success rate (%) of different methods on seen environments.

               SR(%)             P&P Cube      Stack Cube            Turn Faucet         Peg Insertion
             Vanilla BC                3.8            0.0                15.6                 0.0
        Behavior Transformer          23.6            1.6                16.0                 0.8
         Decision Diffuser            11.8            0.6                53.6                 0.6
              MaskDP                  54.7            7.8                28.8                 0.0
        Decision Transformer          65.4            13.0               39.4                 5.6
              Last State              70.8            12.0               47.8                 9.6
                AWE                   96.2            45.4               53.4                31.6
             LLM+CLIP                 92.2            44.6               35.8                63.2
            GT Key States             75.2            58.8               56.4                52.8
              InfoCon                 96.6            63.0               53.8                63.6



C.3   C ONCEPTS AND CONCEPT- DRIVEN POLICIES

While our experiments highlight the strength of InfoCon in identifying key states, integrating this
with policy generation is an exciting and unexplored area. We see a valuable opportunity for future
work in developing a method that not only discovers key states using InfoCon but also generates a
policy similar to CoTPC.
Considering the selection of policy, there are not many methods that focus on making use of key
states in their decision-making policies with a tailored design. Here are some methods that are
relevant to our knowledge:

      • MaskDP (Liu et al., 2022). This method has a weakness: appending the end state into the
        input sequence is needed. The agent must know the exact key states based on the initial
        state, which makes it constrained to achieving a very specific goal and is not applicable to
        our problem setting, where the end goal state is not provided.
      • Modified Decision Transformer. This is a method we found in the work of AWE (Shi
        et al., 2023), in which they adapt the original decision transformer Chen et al., 2021 to let
        it leverage key state prediction during policy learning.
      • CoTPC (Jia et al., 2023), which is the method we mainly employ in our work.

We trained the Modified Decision Transformer and saw that policies based on InfoCon also have
better performance compared with the Decision Transformer without key states or using ground-
truth (GT) key states. The results are in the table below.

Table 8: Success rate (%) of methods based on Decision Transformer (DT for short). For the task
Turn-Faucet, we provide results on three kinds of situations: seen environments (s.&sf.), unseen
environments with seen faucet types (u.&sf.), and unseen environments with unseen faucet types
(u.&uf.).
                       P&P Cube         Stack Cube                  Turn Faucet             Peg Insertion
         SR(%)
                      seen   unseen    seen   unseen     s.&sf.       u.&sf.    u.&uf.      seen    unseen
          DT          65.4     50.0    13.0     7.0          39.4      32.0        9.0       5.6     2.0
       DT & GT        89.8     68.0    58.4    29.0          41.2      36.0       16.0      34.6     6.3
      DT & InfoCon    95.2     70.0    62.6    32.0          48.0      48.0       17.0      52.0     7.8


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    M ORE V ISUALIZATION R ESULTS
We provide more visualization results of key states labeled out by InfoCon at Fig.10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15

E    A LIGNMENT WITH H UMAN S EMANTICS
A variety of methods have been devised to identify elements similar to key states (Neitz et al.,
2018; Jayaraman et al., 2018; Pertsch et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022; Caldarelli et al., 2022). Our
approach surpasses them by ensuring that the identified key states stem from well-defined concepts.
Specifically, in our framework, these concepts pertain to the modeling of goal (Eq. 1,Eq. 2,Eq. 3).
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the concepts encapsulated within the key states of InfoCon share
similarity with intricate human semantics, as substantiated by the evaluation of the Human Intuition
Score (HIS, Eq. 11).
In this section, we present further attempts and results to align the self-discovered manipulation
concepts by InfoCon with human semantics for potential enhancement in the explainability when
facing human-robot interaction. We perform the analysis with the robotic task of “Peg-Insertion.”
The major goal is to check whether we can assign reasonable and linguistically meaningful names
or descriptions to the discovered concepts or key states.
Before we perform some qualitative analysis, we first determine the manipulation concepts discov-
ered for this task by checking the activated concepts (codes) among all the codes in the codebook
(in total 10) of the VQ-VAE employed. Namely, all the trajectories of the task “Peg-Insertion” are
pushed through the VQ-VAE, the activated codes will be recorded for each of them, and then the
activation rate for each code (concept) is computed.
Tab. 9 provides the activation rate of each manipulation concept related to task Peg Insertion using
the concept discovery VQ-VAE trained by InfoCon.

    Table 9: Activation rate of each manipulation concept on task Peg Insertion from InfoCon.

    Concept Index          0       1       2       3     4        5       6      7       8       9
 Activation Rate (%)      46.7   65.0    100.0    1.9   91.1   100.0    95.6    82.3   100.0    3.9


The table above indicates that nearly every trajectory performing task Peg Insertion has the same set
of key states activated, which means that the key states (concepts) involved in accomplishing Peg
Insertion are the discovered concepts with numbering: #0, #1, #2, #4, #5, #6, #7, and #8, in total
8 vectors in the code book of VQ-VAE in InfoCon. (#3 and #9 are probably noise, given their low
activation rate).
Next, we use a sequence to illustrate the description we assign to each of the discovered concepts,
which help align with human semantics. The concept names are the following:

      1 . The gripper is positioned above the peg (discovered concept #7).
      2 . The gripper is aligned with the peg and ready to grasp (discovered concept #5).
      3 . The peg is grasped (discovered concept #0).
      4 . The peg is grasped and lifted (discovered concept #1).
      5 . The peg is aligned with the hole distantly (discovered concept #4).
      6 . The peg is aligned with the hole closely (discovered concept #6).
      7 . The peg is inserted half-way into the hole (discovered concept #8).
      8 . The peg is fully inserted (discovered concept #2).

Please check Fig. 8 for visuals corresponding to these discovered concepts. The above verifies that
humans can still assign descriptions to the discovered concepts by InfoCon. At the same time, we
can see the potential of InfoCon to discover meaningful concepts that can be aligned with human


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


semantics. Moreover, it shows that InfoCon has the capability of discovering more fine-grained
concepts or key states human annotators (in CoTPC) have ignored or are unaware of. These further
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed InfoCon for automatically discovering meaningful
manipulation concepts.


        Figure 8: Align InfoCon Concepts with Human Concepts on the Peg Insertion task.


F   I NFO C ON WITH R EAL -W ORLD DATA
InfoCon can be applied in various tasks involving sequential events (from manipulation, to sound,
video, natural language, log of computer systems, cache behavior of memory, and changing of
climate and weather). These processes can all be regarded as a trajectory with meaningful partitions
in achieving specific goals. Here we provide a visualization of the results of applying InfoCon on
human pose sequences estimated from real-world videos. We can see that it also separates a video of
pose motion into different key states, which can be mapped to different “human motion concepts”.


Figure 9: InfoCon for human motion concept discovery from pose sequences estimated with real-
world videos.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 10: More examples of labeled out key states of task P&P Cube (part1).


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 11: More examples of labeled out key states of task Stack Cube (part1).


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 12: More examples of labeled out key states of task Stack Cube (part2).


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure 13: More examples of labeled out key states of task Turn Faucet.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Figure 14: More examples of labeled out key states of task Peg Insertion (part1).


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Figure 15: More examples of labeled out key states of task Peg Insertion (part2).


                                               27
