Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DAPTIVE R ATIONAL ACTIVATIONS
TO B OOST D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

                    Quentin Delfosse*,1 , Patrick Schramowski1,2,3 , Martin Mundt1,3 ,
                         Alejandro Molina1 & Kristian Kersting1,2,3,4
 1                                                             2
     Computer Science Dept., TU Darmstadt                          German Center for Artificial Intelligence
 3                                                             4
     Hessian Center for Artifical Intelligence                     Centre for Cognitive Science, Darmstadt



                                                   A BSTRACT
              Latest insights from biology show that intelligence not only emerges from the
              connections between neurons, but that individual neurons shoulder more compu-
              tational responsibility than previously anticipated. Specifically, neural plasticity
              should be critical in the context of constantly changing reinforcement learning
              (RL) environments, yet current approaches still primarily employ static activation
              functions. In this work, we motivate the use of adaptable activation functions in RL
              and show that rational activation functions are particularly suitable for augmenting
              plasticity. Inspired by residual networks, we derive a condition under which rational
              units are closed under residual connections and formulate a naturally regularised
              version. The proposed joint-rational activation allows for desirable degrees of flexi-
              bility, yet regularises plasticity to an extent that avoids overfitting by leveraging
              a mutual set of activation function parameters across layers. We demonstrate that
              equipping popular algorithms with (joint) rational activations leads to consistent
              improvements on different games from the Atari Learning Environment benchmark,
              notably making DQN competitive to DDQN and Rainbow.1


1        I NTRODUCTION
Neural Networks’ efficiency in approximating any function has made them the default choice in many
machine learning tasks. This is no different in deep reinforcement learning (RL), where the DQN
algorithm’s introduction (Mnih et al., 2015) has sparked the development of various neural solutions.
In concurrence with former neuroscientific explanations of brainpower residing in combinations
stemming from trillions of connections (Garlick, 2002), present advances have emphasised the role of
the neural architecture (Liu et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019). As such, RL improvements have first been
mainly obtained through enhancing algorithms (Mnih et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Banerjee
et al., 2021) and only recently by searching for performing architectural patterns, via automatic deep
policy search (Pang et al., 2021; Krishnan et al., 2023), or via decoupling object detection (Lin et al.,
2020; Delfosse et al., 2023b) and policy search (Delfosse et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2024).
However, research has also progressively shown that individual neurons shoulder more complexity
than initially expected, with the latest results demonstrating that dendritic compartments can compute
complex functions (e.g. XOR) (Gidon et al., 2020), previously categorised as unsolvable by single-
neuron systems. This finding seems to have renewed interest in activation functions (Georgescu et al.,
2020; Misra, 2020). In fact, many functions have been adopted across different domains (Redmon
et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020; Schulman et al., 2017). To reduce the bias introduced by a fixed
activation function and achieve higher expressive power, one can further learn which activation
function is performant for a particular task (Zoph & Le, 2017; Liu et al., 2018), learn to combine
arbitrary families of activation functions (Manessi & Rozza, 2018), or find coefficients for polynomial
activations as weights to be optimised (Goyal et al., 2019).
Whereas these prior approaches have all contributed to their respective investigated scenarios, there
exists a finer approach that elegantly encapsulates the challenges brought on by reinforcement
     1
         Rational library: github.com/k4ntz/activation-functions; Experiments: github.com/ml-research/rational_rl.



                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Environment
                            (Time Pilot)
   Shared activation functions


                                                                                       .1                    .2
                                           2
                                                              .2
                            Layer 3


                                                              0                        0                     0
                                           0

                                                              .5                                             .1

                                           2                                           .2
                             Layer 4


                                                                                                             0

                                                                                       0
                                           0                  0
                                               -5        0         -5        0              -5         0          -5        0
                                                    epoch 0             epoch 50                 epoch 200             epoch 500

Figure 1: Neural plasticity due to trainable activation functions allows RL agents to adapt to
environments of increasing complexity. Rational activations (bottom), with shared parameters in
each of the last two layers, evolve together with their input distributions (shaded blue) when learning
with DQN on Time Pilot. Each column corresponds to a training state where a new, more challenging
part of the environment (top, e.g. increasing enemy speed and movement complexity) has been
uncovered and is additionally used for training.



learning problems. Specifically, at each layer, we can learn rational activation functions (ratio of
polynomials) (Molina et al., 2020). Not only can rationals converge to any continuous function, but
they have further been proven to be better approximants than polynomials in terms of convergence
(Telgarsky, 2017). Even more crucially, their ability to adapt while learning equips a model with high
neural plasticity ( “capability to adjust to the environment and its transformations” (Garlick, 2002)).
We argue that adapting to environmental changes is essential, making rational activation functions
particularly suitable for dynamic RL environments. To provide a visual intuition, we showcase an
exemplary evolution of two rational activation functions together with their respective changing input
distributions in the dynamic “Time Pilot” environment in Fig. 1.
In this work, we show that plasticity is of major importance for RL agents, as a central element to
satisfy the requirements originating from diverse and dynamic environments and propose the use of
rational activation functions to augment deep RL agents plasticity. Apart from demonstrating the
suitability of adaptive activation functions for Deep RL, we also evaluate how many additional layer
weights can be replaced by rational activations. Our specific contributions are:
(i) We motivate why neural plasticity is a key aspect for Deep RL agents and that rational activations
        are adequate as adaptable activation functions. For this purpose, we not only highlight that
        rational activation functions adapt their parameters over time, but further prove that they can
        dynamically embed residual connections, which we refer to as residual plasticity.
(ii) As additional representational capacity can hinder generalisation, especially in RL (Farebrother
         et al., 2018; Roy et al., 2020; Yarats et al., 2021), we propose a joint-rational variant, that
         uses weight-sharing in rational activations across different layers.
(iii) We empirically demonstrate that rational activations bring significant improvements to DQN and
         Rainbow algorithms on Atari games and that our joint variant further increases performance.
(iv) Finally, we investigate the overestimation phenomenon of predicting too large return values,
         which has previously been argued to originate from an unsuitable representational capacity
         of the learning architecture (van Hasselt et al., 2016). As a result of our introduced (rational)
         neural and residual plasticity, such overestimation can practically be reduced.
We proceed as follows. We start off by arguing in favour of plasticity for deep RL, then show how
rational functions are particularly suitable candidates to provide plasticity in neural networks and
present our empirical evaluation. Before concluding, we touch upon related work.


                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Human normalized score [%]
                                     Rigid       Concatenated ReLU    Non-rational Plasticity (PELU)   Rational Plasticity    Tempered Rational Plasticity      Regularised Rational Plasticity

                                                    Stationary Env.                                    Dynamic Env.                                          Progressive Env.

                             102


                             101
                                      Kangaroo         Space Inv.      Tennis              Asterix        Enduro             Qbert          Jamesbond          Seaquest            Time Pilot


Figure 2: Neural plasticity is essential for reinforcement learning. Human normalised mean scores
for rigid (LReLU and CRELU) DQN agents, agents with non-rational, rational, tempered, and regu-
larised plasticity are shown with standard deviation across 5 random seeded experimental repetitions.
Larger scores are better. Tempered plasticity, allowing initial adaptation to the environments, but not
their transformations in experimental repetitions, performs better on stationary environments. Regu-
larised plasticity performs well across all environment types. Best viewed in colour. A description of
the environments’ types is provided in Appendix A.5.


2                                  R ATIONAL P LASTICITY FOR D EEP RL
Let us start by arguing why deep reinforcement learning agents require extensive plasticity and show
that parametric rational activation functions provide appropriate means to augment plasticity.
As motivated in the introduction, RL is subject to inherent distribution shifts. During training, agents
progressively uncover new states (input drift) and, as the policy improves, the reward signal is
modified (output drift). More precisely, for input drifts, we can distinguish environments according to
how much they change through learning. For simplicity, we categorise according to three intuitive
categories: stationary, dynamic and progressive environments. Consider the example of Atari 2600
games. Kangaroo and Tennis can be characterised as stationary since the games’ distributions do
not change significantly through learning. Asterix, Enduro and Q*bert are dynamic environments,
as different distribution shifts (e.g. Cauldron, Helmet, Shield, etc. in Asterix) are provided to the
agents in the first epochs, with no policy improvement required to uncover them. On the contrary,
Jamesbond, Seaquest, and Time Pilot are progressive environments: agents need to master early
stages before being provided with additional states, i.e. exposed to significant input shifts.
How do we efficiently improve RL agents’ ability to adapt to environments and their changes? To
deal with distribution shifts, our agents require high neural plasticity and thus benefit from adaptive
architectures. To elaborate further in our work, let us consider the popular DQN algorithm (Mnih
et al., 2015), that employs a θ-parameterised neural network to approximate the Q-value function of
a state St and action a. This network is updated following the Q-learning equation: Q (St , a; θ) ≡
Rt+1 + γ maxa Q (St+1 , a; θ). In addition to network connectivity playing an important role, we
now highlight the importance of individual neurons by modifying the network architecture of the
algorithm via the use of learnable activation functions, to show that they are a presently underestimated
component. To emphasise the utility of the upcoming proposed rational and joint-rational activation
functions, we will interleave early results into this section. The latter serves the primary purpose to
not only motivate the suitability of the rational parameterisation to provide plasticity, but also discern
the individual benefits of (joint-) rational activations, in the spirit of ablation studies.

2.1                                R ATIONAL N EURAL P LASTICITY
                                                                                             Pm          j
                                                                                P(x)            j=0 aj x
Rational functions are ratio of polynomials, defined on R by R(x) =                    =       P  n         ,
                                                                                Q(x)       1 + k=1 bk xk
where x ∈ R, {aj } and {bk } are m+1 and n (real) learnable parameters per layer. To test rational
functions’ plasticity, we use the discrete distribution shifts of the Permutted-MNIST continual learning
experiment. We show in Appendix 4 that rational activation functions improve the plasticity over
both ReLU and over CReLU (Shang et al., 2016), used to augment plasticity by Abbas et al. (2023).
For RL we show in Fig. 2 that the rational parametrisations substantially enhances RL agents. More
precisely, by comparing agents with rigid networks (a fixed Leaky ReLU baseline) to agents with
rational plasticity (i.e. with a rational activation function at each layer), we see that rational functions
boosts the agents to super-human performances on 7 out of 9 games. The acquired extra neural
plasticity seems to play a significant role in these Atari environments, especially in progressive ones.


                                                                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to discern the benefits of general plasticity through any adaptive activation function, over the
proposed use of the rational parametrisation, Fig. 2 additionally includes agents with Concatenated
ReLU and with Parametrised Exponential Linear Unit (Trottier et al., 2017). CReLU, was used in RL
to address plasicity loss (Abbas et al., 2023), outperforms LRELU on 6 out of 9 games, but is always
outmatched by rational plasticities. PELU that uses 3 parameters to control its slope, saturation and
exponential decay, and has been shown to outperform other learnable alternatives on classification
tasks (Godfrey, 2019). However, in contrast to the rational parameterisation, it seems to fall behind
and only boosts the agents to super-human performance on 3 out of 9 games (contrary to 7), implying
that the type of plasticity provided by rational activations is particularly suitable.
To highlight the desirability of rational activations even further, we additionally distinguish between
the plasticity of agents towards their specific environment and the plasticity allowing them to adapt
while the environment is changing. To this end, we show agents equipped with rational activations
that are tempered in Fig. 2. Such agents are equipped with the final, optimised rational functions
of trained rational-equipped agents. They correspond to frozen functions from agents that already
adapted to their specific environment. The plasticity of the rationals is thus tempered (i.e. stopped) in
a repeated application (i.e. another training session) to emphasise the necessity to continuously adapt
the activation functions, together with the layers’ weights during training. Whereas providing agents
with such tempered, tailored to the task, activations already boosts performances, rational plasticity at
all times is essential, particularly in dynamic and progressive environments.

2.2   R ATIONAL R ESIDUAL P LASTICITY

The prior paragraphs have showcased the advantage of agents equipped with rational activation
functions, rooted in their ability to update their parameters over time. However, we argue that the
observed boost in performance is not only due to parameters adapting to distributional drifts. Rational
activations can embed one of the most popular techniques to stabilise deep networks training; namely,
they can dynamically make use of a residual connection. We refer to this as residual plasticity.

Rationals are closed under residual connection and provide residual plasticity. We here show
that rational functions with strictly higher degree in the numerator embed residual connections. Recall
that residual neural networks (ResNets) were initially introduced following the intuition that it is
easier to optimise the residual mapping than to optimise the original, unreferenced mapping (He et al.,
2016). Formally, residual blocks of ResNets propagate an input X through two paths: a transforming
block of layers that preserves the dimensionality (F ) and a residual connection (identity).
Theorem: Let R be a rational function of order (m, n). R embeds a residual connection ⇔ m > n.
Proof: Let us consider a rational function R = P/Q of order (m, n), with coefficients A[m] =
(aj )m
     j=0 ∈ R
               m+1
                   of P and B [n] = (bi )ni=0 ∈ Rn+1 of Q (with b0 = 1). We denote by ⊗ (respectively
⊘) the Hadamard product (respectively division). Let X ∈ Rn1 ×···×nx be a tensor corresponding to
the input of the rational function of an arbitrary layer in a given neural network. We derive X ⊗k =
Nk
   i=1 X. Furthermore, we use GV
                                      [k]
                                           (X) = [1, X, X ⊗2 , ..., X ⊗k ] ∈ R(n1 ×···×nx )×k+1 to denote
the tensor containing the powers up to k of the tensor X. Note that GV [k] can be understood as a
generalised Vandermonde tensor, similar as introduced in (Xu et al., 2016). For V [k] = (vi )ki=0 ∈ Rk+1 ,
                   Pk
let GV [k] .V [k] = i=0 vi X ⊗i be the weighted sum over the tensor elements of the last dimension.
Now, we apply the rational activation function R with residual connection to X:
           y(X) = R(X) + X = GV [m] (X).A[m] ⊘ GV [n] (X).B [n] + X
                  = (GV [m] (X).A[m] + X ⊗ GV [n] (X).B [n] ) ⊘ GV [n] (X).B [n]
                                                             [n+1]
                  = (GV [m] (X).A[m] + GV [n+1] (X).B0               ) ⊘ GV [n] (X).B [n]
                  = GV [max(m,n+1)] (X).C [max(m,n+1)] ⊘ GV [n] (X).B [n]               = R(X),
                                                                                          e
         [n+1]
where B0        = (b0,i )n+1
                         i=0 ∈ R
                                 n+2
                                      (with b0,0 = 0 and b0,i = bi−1 for i ∈ {1, ... , n + 1}),
  [max(m,n+1)]           max(m,n+1)
C                = (cj )j=0         (cj = aj + bj−1 , aj = 0 ∀j ∈  / {0, ... , m}, bj = 0 ∀j ∈
                                                                                             / {0, ... , n}).
e is a rational function of order (m′ , n′ ), with m′ > n′ . In other words, rational activation functions
R
of order m > n embed residual connections. Using the same degrees for numerator and denominator


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


certifies asymptotic stability, but our derived configuration allows rationals to implicitly use residual
connections. Importantly, note that these residual connections are not rigid, as these functions can
progressively learn aj = 0 for all j > n, i.e. we have residual plasticity.

Rational plasticity to replace residual blocks’ plasticity. In very deep ResNets, it has been
observed that feature re-combinations does not occur inside the blocks but that transitions to repre-
sentations occur during dimensionality changes Veit et al. (2016); Greff et al. (2017).
To investigate this hypothesis, Veit et al. have conducted lesioning experiments, where a residual block
is removed from the network, and surrounding ones are fine-tuned to recover. Whereas we emphasize
that we do not claim that the residual in rationals can replace entire convolutional blocks or that they
are generally equivalent, we hypothesize that under the conditions investigated by Veit et al. of very
deep networks, residual blocks could learn complex activation function-like behaviours. To test this
conjecture, we repeat the lesioning experiments, but also test replacing the lesioned block with a
rational function that satisfies the residual connection condition derived above. Results are provided
in appendix (cf. A.2) and show that rational functions’ plasticity can efficiently compensate for
the lost capacity of lesioned residual blocks in very deep residual networks.

2.3       NATURAL R ATIONAL R EGULARISATION

We have motivated and shown that the combination of neural and residual plasticity form the central
pillars for why rational activation functions are desirable in deep RL. In particular for dynamic and
progressive environments, rational plasticity has been observed to provide a substantial boost over
alternatives. However, if we circle back to Fig. 2 and take a more careful look at the stationary
environments, we can observe that our previously investigated tempered rational plasticity (for
emphasis, initially allowed to tailor to the task but later “stopped” in experimental repetition) can
also have an upper edge over full plasticity. The extra rational plasticity at all times might reduce
generalisation abilities, particularly on non-diverse stationary environments. In fact, prior works have
highlighted the necessity for regularisation methods in deep reinforcement learning (Farebrother
et al., 2018; Roy et al., 2020; Yarats et al., 2021).
We thus propose a naturally regularised rational activation version, inspired from residual blocks. In
particular, Greff et al. have indicated that sharing the weights can improve learning performances,
as shown in Highway (Lu & Renals, 2016) and Residual Networks (Liao & Poggio, 2016). In the
spirit of these findings, we propose the regularised joint-rationals, where we constrain the input to
propagate through different layers but always be activated by the same learnable rational activation
function. Rational functions thus share a mutual set of parameters across the network, (instead of
layers, cf. Fig. 11). As observable in Fig. 2, this regularised form of plasticity increases the agents’
scores in the stationary environments and does not deteriorate performances in the progressive ones.

3       E MPIRICAL E VIDENCE FOR P LASTICITY
Our intention here is to investigate the benefits of neural plasticity through rational networks for deep
reinforcement learning. That is, we investigated the following questions:
(Q1) Do neural networks equipped with rational plasticity outperform rigid baselines?
(Q2) Can neural plasticity make up for more heavy algorithmic RL advancements?
(Q3) Can plasticity address the overestimation problem?
(Q4) How many more parameters would rigid networks need to measure up to rational ones?
To this end, we compare2 our rational plasticity using the original DQN algorithm and its convolutional
network (Mnih et al., 2015) on 15 different games of the Atari 2600 domain (Brockman et al., 2017).
We compare these architectures to ones equipped with Leaky ReLU (as experiments on Breakout
and SpaceInvaders showed that agents with Leaky ReLU outperform ReLU ones), the learnable
PELU function, as well as SiLU (SiLU(x) = x · sigmoid(x)) and its derivative dSiLU. Elfwing
et al. showed that SiLU or a combination of SiLU (on convolutional layers) and its derivative (on
fully connected layers) perform better than ReLU in DQN agents on several games (2018). SiLU
and dSiLU are —to our knowledge— the only activation functions specifically designed for RL
applications. More details on the architecture and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix A.8.
    2
        30.000 GPU hours, carried out on a DGX-2 Machine with Nvidia Tesla V100 with 32GB.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            PELU


     0      1        2        3


    PELU
 rational
joint-rat


Figure 3: Learnable functions’ plasticity boosts RL agents. For reliable evaluation, we report the
performance profiles (top left) as well as superhuman probabilities (with CIs, bottom left) of baselines
(i.e. DQN and DDQN with Leaky ReLU, DQN with SiLU and SiLU + dSiLU), as well as DQN
with plasticity: using PELU, rational and joint-rational (5 random seeds). While the learnable PELU
already augment performances of its agents, rational and joint-rational ones lift them above human
performances on more than 70% of our runs. Detailed score tables are provided in Appendix A.3.



We then compare increased neural plasticity provided by (joint-)rational networks to algorithm
improvements, namely the Double DQN (DDQN) method (van Hasselt et al., 2016), that tackles
DQN’s overestimation problem, as well as Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018). Rainbow incorporates
multiple algorithm improvements brought to DQN—Double Q-learning, prioritised experience replay,
duelling network, multi-step target, distributional learning and stochastic networks—and is widely
used also as a baseline (Lin et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2021). We further explain how neural plasticity
can help readdress overestimation. Finally, we evaluate how many additional weights rigid networks
need to approximate rational ones.
In practice, we used safe rational functions (Molina et al., 2020), i.e. we used the absolute value of
the sum in the denominator to avoid poles. This stabilises training and makes the function continuous.
Rational activation functions are shared across layers (adding only 10 parameters per layer) or through
the whole network for the regularised (joint) version, with their parameters optimised together with
the rest of the weights. For ease of comparison and reproducibility, we conducted the original DQN
experiment (also used by DDQN and SiLU authors) using the mushroomRL (D’Eramo et al., 2020)
library, with the same hyperparameters (cf. Appendix A.8) across all the Atari agents, for a specific
game, but we did not use reward clipping. For a fair comparison, we report final performances using
the human-normalised (cf. Eq. 2 in Appendix) mean and standard deviation of the scores obtained
by fully trained agents over five seeded reruns for every (D)DQN agent. However, since often only
the best performing RL agent is reported in the literature, we also provide tables of such scores
(cf. Appendix A.3). For the Rainbow algorithm, we unfortunately can only report the results of
single runs. A single run took more than 40 days on an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU; Rainbow is
computationally quite demanding (Obando-Ceron & Castro, 2021).


(Q1) DQN with activation plasticity is better than rigid baselines. To start off, we compared RL
agents with additional plasticity (from PELU and rationals) to rigid DQN baselines: Leaky ReLU, as
well as agents equipped with SiLU and SiLU+dSiLU activation functions.
The results summarised in Fig. 3 confirm what our earlier figure had shown, but on a larger scale.
While RL agents with functions of the SiLU family do not outperform Leaky ReLU ones in our games,
plastic DQN agents clearly outperform their rigid activation counterparts. DQN with regularised
plasticity even obtains a higher superhuman probability and highest mean scores 64% of the time.
Scores on (difficult credit assignment) Skiing are in Appendix A.3. This clearly shows that plasticity,
and above all rational plasticity, pays off for deep agents, providing an affirmative answer to Q1.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Networks with rational (Rat.) and regularised (Reg.) rational plasticity compared to rigid
baselines (DQN, DDQN and Rainbow) over five random seeded runs on eight Atari 2600 games. The
resulting mean scores (lines) and standard deviation (transparent area) during training are shown.
As one can see, DDQN does not resolve performance drops but only delays them (e.g. particularly
pronounced on Seaquest). A figure including the evolution of every agent on all Atari 2600 games is
provided in Appendix A.4. Figure best viewed in colour.


(Q2) Neural plasticity can boost performances of complex deep reinforcement learning ap-
proaches, such as Rainbow. In Fig. 4, we show the learning curves of Rainbow and DQN agents,
both with Leaky ReLU baselines, as well as with full and regularised rational plasticity types. While
Rainbow is computationally much heavier (∼ 8 times slower than DQN in our experiments, with
higher memory needs), its rigid form never outperforms the much simpler and more efficient DQN
with neural plasticity, and its rational versions dominate in only 1 out of 8 games (Enduro). In our
experiments, Rainbow even lost to vanilla DQN on 3 games. These results show that augmenting the
plasticity of an RL agent’s modeling architecture can be of higher importance than bringing complex
and computationally expensive improvements to the learning algorithm.
Therefore, DQN with rational plasticity is a competitive alternative to the complicated and expensive
Rainbow method. Plasticity also improves Rainbow agents, answering question (Q2) affirmatively.

(Q3) Neural plasticity directly tackles the overestimation problem. Revisiting Fig. 4, one can
see that Rainbow variants are worst on dynamic environments such as Jamesbond, Time Pilot and
particularly Seaquest. For these games, the performance of rigid (Leaky ReLU) DQN progressively
decreases. Such drops are well known in the literature and are typically attributed to the overestimation
problem of DQN. This overestimation is due to the combination of bootstrapping, off-policy learning
and a function approximator (neural network) operating by DQN. van Hasselt et al. showed that
inadequate flexibility of the function approximator (either insufficient or excessive) can lead to
overestimations of a state-action pairs (2016). The max operator in the update rule of DQN then
propagates this overestimation while learning with the replay buffer. The overestimated states can
stay in the buffer long before the agent revisit (and thus update) them. This can lead to catastrophic
performance drops. To mitigate this problem, van Hasselt et al. introduced a second network to
separate action selection from action evaluation, resulting in Double DQN (DDQN).
We have compared rigid DDQN (equipped with Leaky ReLU), to vanilla DQN with neural plasticity
on Atari games. As one can see in Fig. 3, DQN with rational plasticity outperforms the more complex
(rigid) DDQN algorithm on every considered Atari game. This reinforces the affirmative answer to
(Q1) from earlier on. More importantly, we have computed the relative overestimation values of the
(D)DQN, both with and withoutP∞  neural plasticity, following: overestimation = Q-value−R
                                                                                    R     , where the
return R corresponds to R = t=0 γ t rt , with the observed reward rt and the discount factor γ.
The results are summarised in Fig. 5. Plasticity helps to reduce overestimation drastically. DDQN
substantially reduces overestimation on Jamesbond, Kangaroo, Tennis, Time Pilot and Seaquest.
For these games, DDQN obtains the best performances among all rigid variants only on Jamesbond
(cf. Tab. 3 in Appendix). Moreover, Fig. 4 reveals that the DDQN agents’ performance drops are only
delayed and not prevented. The performance drops thus happen after the 200th epoch, after which the
agents’ training is usually stopped, as no more performance increase seems achievable.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Plasticity naturally reduces overestimation. Relative overestimation values (↓, log scale)
of rigid DQN and DDQN, as well as DQN with rational and regularised rational plasticity. Each
trained agent is evaluated on 100 completed games (5 seeds per game per agent). Agents with
rational plasticity lower overestimation values as much or further than rigid DDQN ones, which has
specifically been introduced to this end. Figure best viewed in colour.


Overestimation might play a role in the performance drops on progressive environments (cf. Fig. 4:
Jamesbond, TimePilot and Seaquest), but cannot fully explain the phenomena. RL agents with higher
plasticity handle these games much better while embedding only a few more parameters. Hence, we
advocate that neural plasticity better deals with distribution shifts of dynamic and progressive envi-
ronments. Perhaps surprisingly, (regularised) rational plasticity not only works well on challenging
progressive environments but also on simpler ones such as Enduro, Pong and Q*bert, where more
flexibility is likely to hurt. Flexibility does not lead to overestimation (cf. Fig. 5). The rational func-
tions for these games have a simpler profile than ones of more complicated games like Kangaroo and
Time Pilot (cf. Appendix A.6). The rational functions seem to adapt to the environment’s complexity
and the policy they need to model. This clearly provides an affirmative answer to (Q3).

(Q4) Adding parameters through rationals efficiently augments plasticity. Compared to rigid
alternatives, the joint-rational networks embed in total 10 additional parameters and always out-
perform (cf. Fig. 4) PELU (12 more parameters) ones. Our proposed method to add plasticity via
rational functions thus efficiently augments the capacity of the network. However, ReLU layers can
theoretically approximate rational functions (Telgarsky, 2017). Augmenting the number of layers
(or neurons per layer) is thus, theoretically, a costly alternative to augment the plasticity. How many
parameters are practically needed in rigid networks to obtain similar performances? Searching for
bigger equivalent architectures for RL agents is tedious, as RL training curves possess considerably
more variance and noise than SL ones (Pang et al., 2021), but this question is not restricted to RL. We
thus answer it by highlighting the generality of our insights, demonstrated by further investigation on
a classification scenario (cf. Appendix A.1). In short, rigid baselines need up to 3.5 times as many
parameters as the architectures that use rational functions in order to obtain similar performances.
All experimental results together clearly show that increasing neural plasticity, particularly through
the integration of rational activations functions, considerably benefits deep reinforcement learning
agents in a highly computational efficient manner.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Next to the related work discussed throughout the paper, our work on neural plasticity is also related
to several research lines on neural architecture search and to the choice of activation functions,
particularly in deep reinforcement learning settings.

The choice of activation functions. Many functions have been adopted across domains (e.g. Leaky
ReLU in YOLO (Redmon et al., 2016), hyperbolic tangent in PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), GELU
in GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)), indicating that the relationship between the choice of activation
functions and the performances is highly dependent on the task, architecture and hyper-parameters.
As shown, parametric functions augment on plasticity. Molina et al. showed that rational functions can
outperform other learnable activation function types on supervised learning tasks (2020). Telgarsky
(2017) showed that rationals are locally better approximants than polynomials. Loni et al. (2023)
showed that searching for activation functions mitigates the performance drops of sparsity in networks.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Neural Architectures for Deep Reinforcement Learning. Cobbe et al. showed that the architecture
of IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018), notably containing residual blocks, improved the performances
over the original Nature-CNN network used in DQN (2019). Motivated by these findings, Pang et al.
(2021) recently applied neural architecture search to RL tasks and demonstrated that the optimal
architecture highly depend on the environment. Their search provides different architectures across
environments, with varying activation functions across layers and potential residual connections.
Continuously modifying the complexity of the neural network based on the noisy reward signal in a
complex architectural space is extremely resource demanding, particularly for large scale problems.
Many reinforcement learning specific problems, such as noisy rewards (Henderson et al., 2018),
input interdependency (Mnih et al., 2015), policy instabilities (Haarnoja et al., 2018), sparse rewards,
difficult credit assignment (Mesnard et al., 2021), complicate an automated architecture search.

Plasticity in deep RL. A lot of attention has recently been brought to the plasticity of RL agents’
learning structures. Abbas et al. (2023) have also identified their loss of plasticity and answered
it using concatenated ReLU (CReLU) in Rainbow. Nikishin et al. (2022) periodically reset parts
of the networks, Sokar et al. (2023) improved the resets by targeting identified dormant neurons.
Similarly, Nikishin et al. (2023) inject plasticity via incorporating new trainable weights. Lyle
et al. (2022) mitigate capacity (or plasiticity) loss, regularizing some features back to their starting
values, and later showed that layer normalization help with plasticity (Lyle et al., 2023). Dohare
et al. (2023) tackle dynamics with continual backprop and apply it to RL on PPO (Dohare et al.,
2021), also varying between different non-learnable activation functions. Dynamically adapting the
hyperparameter landscape is also improves agents’ adaptability to distribution shifts (Zahavy et al.,
2020; Mohan et al., 2023). Testing how much much of these techniques can be covered by the use of
rational plasticity is an interesting line of future work, as rational functions dynamically change the
weights optimisation landscape. Fuks et al. (2019) adjust sub-policies on sub-games to find suitable
hyperparameters that bootstrap a main evolution-based optimised agent. Apart from using CReLU,
all of these techniques are complementary to the use of rational plasticity.


5    L IMITATIONS , F UTURE W ORK AND S OCIETAL I MPACT

We have shown the benefits of rational activation functions for RL, as a consequence of both their
neural and residual plasticity. In our derivation for closure under residuals, we have deduced that
the degree of the polynomial in the numerator needs to be greater than that of the denominator.
Correspondingly, we have based our empirical investigations on the degrees (5, 4). Interesting future
work would be to further automatically select suitable such degrees, or even integrating rationals into
dynamic hyperparameters’ optimisation techniques. One should also explore neural plasticity in more
advanced RL approaches, including short term memory (Kapturowski et al., 2019), neurosymbolic
approaches (Delfosse et al., 2024), finer exploration strategy (Badia et al., 2020), and in continual
learning (Kudithipudi et al., 2022) techniques. Finally, the noisy optimisation performed in our RL
experiments contribute to carbon emissions. However, this is usually a means to an end, as RL
algorithms are also used to optimise energy distribution and consumption in several applications.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we have highlighted the central role of neural plasticity in deep reinforcement learning
algorithms, and have motivated the use of rational activation functions, as a lightweight way of
boosting RL agents performances. We derived a condition, under which rational functions embed
residual connections. Then the naturally regularised joint-rational activation function was developed,
inspired by weight sharing in residual networks.
The simple DQN algorithm equipped with these (regularised) rational forms of plasticity becomes
a competitive alternative to more complicated and costly algorithms, such as Double DQN and
Rainbow. Fortunately, the complexity of these rational functions also seem to automatically adapt
to the one of the environment used for training. Their use could be a substitute for more expensive
architectural searches. We thus hope that they will be adopted in future deep reinforcement learning
algorithms, as they can provide agents with the necessary neural plasticity required by stationary,
dynamic and progressive reinforcement learning environments.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Elisa Corbean for her help on the manuscript revisions, as well as the anonymous
reviewers of ICLR 2024 for their valuable feedback. This research work has been funded by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education,
Research, Science within their joint support of the National Research Center for Applied Cybersecu-
rity ATHENE, via the “SenPai: XReLeaS” project, from the German Center for Artificial Intelligence
(DFKI). This work was also supported by the project “safeFBDC - Financial Big Data Cluster (FKZ:
01MK21002K)”, funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economics Affairs and Energy as part
of the GAIA-x initiative. It benefited from the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Research,
Science and the Arts (HMWK; project “The Third Wave of AI”)

R EFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Rosie Zhao, Joseph Modayil, Adam White, and Marlos C. Machado. Loss of plasticity
  in continual deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, 2023.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot,
  Steven Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martín Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andrew Bolt, and
  Charles Blundell. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In 8th International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Chayan Banerjee, Zhiyong Chen, and Nasimul Noman. Improved soft actor-critic: Mixing prioritized
  off-policy samples with on-policy experience. ArXiv, 2021.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. ArXiv, 2017.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2020.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Christopher Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying
  generalization in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, (ICML), 2019.
Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and
  explainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. 2023a.
Quentin Delfosse, Wolfgang Stammer, Thomas Rothenbacher, Dwarak Vittal, and Kristian Kersting.
  Boosting object representation learning via motion and object continuity. In European Conference
  on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML),
  2023b.
Quentin Delfosse, Sebastian Sztwiertnia, Wolfgang Stammer, Mark Rothermel, and Kristian Kersting.
  Interpretable concept bottlenecks to align reinforcement learning agents. ArXiv, 2024.
Carlo D’Eramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Mushroomrl:
  Simplifying reinforcement learning research. ArXiv, 2020.
Shibhansh Dohare, Ashique Rupam Mahmood, and Richard S. Sutton. Continual backprop: Stochastic
  gradient descent with persistent randomness. ArXiv, 2021.
Shibhansh Dohare, J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Parash Rahman, Richard S. Sutton, and A. Rupam
  Mahmood. Maintaining plasticity in deep continual learning. ArXiv, 2023.
Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural Networks, 2018.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Jesse Farebrother, Marlos C. Machado, and Michael Bowling. Generalization and regularization in
  DQN. ArXiv, 2018.
Lior Fuks, Noor H. Awad, Frank Hutter, and Marius Thomas Lindauer. An evolution strategy with
  progressive episode lengths for playing games. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2019.
D Garlick. Understanding the nature of the general factor of intelligence: the role of individual
  differences in neural plasticity as an explanatory mechanism. Psychological review, 2002.
Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Nicolae-Catalin Ristea, and Nicu Sebe. Non-linear
 neurons with human-like apical dendrite activations. ArXiv, 2020.
Albert Gidon, Timothy Adam Zolnik, Pawel Fidzinski, Felix Bolduan, Athanasia Papoutsi, Panayiota
  Poirazi, Martin Holtkamp, Imre Vida, and Matthew Evan Larkum. Dendritic action potentials and
  computation in human layer 2/3 cortical neurons. Science, 2020.
Luke B. Godfrey. An evaluation of parametric activation functions for deep learning. IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC), 2019.
Mohit Goyal, Rajan Goyal, and Brejesh Lall. Learning activation functions: A new paradigm of
 understanding neural networks. ArXiv, 2019.
Klaus Greff, Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Highway and residual networks
  learn unrolled iterative estimation. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence AAAI, 2018.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney,
 Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining
 improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.
Steven Kapturowski, Georg Ostrovski, John Quan, Rémi Munos, and Will Dabney. Recurrent
  experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning. In 7th International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Srivatsan Krishnan, Amir Yazdanbaksh, Shvetank Prakash, Jason J. Jabbour, Ikechukwu Uchendu,
  Susobhan Ghosh, Behzad Boroujerdian, Daniel Richins, Devashree Tripathy, Aleksandra Faust,
  and Vijay Janapa Reddi. Archgym: An open-source gymnasium for machine learning assisted
  architecture design. Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer
  Architecture, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. Cifar-10 (canadian institute for advanced
  research). URL http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dhireesha Kudithipudi, Mario Aguilar-Simon, Jonathan Babb, Maxim Bazhenov, Douglas Blackiston,
  Josh C. Bongard, Andrew P. Brna, Suraj Chakravarthi Raja, Nick Cheney, Jeff Clune, Anurag Reddy
  Daram, Stefano Fusi, Peter Helfer, Leslie M. Kay, Nicholas A. Ketz, Zsolt Kira, Soheil Kolouri,
  Jeffrey L. Krichmar, Sam Kriegman, Michael Levin, Sandeep Madireddy, Santosh Manicka, Ali
  Marjaninejad, Bruce L. McNaughton, Risto Miikkulainen, Zaneta Navratilova, Tej Pandit, Alice
  Parker, Praveen K. Pilly, Sebastian Risi, Terrence J. Sejnowski, Andrea Soltoggio, Nicholas Soures,
  Andreas Savas Tolias, Darío Urbina-Meléndez, Francisco J. Valero-Cuevas, Gido M. van de
  Ven, Joshua T. Vogelstein, Felix Wang, Ron Weiss, Angel Yanguas-Gil, Xinyun Zou, and Hava T.
  Siegelmann. Biological underpinnings for lifelong learning machines. Nature Machine Intelligence,
  2022.
Qianli Liao and Tomaso A. Poggio. Bridging the gaps between residual learning, recurrent neural
  networks and visual cortex. ArXiv, 2016.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. SPACE: unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2020.
Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, Alan L.
  Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural architecture search. In 15th
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Mohammad Loni, Aditya Mohan, Mehdi Asadi, and Marius Thomas Lindauer. Learning activation
 functions for sparse neural networks. ArXiv, 2023.
Liang Lu and Steve Renals. Small-footprint deep neural networks with highway connections for
  speech recognition. In 17th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
  Association (INTERSPEECH), 2016.
Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in
  reinforcement learning. ArXiv, 2022.

Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. ArXiv, 2023.
Franco Manessi and Alessandro Rozza. Learning combinations of activation functions. In 24th
  International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2018.
Thomas Mesnard, Theophane Weber, Fabio Viola, Shantanu Thakoor, Alaa Saade, Anna Harutyunyan,
  Will Dabney, Thomas S. Stepleton, Nicolas Heess, Arthur Guez, Eric Moulines, Marcus Hutter,
  Lars Buesing, and Rémi Munos. Counterfactual credit assignment in model-free reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Diganta Misra. Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic activation function. In 31st British Machine
  Vision Conference 2020, (BMVC), 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles
  Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane
  Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
  2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
Aditya Mohan, C. E. Benjamins, Konrad Wienecke, Alexander Dockhorn, and Marius Lindauer.
 Autorl hyperparameter landscapes. ArXiv, 2023.
Alejandro Molina, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Padé activation units: End-to-end
  learning of flexible activation functions in deep networks. In 8th International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron C. Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.
Evgenii Nikishin, Junhyuk Oh, Georg Ostrovski, Clare Lyle, Razvan Pascanu, Will Dabney, and
  André Barreto. Deep reinforcement learning with plasticity injection. ArXiv, 2023.
Johan S. Obando-Ceron and Pablo Samuel Castro. Revisiting rainbow: Promoting more insightful
  and inclusive deep reinforcement learning research. In Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Dong Pang, Xinyi Le, and Xinping Guan. RL-DARTS: differentiable neural architecture search via
  reinforcement-learning-based meta-optimizer. Knowl. Based Syst., 2021.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Kumar Divvala, Ross B. Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Uni-
  fied, real-time object detection. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2016.
Julien Roy, Paul Barde, Félix G. Harvey, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Chris Pal. Promoting coordi-
  nation through policy regularization in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2020 (NeurIPS), 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv, 2017.
Wenling Shang, Kihyuk Sohn, Diogo Almeida, and Honglak Lee. Understanding and improving
 convolutional neural networks via concatenated rectified linear units. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, 2016.
Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.
Matus Telgarsky. Neural networks and rational functions. In Proceedings of the 34th International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2017.
Ludovic Trottier, Philippe Giguère, and Brahim Chaib-draa. Parametric exponential linear unit for
  deep convolutional neural networks. In IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and
  Applications (ICMLA), 2017.
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning.
  In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016.
Andreas Veit, Michael J. Wilber, and Serge J. Belongie. Residual networks behave like ensembles of
  relatively shallow networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, Paul Pu Liang, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom M Mitchell. Read and
  reap the rewards: Learning to play atari with the help of instruction manuals. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. SNAS: stochastic neural architecture search.
   In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Changqing Xu, Mingyue Wang, and Xian Li. Generalized vandermonde tensors. Frontiers of
  Mathematics in China, 2016.
Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing deep
  reinforcement learning from pixels. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  (ICLR), 2021.
Tom Zahavy, Zhongwen Xu, Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, H. V. Hasselt, David Silver,
  and Satinder Singh. A self-tuning actor-critic algorithm. arXiv: Machine Learning, 2020.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        A PPENDIX

As mentioned in the main body, the appendix contains additional materials and supporting information
for the following aspects: rational activation functions improving plasticity (4), comparison of rational
and rigid networks with different sizes on supervised learning experiments (A.1), results on replacing
residual blocks with rational activation functions (A.2), every final and maximal scores obtained by
the reinforcement learning agents used in our experiments (A.3), the evolutions of these scores (A.4),
the different environment types with illustrations of their changes (A.5), graphs of the learned rational
activation functions (A.6) and technical details for reproducibility (A.8).
Rational functions improve plasticity
To prove that rational can help with plasiticy, we     100     MNIST           PERM. 1 PERM. 2
tested them in continual learning settings (with
                                                        80      Task 0


                                                           Test Accuracy (%)
more abrupt distribution shifts). We included Con-
                                                                Task 1
catenated RELU and rational functions to an ex-         60      Task 2
                                         3
isting implementation of continual AI , in which                ReLU
                                                        40      CReLU
4 layers (2 convolutional ones and to fully con-                Rational
nected ones) networks are trained on MNIST. The         20
network then continues training on PERM.1, a             0
variation of the dataset, for which a fixed random          0     50 100 150 200 250 300 350
permutation is applied to every image. Another                            Training images (K)
permutation is used for PERM. 2, used after the     Figure 6: Rational   function      improve plasticity
training on PERM1. As shown in Fig. 6, networks on the permutted MNIST experiment. Ratio-
with rationals are both better at modelling the new nal networks obtain better accuracies on each
data (higher accuracies on the currently trained currently and previously trained datasets.
data), but are also able to retain more information about the data previously trained on. Networks
with Continual ReLU (Shang et al., 2016) better retain information on Task 1, while performing on
par with ReLU ones for the 2 other tasks.


A.1       R ATIONAL EFFICIENT PLASTICITY CAN REPLACE LAYER ’ S WEIGHT PLASTICITY

We here show that networks with rational activations not only outperform Leaky ReLU ones with
the same amount of parameters, but also to outperform deeper and more heavily parametrised neural
networks (indicated by the colours). For example, a rational activated VGG4 not only performs better
than a rigid Leaky ReLU VGG4 at 1.37M parameters, but even performs similarly to the 4.71M
parameters rigid VGG6. Activation’s plasticity allowing to reduce the number of layers weights
is also shown by the experiments summarized in Tab. 2 in the next section, where blocks from a
pretrained ResNet are replaced by a rational function, and the resulting networks are able to recover
and surpass their accuracies.


           Architecture                         VGG4                                 VGG6              VGG8
           Activation function            LReLU Rational                       LReLU Rational    LReLU Rational
          CIFAR 10      Training Acc@1    83.0±.3 87.1±.6                      86.9±.2 89.2±.2   90.1±.1 92.4±.2
                        Testing Acc@1     80.0±1. 84.3±.5                      83.1±.6 85.4±.6   85.0±1. 86.9±.3
          CIFAR 100 Training     Acc@1
                        Testing Acc@1
                                          64.6±.8 70.4±.9
                                          56.5±.9 58.9±.6
                                                                               70.7±.6 86.0±.9
                                                                               59.0±.5 59.9±.9
                                                                                                 87.7±.2 87.8±.1
                                                                                                 60.0±.9 59.9±.4
           # Network parameters                 1.37M                                4.71M             9.27M

Table 1: Shallow rational networks perform as deeper Leaky ReLU ones. VGG networks training and
testing top-1 accuracies with different numbers of layers are evaluated on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
Rational VGG4 has similar performances as VGG6 network, with 3.5 times less parameters, and
Rational VGG6 outperforms VGG8, with two times less parameters. Shaded colour pairs included
for emphasis.

    3
        https://github.com/ContinualAI/colab/blob/master/notebooks/permuted_and_split_mnist.ipynb


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2       R ESIDUAL BLOCK LEARN OF DEEP R ES N ET LEARN ACTIVATION FUNCTION - LIKE
          BEHAVIOUR .

We present in this section lesioning experiments, where a residual block is lesioned from a pretrained
Residual Network, and the surrounding blocks are fine-tuned (with a learning rate of 0.001) for 15
epochs. These lesioning experiments were first conducted by Veit et al. (2016). We also perform
rational lesioning, where we replace a block by an (identity initialised)4 rational activation function
(instead of removing the block), and train the activation function along with the surrounding blocks.
The used rational functions have the same order as in every other experiment ((m, n) = (5, 4)), that
satisfies the rational residual property derive in the paper). We report recovery percentages, computed
following:
                                                     finetuned − surgered
                                 recovery = 100 ×                          .                         (1)
                                                      original − surgered
We also provide the amount of dropped parameters of each lesioning.


Table 2: Rational functions improve lesioning. The recovery percentages for finetuned networks
after lesioning (Veit et al., 2016) of a ResNet layer’s (L) block (B) are shown. Residual blocks
were lesioned, i.e. replaced with the identity (Base) or a rational from a pretrained ResNet101 (44M
parameters). Then, the surrounding blocks (and implanted rational activation function) are retrained
for 15 epochs. Larger percentages are better, best results are in bold.


                   Recovery (%) Lesioning                    L2B3 L3B19 L3B22 L4B2
                                Original (Veit et al., 2016) 100.9 90.5 100   58.9
                   Training
                                Rational (ours)              101.1 104  120   91.1
                                     Original (Veit et al., 2016) 93.1        97.1   81.6   81.7
                   Testing
                                     Rational (ours)              90.5        97.6   91.5   85.3
                                 % dropped params                      0.63   2.51   2.51   10.0


As the goal is to show that flexible rational functions can achieve similar modelling capacities to the
residual blocks, we did not apply regularisation methods and mainly focused on training accuracies.
We can clearly observe that rational activation functions lead to performance improvements that
even surpass the original model, or are able to maintain performances when the amount of dropped
parameters rises.

A.3       C OMPLETE SCORES TABLE FOR D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Through this work, we showed the performance superiority of reinforcement learning agents that
embed additional plasticity provided by learnable rational activation functions. We used human
normalised scores (cf. Eq. 2) for readability. For completeness, we provide in this section the final
raw scores of every trained agent. As many papers provide the maximum obtained score among
every epoch and every agent, even if we consider it to be an inaccurate and noisy indicator of the
performances, for which random actions can still be taken (because of ϵ-greedy strategy also being
used in evaluation). A fairer indicator to compare methods is the mean score. We thus also provide
final mean scores (of agents retrained among 5 seeded reruns) with standard deviation. We start off
by providing the human scores used for normalisation (provided by van Hasselt et al., in Table 5),
then provide final mean and maximum obtained raw scores of every agent.


   4
       all weights are initially set to 0 but a1 (and b0 ), both set to 1.


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm                         DQN                       DDQN                 DQN with Plasticity
    Activation         LReLU          SiLU        d+SiLU       LReLU         PELU         rational    joint-rational
Asterix               1.85±1.2       0.52±0.6    2.14±1.4      48.9±17.7     25.8±3.7    242±23.5     168±32.6•
Battlezone            11.4±7.0       21.2±15.0   11.3±6.7      68.2±34.8     46.6±19.5   70.1±2.1•    77.4±8.7
Breakout              558±166        93.9±57.6   11.7±14.0     286±122       788±79.2    1134±130•    1210±36.0
Enduro                16.3±21.3      37.0±17.7   0.37±0.5      47.7±18.1     24.5±42.6   141±15.0     129±14.7•
Jamesbond             8.62±6.4       6.08±3.7    5.28±4.4      10.7±11.1     74.2±51.5   308±48.5•    312±59.5
Kangaroo              11.8±12.5      128±95.6•   13.9±18.5     17.2±14.5     57.7±14.6   107±43.1     193±86.8
Pong                  101±5.5        96.1±12.0   104±3.3       91.3±30.8     106.4±2.2   107.0±2.4•   107.3±2.7
Qbert                 55.4±17.1      14.2±17.0   2.74±0.2      74.0±21.7     101±6.6     120±2.8      117±4.9•
Seaquest              0.57±0.4       3.67±4.1    0.18±0.2      2.17±0.9      9.21±2.5    16.3±0.5•    18.4±3.3
Skiing                -90.7±37.9     -111±-0.7   -85.5±43.4    -86.9±46.6    -111±-.7    -59.5±60.7   -60.2±56.1•
Space Inv.            33.9±4.3       33.1±11.9   32.4±12.4     31.0±1.0      50.1±3.3•   42.3±3.1     95.1±17.7
Tennis                8.94±17.3      26.3±53.3   78.5±64.3     32.1±51.6     106±53.3    257.8±2.8•   258.3±5.2
Timepilot             14.9±14.3      19.3±31.0   18.3±38.1     6.61±7.5      124±26.1    341±105      253±11.0•
Tutankham             0.03±2.8       58.2±48.6   2.89±4.0      24.4±-0.4     91.6±29.3   130±10.7•    134±29.3
Videopinball          440±123        55.8±61.9   -4.03±32.5    626±241       299±168     1616±1026    906±539•
# Wins                0/15           0/15        0/15          0/15          0/15        6/15         9/15
# Super-Human         3/15           1/15        1/15          2/15          6/15        11/15        11/15

Table 3: Neural plasticity leads to vast performance improvements. Normalised mean scores and
standard deviations (in percentage, cf. Appendix A.8 for the equation) of rigid baselines (i.e. DQN
and DDQN with Leaky ReLU, DQN with SiLU and SiLU + dSiLU), as well as DQN with plasticity:
using PELU, rational (full) and joint-rational (regularised), are reported over five experimental
random seeded repetitions (larger mean values are better). The best results are highlighted in bold
and runner-ups denoted with • markers. The last rows summarise the number of times best mean
scores were obtained by each agent and the number of super-human performances.


Final mean and maximum obtained scores of Rainbow agents:

            Evaluation             Final Mean Scores               Max. Obtained Scores
               Plasticity    rigid     full      regularised    rigid       full    regularised
               Breakout      52        279       303            383         569     569
               Enduro        844       1473      1470           1388        1973    1964
               Kangaroo      40        2157      2139           6300        6000    4800
               Q*bert        149       11931     11551          16125       23550   23550
               Seaquest      82        247       282            920         1280    1280
               Space Inv.    595       1263      1157           2070        3395    2875
               Time Pilot    3926      5386      6411           12700       15900   15900

Table 4: Final mean and maximum obtained scores obtained by rigid Rainbow agents (i.e. using
Leaky ReLU), as well as Rainbow with full (i.e. using rational activation functions) and regularised
(i.e. using joint-rational ones) plasticity (only 1 run because of computational cost, larger values are
better).


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Final mean scores of all agents:

 Algorithm      Random                  DQN                   DDQN              DQN with Plasticity
 Network type       -       LReLU       SiLU      d+SiLU     LReLU       PELU           full     regularised
 Asterix        67.9±2.2 206±90       107±45    228±108    3723±1324 1998±275     18109±1755 12621±2436
 Battlezone     788±38    4464±2291 7612±4877 4429±2183 22775±11265 15807±6320 23403±701       25749±2837
 Breakout       0.14±01   155±46      26.2±16   3.4±3.89   79.4±33.8   219±22     315±36       336±10
 Enduro         0±0       121±158     274±131   2.77±3.41  353±134     181±315    1043±111     957±109
 Jamesbond      6.39±0.41 37.6±23.6   28.4±13.8 25.5±16.2  45.2±40.7   275±187    1122±176     1137±216
 Kangaroo       14.2±0.9 335±342      3500±2607 393±504    484±395     1586±398   2940±1175    5266±2365
 Pong           -20.2±0   15.9±2      14.1±4.3  16.9±1.2   12.4±11     17.8±0.8   18±0.9       18.1±1
 Q*bert         40.6±2.8 6715±2058 1754±2048 371±28        8954±2616 12143±795 14436±336       14080±593
 Seaquest       20.1±0.4 250±162      1504±1677 94.6±87.2  898±353     3740±991   6603±200     7461±1321
 Skiing         -16104±92 -27365±4794 -29890±4 -26725±5485 -26892±5881 -29912±10 -23487±7624 -23582±7058
 Space Inv.     51.6±1.1 531±62       520±169   509±176    490±15      759±48     650±45       1395±251
 Tennis         -23.9±0.0 -22.4±3.0   -19.4±9.2 -10.4±11.1 -18.4±8.9   -5.6±9.2   20.5±0.5     20.6±0.9
 TimePilot      688±30    1428±739    1644±1566 1594±1918 1016±401     6818±1323 17632±5242 13261±576
 Tutankham      3.51±0.54 3.55±4.3    81.9±66   7.41±5.96  36.4±0      127±40     179±15       184±40
 VideoPinb.     6795±461 45683±11383 11730±5941 6439±3336 62151±21791 42051±15356 149712±91219 86942±48143

Table 5: Final mean raw scores (with std. dev.) of rigid baselines (i.e. DQN and DDQN with Leaky
ReLU, DQN with SiLU and SiLU + dSiLU), as well as DQN with full plasticity (i.e. using rational
activation functions) and regularised plasticity (i.e. using joint-rational ones) on Atari 2600 games,
averaged over 5 seeded reruns (larger mean values are better).


Maximum obtained scores:

 Algorithm         Random                 DQN                 DDQN            DQN with Plasticity
 Network type           -     LReLU       SiLU     d+SiLU     LReLU      PELU        full      regularised
   Asterix         71         9250       3400      3800       20150     9300       84950       49700
   Battlezone      843        88000      81000     70000      97000     68000      78000       94000
   Breakout        0          427        370       344        411       430        864         864
   Enduro          0          1243       928       1041       1067      1699       1946        1927
   Jamesbond       6          5600       5750      700        7500      6150       9250        13300
   Kangaroo        15         14800      15600     10200      13000     12400      16200       16800
   Pong            -20        21         21        21         21        21         21          21
   Q*bert          45         19425      11700     5625       19200     18900      24325       25075
   Seaquest        20         7440       8300      740        15830     14860      9100        26990
   Skiing          -15997     -5987      -6505     -6267      -5359     -5495      -5368       -5612
   Space Inv.      53         2435       2205      2460       2290      2030       2490        3790
   Tennis          -23        8          1         -1         4         -1         24          36
   Time Pilot      730        11900      15500     12500      12200     16300      72000       28000
   Tutankham       4          249        267       267        274       397        334         309
   VideoPinb.      7599       998535     950250    338512     991669    322655     997952      998324

Table 6: Maximum obtained scores (with std. dev.) of rigid baselines (i.e. DQN and DDQN with
Leaky ReLU, DQN with SiLU and SiLU + dSiLU), as well as DQN with full plasticity (i.e. using
rational activation functions) and regularised plasticity (i.e. using joint-rational ones) on Atari 2600
games, averaged over 5 seeded reruns (larger values are better).


Human scores used for normalisation:
Asterix: 7536, Battlezone: 33030, Breakout: 27.9, Enduro: 740.2, Jamesbond: 368.5,
Kangaroo: 2739, Pong: 15.5, Q*bert: 12085, Seaquest: 40425.8, Skiing: −3686.6, Space
Invaders: 1464.9, Tennis: −6.7, Time Pilot: 5650, Tutankham: 138.3, Video Pinball: 15641.1


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4    E VOLUTION OF THE SCORES ON EVERY GAME

The main part present some graphs that compares performance evolutions of the Rainbow and DQN
agents with plasticity, as well as Rigid DQN, DDQN and Rainbow agents. We here provide the
evolution of the scores of every tested DQN and the DDQN agents on the complete game set. DQN
agents with higher plasticity are always the best-performing ones. Experiments on several games (e.g.
Jamesbond, Seaquest) show that using DDQN does not prevent the performance drop but only delays
it.

                                    Asterix                      30K
                                                                                   BattleZone                                         Breakout
                    DQN RN                                                                                     350
          20K       DQN RRN                                      25K
                                                                                                               300
                    DQN Leaky ReLU                               20K
          15K       DDQN LReLU                                                                                 250
                    DQN PELU                                     15K                                           200
          10K       DQN SiLU+dSiLU
                    DQN SiLU                                     10K                                           150
                                                                                                               100
          5K                                                      5K
                                                                                                                50
                                                                  0K
          0K                                                                                                     0
                0        100       200       300     400   500          0   100     200   300     400   500          0        100     200      300   400    500
                                    Enduro                                         Jamesbond                                          Kangaroo
         1200                                                    1400                                          7K
         1000                                                    1200                                          6K
          800                                                    1000                                          5K
          600                                                    800                                           4K
          400                                                    600                                           3K
          200                                                    400                                           2K
            0                                                    200                                           1K
          200                                                      0                                           0K
                0        100       200       300     400   500          0   100     200   300     400   500          0        100     200      300   400    500
                                         Pong                                         Qbert                                           Seaquest
           20
                                                                 14K
                                                                                                               8K
                                                                 12K
           10
                                                                 10K                                           6K
            0                                                     8K
                                                                                                               4K
                                                                  6K
           10                                                     4K                                           2K
                                                                  2K
           20                                                     0K                                           0K
                0        20         40          60   80    100          0   100     200   300     400   500          0        100     200      300   400    500
                                        Skiing                                    SpaceInvaders                                           Tennis
                                                                 1400                                           20
         -15K                                                    1200
                                                                                                                10
                                                                 1000
         -20K                                                                                                    0
                                                                 800
         -25K                                                    600                                            10
                                                                 400
         -30K                                                                                                   20
                                                                 200
                                                                   0                                            30
                0   25        50   75    100 125 150 175 200            0   100     200   300     400   500          0        100     200      300   400    500
                                   TimePilot                                       Tutankham                                         VideoPinball
                                                                 200                                          250K
          20K
                                                                                                              200K
                                                                 150
          15K
                                                                                                              150K
                                                                 100
          10K                                                                                                 100K
                                                                  50
          5K                                                                                                  50K

          0K                                                       0                                           0K
                0        100       200       300     400   500          0   100     200   300     400   500          0   25     50   75     100 125 150 175 200


Figure 7: Smoothed (cf. Eq. 3) evolutions of the scores on every tested game for DQN agents with
full (i.e. using rational activation functions) and regularised (i.e. using joint-rational ones) plasticity,
and original DQN agents using Leaky ReLU, SiLU and SiLU+dSiLU, as well as for DDQN agents
with Leaky ReLU.


                                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   E NVIRONMENTS TYPES : STATIONARY, DYNAMICS AND PROGRESSIVE

The used environments have been separated in 3 categories, describing their potential changes through
agents learning. This categorisation is here illustrated with frames of the tested games. As one can
see: Breakout, Kangaroo, Pong, Skiing, Space Invaders, Tennis, Tutankham and VideoPinball can
be categorised as stationary environment, as changes are minimal for the agents in these games.
Asterix, BattleZone, Q*bert and Enduro present environment changes, that are early reached by the
playing agents, and are thus dynamic environments. Finally, Jamesbond, Seaquest and Time Pilot
correspond to progressive environments, as the agents needs to master early changes to access new
parts of these environments.

         Asterix   Battle Zone Breakout    Enduro    Jamesbond Kangaroo      Pong       Q*bert


       Seaquest      Skiing   Space Inv.   Tennis    Time Pilot Tutankham Video Pinb.


Figure 8: Images extracted from DQN agents with full plasticity playing the set of 15 Atari 2600
games used in this paper. Stationary environments (e.g. Pong, Video Pinball) do not evolve during
training, dynamic ones provide different input/output distributions that are early accessible in the
game (e.g Q*bert, Enduro) and progressive ones (e.g. Jamesbond, Time Pilot) require the agent to
improve for the it to evolve.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6    L EARNED RATIONAL ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS



We have explained in the main text how rational functions of agents used on different games
can exhibit different complexities. This section provides the learned parametric rational functions
learned by DQN agents with full plasticity (left) and by those with regularised plasticity (right) after
convergence for every different tested game of the gym Atari 2600 environment. Kernel Density
Estimations (with Gaussian kernels) of input distributions indicates where the functions are most
activated. Rational functions from agents trained on simpler games (e.g. Enduro, Pong, Q*bert) have
simpler profiles (i.e. fewer distinct extremas).
       Asterix


                         10           5      0                   4             2                 0                         4               2               0       10                5                   0             10                5                0
       BattleZone


                    20            10         0                   10                 5                    0                         2                       0             4           2           0               2     5                 0                    5
       Breakout


                                  50                 0                     2                 0                             2               1           0             10                  0                    10            20               10           0
       Enduro


                         40            20        0               5.0           2.5 0.0                       2.5           4                   2               0             5                   0                     20                10               0
       Jamesbond


                    40             20            0           6             4             2           0                         2               0                   5.0       2.5         0.0                 2.5            20               10           0
       Kangaroo


                         10       5         0            5           5.0           2.5       0.0                       2           1               0                         5                   0                              10           5        0
       Pong


                    10                5          0           1.0           0.5 0.0                       0.5           2               1           0                4            2           0               2         2             1            0
       Qbert


                    10            5         0                         4             2                0                     2               1               0                     5                   0                 10                5            0
       Seaquest


                              0             10               4                 2                 0                 6               4               2                5.0          2.5         0.0                 2.5       10            5            0



                                                                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Skiing
                       20     10           0            10              4           2           0           2       2            0               2             5       0             5             0           20

       SpaceInvaders


                                      20                0       6           4           2           0           6       4            2       0       10            5   0         5             10      5            0
       Tennis


                             20            10               0       4           2           0           2       4            2           0                 5           0                      10           5            0
       TimePilot


                                 20                 0                   4           2           0           2           4        2       0           5.0       2.5 0.0         2.5            20       10               0
       Tutankham


                             5                  0               7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0                                     2            1       0                     10          5             10            5                    0
       VideoPinball


                        20             10               0       4               2           0                           2                0           5.0 2.5 0.0 2.5                     10            5            0

Figure 9: Profiles (dark blue) and input distributions (light blue) of rational functions (left) and
joint-rational ones (right) of DQN agents on the different tested games. (Joint-)rational functions
from agents of simpler games have simpler profiles (i.e. fewer distinct extrema).


                                                                                                                            21
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   A.7                  E VOLUTION OF RATIONALS ON THE P ERM -MNIST CONTINUAL LEARNING EXPERIMENT

   Figure 10 depicts the evolutions of rational functions through the permuted MNIST experiment. One
   can see that while the function of the first layer remains stable through the successive datasets, the
   second one flatten at its most activated region (around 0), while the third one increase its slope in
   this region, leading to higher gradients. This suggests that rational functions can help adapting the
   gradient scales at each layer. Further investigating this is an interesting line of future work.

                           Evolution of the rational functions on the Permuted MNIST experiment
Before training
 After MNIST
 After PERM1
 After PERM2


                                 Layer 1                            Layer 2             Layer 3



  Figure 10: Evolution of the rational activation functions on the permuted MNIST experiment (cf. 4).
  The 3 rational activation functions used for training (and retraining) are adapting to fit the data
  (depicted in semi transparent).


   A.8                  T ECHNICAL DETAILS TO REPRODUCE THE EXPERIMENTS

  We here provide details on our experiments for reproducibility. We used the seed 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 for
  every multi-seed experiment.

   S UPERVISED L EARNING E XPERIMENTS
   For the lesioning experiment, we used an available5 pretrained Residual Network. We then remove
   the corresponding block (and potentially replace it with an identity initialised rational activation
   function) (surgered). We finetune the new models, allowing for optimisation of the previous and next
   layers (and potentially the rational function) for 15 epochs with SGD (learning rate of 0.001).
                  5
                      https://download.pytorch.org/models/resnet101-5d3b4d8f.pth


                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the classification experiments, we run on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., MIT
License), we let every network learn for 60 epochs. We use the code provided by Molina et al. (2020),
with only one classification layer in these smaller VGG versions (VGG4, VGG6 and VGG8, against
3 for VGG16 and larger). We use SGD as the optimisation algorithm, with a learning rate of 0.02
and 128 as batch size. The VGG networks contain successive VGG blocks that all consist of n
convolutional layers, i input channels and o output channels, stride 3 and padding 1, followed by an
activation function, and 1 Max Pooling layer. For each used architecture, the (n, i, o) parameters of
the successive blocks are:

          • VGG4: (1, 3, 64) →
                             − (1, 64, 128) →
                                            − (2, 128, 256)
          • VGG6: (1, 3, 64) →
                             − (1, 64, 128) →
                                            − (2, 128, 256) →
                                                            − (2, 256, 512)
          • VGG8: (1, 3, 64) →
                             − (1, 64, 128) →
                                            − (2, 128, 256) →
                                                            − (2, 256, 512) →
                                                                            − (2, 512, 512)

The output of these blocks is then passed on to a classifier (linear layer). Only activation functions
differ between the Leaky ReLU and the Rational versions.

R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING E XPERIMENTS
To ease the reproducibility of our the reinforcement learning experiments, we used the Mushroom RL
library (D’Eramo et al., 2020) on the Arcade Learning Environment (GNU General Public License).
We used states consisting of 4 consecutive grey-scaled images, downsampled to 84 × 84. Computing
the gradients for rational functions takes longer than e.g. ReLU. However, we used a CUDA optimized
implementation of the rational activation functions that we open source along with this paper. In
practice, we did not notice any significant training time difference.
Network Architecture. The input to the network is thus a 84x84x4 tensor containing a rescaled, and
gray-scaled, version of the last four frames. The first convolution layer convolves the input with 32
filters of size 8 (stride 4), the second layer has 64 layers of size 4 (stride 2), the final convolution layer
has 64 filters of size 3 (stride 1). This is followed by a fully-connected hidden layer of 512 units.
All these layers are separated by the corresponding activation functions (either Leaky ReLU, SiLU,
SiLU for convolution layers and dSiLU for linear ones, PELU, rational functions (at each layer) and
joint-rational ones (shared accross layers) of order m = 5 and n = 4, initialised to approximate
Leaky ReLU). We used the default PeLU initial hyperparameters (a=1, b=1, c=1) and let the weights
optimizer tune them through training, as for rational functions. For CRELU, we took the implementa-
tion from ML Compiled 6 , and halves the number of filters in the following convolutional layers to
keep the same network structure intact, as done by Shang et al. (2016).
Hyper-parameters. We evaluate the agents every 250K steps, for 125K steps. The target network is
updated every 10K steps, with a replay buffer memory of initial size 50K, and maximum size 500K,
except for Pong, for which all these values are divided by 10. The discount factor γ is set to 0.99 and
the learning rate is 0.00025. We do not select the best policy among seeds between epochs. We use
the simple ϵ-greedy exploration policy, with the ϵ decreasing linearly from 1 to 0.1 over 1M steps,
and an ϵ of 0.05 is used for testing.
The only difference from the evaluation of Mnih et al. (2015) and of van Hasselt et al. (2016)
evaluation is the use of the Adam optimiser instead of RMSProp, for every evaluated agent.
Normalisation techniques. To compute human normalised scores, we used the following equation:
                                              score agent − score random
                     scorenormalised = 100 ×                             ,                (2)
                                             score human − score random

For readability, the curves plotted in the Fig. 4 and Fig. 8 are smoothed following:
                                scoret = α × scoret−1 + (1 − α) × scorest ,                               (3)
with α = 0.9.
Overestimation computation. We used the following formulae to compute relative overestimation.
                                                             Q-value − R
                                        overestimation =                                                  (4)
                                                                  R
   6
       https://ml-compiled.readthedocs.io/en/latest/activations.html


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
The DQN, DDQN and Rainbow agents networks architecture, rational plasticity (with rational
activations functions at each layer) and of the regularized ones (with one joint-rational activation
function shared across layers). For the other activation functions, the "Rat." blocks are replaced with
Leaky ReLU, CReLU, SiLU, or PELU. For the d+SiLU networks, SiLU is used on the convolutional
layers (i.e. first two), and dSiLU in the fully connected ones (i.e. last two).

                         (32)      (32, 4, 8, 8)                                  (32)       (32, 4, 8, 8)



                        View       Convolution                                    View       Convolution



                                 Add            (6)              (4)        (6)          Add                                           (4)



                (64)     (64, 32, 4, 4)         Rat.
                                                PAU                                    PAURat. (64, 32, 4, 4)
                                                                                    Joint                                (64)



             View         Convolution                                                               Convolution        View



                       Add         (6)                (4)                                                        Add



   (64)         (64, 64, 3, 3)    Rat.
                                  PAU                                                        (64, 64, 3, 3) Joint
                                                                                                               PAURat.          (64)



   View         Convolution                                                                                  Convolution        View



           Add            (6)             (4)                                                                                   Add



                         PAU
                         Rat.          (512, 3136)                                                            (512, 3136) Joint
                                                                                                                             PAURat.



          (512)          View              Mult                                                      (512)        Mult          View



          (6)           Addmm             (4)         (6, 512)                                                   Addmm


                                                                                  (6, 512)
                         PAU
                         Rat.             (6)           Mult                                                       PAURat.
                                                                                                                Joint                   (6)
                                                                                                Mult


                                       Addmm                                                                       Addmm



                                        Loss                                                                        Loss



Figure 11: left: The DQN agents’ neural network equipped with Rational Activation Functions (Rat.).
Any other network with classical activation functions (as Leaky Relu or SiLU) would be similar, with
the corresponding activation function instead of the rational one. right: The agents’ network using the
regularized joint-rational version of the network. The same activation is used across the layers. The
parameters of the rational activation (in orange) function are shared. In both graphs, operations are
placed in the grey boxes and parameters in the blue ones, (or orange for the rationals’ ones).


                                                                       24
