Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L OGICAL L ANGUAGES ACCEPTED BY T RANSFORMER
E NCODERS WITH H ARD ATTENTION
 Pablo Barceló                                       Alexander Kozachinskiy
 IMC, PUC Chile & IMFD Chile & CENIA                  IMFD and CENIA
 Santiago, Chile                                      Santiago, Chile.
 pbarcelo@uc.cl                                       alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl

 Anthony Widjaja Lin                                   Vladimir Podolski
 University of Kaiserslautern-Landau                   Tufts University
 & Max-Planck Institute for Software Systems           Medford, USA
 Kaiserslautern, Germany                               vladimir.podolskii@tufts.edu
 awlin@mpi-sws.org



                                            A BSTRACT
         We contribute to the study of formal languages that can be recognized by trans-
         former encoders. We focus on two self-attention mechanisms: (1) UHAT (Unique
         Hard Attention Transformers) and (2) AHAT (Average Hard Attention Transform-
         ers). UHAT encoders are known to recognize only languages inside the circuit
         complexity class AC0 , i.e., accepted by a family of poly-sized and depth-bounded
         boolean circuits with unbounded fan-ins. On the other hand, AHAT encoders can
         recognize languages outside AC0 ), but their expressive power still lies within the
         bigger circuit complexity class TC0 , i.e., AC0 -circuits extended by majority gates.
         We first show a negative result that there is an AC0 -language that cannot be recog-
         nized by an UHAT encoder. On the positive side, we show that UHAT encoders
         can recognize a rich fragment of AC0 -languages, namely, all languages definable
         in first-order logic with arbitrary unary numerical predicates. This logic, includes,
         for example, all regular languages from AC0 . We then show that AHAT encoders
         can recognize all languages of our logic even when we enrich it with counting
         terms. Using these results, we obtain a characterization of which counting prop-
         erties are expressible by UHAT and AHAT, in relation to regular languages.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Transformers have revolutionized natural language processing by facilitating the efficient and effec-
tive modeling of intricate contextual relationships within text (Vaswani et al., 2017). This remarkable
capability has sparked numerous investigations into the potential boundaries of transformers’ power
(Hahn, 2020; Yao et al., 2021; Pérez et al., 2021; Weiss et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2022; Chiang &
Cholak, 2022; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Chiang et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2022; Merrill & Sabhar-
wal, 2023; Strobl, 2023). One natural method for addressing this question is to explore the classes of
formal languages that these architectures can recognize. This approach provides an insight into their
strengths and limitations. The response to this question naturally relies on the specific features al-
lowed within transformer encoders. These encompass the interplay between encoders and decoders,
the kind of functions used for positional encodings and attention mechanisms, and considerations of
fixed or unbounded precision, among other factors.
While the capacity of transformers that incorporate both encoders and decoders to recognize lan-
guages is well understood today (indeed, such architectures are Turing-complete and can thus rec-
ognize any computable language (Pérez et al., 2021)), a precise characterization of the languages
accepted by transformer encoders is lacking. Unique Hard Attention Transformers (UHAT) are a
class of transformer encoders that has been a subject of many recent papers. As was shown by Hao
et al. (2022), UHATs recognize only languages in AC0 , i.e., recognized by families of Boolean cir-
cuits of unbounded fan-in that have constant depth and polynomial size. Intuitively, this means that


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


UHATs are weak at “counting” (more precisely, reasoning about the number of occurrences of vari-
ous letters in the input word). For example, consider the following languages: majority and parity.
The first one corresponds to the set of words over alphabet {a, b} for which the majority of positions
are labeled by a, while the second checks if the number of positions labeled a is even. That these
languages are not in AC0 follows from a groundbreaking result in circuit complexity theory (Furst
et al., 1981; Ajtai, 1983)). Hence, they are neither accepted by UHATs. However, which fragment
of the AC0 languages can actually be recognized by UHATs remains an unresolved question.
We start by showing that not all AC0 languages can be accepted by UHATs. This is obtained by
combining results of Ajtai (1983) and Hahn (2020). Based on the previous observation, we focus
on identifying a rich fragment of AC0 that can in fact be embedded into the class of UHATs. To
achieve this, we use the characterization of AC0 as the class of languages expressible in FO(All), the
extension of first-order logic (FO) with all numerical predicates defined in relation to the linear order
of a word (Immerman, 1999). We show that UHATs recognize all languages definable in FO(Mon),
the restriction of FO(All) with unary numerical predicates only (Barrington et al., 2005). The logic
FO(Mon) is highly expressive. Unlike FO, it can express non-regular languages like {an bn | n >
0}. Remarkably, it contains all regular languages within AC0 , which includes examples like (aa)∗
— a language not definable in FO. Additionally, our result subsumes the result of Yao et al. (2021),
where it is shown that Dyck languages of bounded nested depth can be recognized by UHATs. These
languages are regular and belong to AC0 , hence they are expressible in FO(Mon).
To establish the result that UHATs recognize all languages definable in FO(Mon), we take a slightly
circuitous route: rather than directly formulating FO(Mon) sentences as UHATs, we show that each
formula in LTL(Mon), the extension of linear temporal logic (LTL) (Clarke et al., 2018) with
arbitrary unary numerical predicates, can be equivalently represented as an UHAT. The proof for
FO(Mon) then derives from Kamp’s seminal theorem (Kamp, 1968), which establishes the equiva-
lence between languages definable in FO and LTL. The advantage of dealing with LTL, in contrast
to FO, lies in the fact that all LTL formulas are unary in nature, i.e., they are interpreted as sets of
positions on a word, unlike FO formulas which possess arbitrary arity. This property aligns well
with the expressive capabilities of UHATs, facilitating a proof through structural induction.
While the fact that UHAT is in AC0 implies limited counting abilities of such encoders, recent work
has shown that a slight extension of the hard attention mechanism can help in recognizing languages
outside AC0 (Hao et al., 2022). Instead of using unique hard attention, this model uses average hard
attention (AHAT), which refers to the idea that the attention mechanism returns the uniform average
value among all positions that maximize the attention. To what extent does AHAT enrich the counting
ability of UHAT? In answering this question, we introduce a logic named LTL(C, +), which is an
extension of LTL(Mon) that naturally incorporates counting features. We show that any language
that can be defined within LTL(C, +) can also be identified by an AHAT. The logic LTL(C, +)
can express interesting languages lying outside AC0 including majority and parity. More generally,
our result implies that AHATs are equipped with a powerful counting ability: all permutation-closed
languages over a binary alphabet and all permutation closures of regular languages (which are in
general not context-free) can be recognized by AHATs.
As a corollary, we provide a characterization of the “counting properties” of regular languages which
can be captured by UHAT and AHAT. Two approaches for understanding counting properties of
regular languages can be found in formal language theory: (1) Parikh-equivalence, and (2) taking
letter-permutation closure. Both approaches “remove” the ordering from the input string, and as a
result only the letter-count (more popularly called Parikh images) of an input string matters. In the
setting of (1) (e.g. see (Parikh, 1966; Kozen, 1997)), a machine is allowed to try all letter reorderings
of the input string w, and accepts iff the machine accepts some letter reordering of w. According
to the well-known Parikh’s Theorem (Parikh, 1966), each context-free language can in this way be
captured by a regular language, e.g., {0n 1n : n ≥ 0} can be captured by (01)∗ . We show in this
paper that each regular language is Parikh-equivalent to an UHAT language, despite the fact that
PARITY is not in UHAT. In the setting of (2), a machine must accept all letter permutations of an
input string w. The letter-permutation closure of a regular language is not necessarily regular, e.g.,
such a closure language of (abc)∗ consists of all strings with the same number of a’s, b’s, and c’s,
which is not even context-free. In this setting, although UHAT cannot capture regular languages like
PARITY, AHAT can surprisingly capture all regular languages.



                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Related work. There has been very little research on identifying logical languages that can be
accepted by transformers. The only example we are aware of is the recent work by Chiang et al.
(2023), in which a variant of first-order logic with counting quantifiers is demonstrated to be embed-
dable into transformer encoders with a soft attention mechanism. The primary distinction between
their work and our results is the choice of the attention mechanism. Additionally, the logic examined
in their paper does not have access to the underlying word order being considered. This implies that
some simple languages, such as a∗ b∗ , which are definable in FO, are not definable in their logic.
Due to the space constraints, some of the proofs are omitted and can be found in the online version
of this paper (Barceló et al., 2023).


2     BACKGROUND NOTIONS AND RESULTS

2.1   T RANSFORMER ENCODERS

An encoder layer is a function that takes a sequence of vectors, v0 , . . . , vn−1 , in Rd as input, where
d ≥ 0. It produces an output sequence of vectors of the same length, v0′ , . . . , vn−1  ′
                                                                                             , in Re , with
e ≥ 0. The length of the sequence, n, can be arbitrary, but input and output dimensions, d and e,
are fixed for an encoder layer. For the first part of the paper we employ a unique hard attention
mechanism, meaning that a position only attends to the element with the highest attention score.
Formally, an encoder layer with unique hard attention is given by two affinte transformations
A, B : Rd → Rd and one feed-forward neural network N : R2d → Re with ReLU activation func-
tion. For i ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}, we set
                                         ai ← vji ,
where ji ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1} is the minimum element that maximizes the attention score ⟨Avi , Bvj ⟩
over j ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}. The ai s are often known as attention vectors. After that, we set
                                 vi′ ← N (vi , ai ),       i = 0, . . . , n − 1.
It is well-known that feed-forward neural networks with ReLU activation can express the function
max{x, y}. Thus, we may assume that N can be an arbitrary composition of affine functions with
max.

Transformer encoder. A unique hard attention transformer encoder (UHAT)1 is defined simply
as the repeated application of encoder layers with unique hard attention.

2.2   L ANGUAGES ACCEPTED BY TRANSFORMER ENCODERS

Next, we define how a transformer can be used to accept languages over a finite alphabet. This
requires extending transformer encoders with three features: a function for representing alphabet
symbols as vectors (which, for the purposes of this paper, we represent as one-hot encodings),
another function that provides information about the absolute positions of these symbols within the
input word, and a vector that is used for checking whether the word should be accepted or not. The
function that provides information about positions is often referred to as a positional encoding, and
it is essential for recognizing properties of ordered sequences of vectors. In fact, without positional
encoding, encoders treat input sequences as invariant to permutations (Pérez et al., 2021).
Consider a finite alphabet Σ and let T be an UHAT that takes a sequence of vectors over Rd as
input and converts it into a sequence of vectors over Re . A language L ⊆ Σ+ is accepted by T , if
there is an embedding function f : Σ → Rd , a positional encoding function p : N × N → Rd , and a
vector t ∈ Re , such that for every w̄ ∈ L we have T ′ (w̄) > 0, and for every w ∈ Σ+ \ L we have
T ′ (w̄) < 0. Here, T ′ : Σ+ → R is defined as follows. Let w̄ = a0 . . . an−1 ∈ Σn , and suppose
the output of T when given the input sequence f (a0 ) + p(0, n), . . . , f (an−1 ) + p(n − 1, n) is the
sequence v0 , . . . , vn−1 . Then we set T ′ (w̄) = ⟨t, v0 ⟩.
    1
      Some of the previous papers, for instance Hao et al. (2022), allow to use in UHAT only rational numbers.
We find this too restrictive because functions such as cos and sin are widely used in practice. Nevertheless, we
stress that our results hold with this restriction, by taking good-enough approximations by rational numbers.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3   F IRST ORDER LOGIC ON WORDS

We assume familiarity with first-order logic (FO). Let Σ be a finite alphabet. A word w̄ =
a0 · · · an−1 in Σ+ is represented as a structure Sw̄ whose domain is {0, . . . , n − 1}. This struc-
ture includes a binary relation < that is interpreted as the linear order on the domain, and for each
symbol a ∈ Σ, there is a unary relation Pa containing positions i = 0, . . . , n − 1 where ai = a.
Given an FO sentence over words, that is, an FO formula without free variables, we denote the
language of all words w̄ ∈ Σ+ satisfying Sw̄ |= ϕ as L(ϕ). If an L ⊆ Σ+ satisfies L = L(ϕ), for
some FO sentence ϕ, then we say that L is definable in FO.
Example 1. First-order logic (FO) enables us to define certain languages of interest. Here, we
present an illustrative example. Initially, we recognize that we can employ FO to define a relation
first(x) := ¬∃y(y < x) that exclusively holds true at the first position of a word. Correspondingly,
we can define a relation last(x) := ¬∃y(x < y) that holds solely at the last position of the word.
Moreover, it is possible to define a binary relation succ(x, y) := x < y ∧ ¬∃z(x < z ∧ z < y),
which defines the successor relation within the domain. With these expressions, we can show that
FO is capable of defining the language (ab)+ :

    ∃x first(x) ∧ Pa (x) ∧ ∃x last(x) ∧ Pb (x) ∧ ∀x∀y succ(x, y) → (Pa (x) ↔ Pb (y)) .
That is, the first symbol of the word is an a, the last one is a b, every a is followed by a b, and every
b is preceded by an a.

2.4   U NARY NUMERICAL PREDICATES

It is known that FO sentences can only define regular languages. In turn, there are regular languages
that are not definable in FO. An example is the language (aa)∗ , which contains those words formed
solely by the symbol a that are of even length. However, there is a straightforward extension of FO
that can define this language: all we need to do is add unary predicate even(x), which holds true at
position i in a word if and only if i is even. In fact, extending FO with the predicate even(x) allows
us to define the language (aa)∗ using the following formula, which indicates that the last symbol in
the word satisfies the unary predicate even: ∀xPa (x) ∧ ∀y(last(y) → even(y)).
The extension of FO with unary numerical predicates can then be useful for defining languages. We
define a unary numerical predicate Θ as an infinite family of functions
                                 θn : {0, . . . , n} → {0, 1},     n > 0.
Given a word w̄ in Σ+ of length n, for n > 0, we have that the predicate Θ(x) holds in position i
in w̄ if and only if θn (i) = 1 (so far, we do not use the value of θn at n as positions are numbered
from 0 to n − 1. We will use this value in Section 4). Notice that under our definition, the truth of a
unary numerical predicate at position i in the word w̄ depends not only on i but also on the length of
the word w̄. As we will explore further, this characteristic is advantageous for defining interesting
languages in FO extended with arbitrary unary numerical predicates. Following the literature, we
write FO(Mon) for such an extension (Barrington et al., 2005).
Example 2. Consider, for example, the non-regular language {an bn | n > 0}. We show that it can
be expressed in FO(Mon) with the help of a unary numerical predicate Θ(x) such that θn (i) = 1
iff n is even and i = n/2 − 1. In fact,  it suffices to use the formula: ∃x Θ(x) ∧ Pa (x) ∧ ∀y(y <
x → Pa (y)) ∧ ∀y(x < y → Pb (y)) . This formula expresses that the middle point i of w̄ exists, is
labeled as a, and all positions smaller than i are also labeled a, while all positions larger than i are
labeled as b. This example illustrates the significance of unary numerical predicates depending on
both the position and the length of the word over which the formula is evaluated.
The definition of the language L(ϕ) ⊆ Σ+ defined by an FO(Mon) sentence ϕ is analogous to the
one we provided for FO.

3     AC0 LANGUAGES ACCEPTED BY UHAT S
3.1   N OT ALL LANGUAGES IN AC0 ARE ACCEPTED BY UHAT S .

Hao et al. (2022) proved that languages accepted by UHATs belong to the circuit complexity class
AC0 , i.e., the class of languages accepted by families of Boolean circuits of unbounded fan-in,


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


constant depth, and polynomial size. We combine results by Ajtai (1983) and Hahn (2020) to show
that the opposite is not the case, i.e., there are AC0 languages that are not accepted by UHATs.
As shown in Ajtai (1983), there is an AC0 -family of circuits {Cn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}}n∈N such that
for all n, the circuit Cn accepts all strings with at at least 2n/3 ones and rejects all strings with at
most n/3. Consider a language approximate majority, consisting of strings accepted by circuits from
{Cn }. This language is in AC0 by construction. However, as we state next, it cannot be recognized
by an UHAT. This result is proved by using a property of UHATs established in Hahn (2020).
Proposition 1. There is no UHAT that accepts the language approximate majority.
Viola (2009) shows that {Cn } can be made polynomial-time computable, which implies the exis-
tence of a polynomial-time computable language from AC0 that cannot be accepted by an UHAT.

3.2   M AIN RESULT: FO(Mon) LANGUAGES ARE ACCEPTED BY UHAT S

Proposition 1 tells us that not all AC0 languages are accepted by UHATs. In this section, we identify
a significant subset of AC0 languages that can be accepted by UHATs. To accomplish this, we rely
on the characterization of the class AC0 as those languages that can be defined in FO extended with
arbitrary numerical predicates. Our main result establishes that as long as we restrict ourselves to
unary numerical predicates, translation into UHATs is possible.
Theorem 1. Let Σ be a finite alphabet and ϕ an FO(Mon) sentence over words from the alphabet
Σ. There is an UHAT that accepts L(ϕ).
Proving this result by induction on FO(Mon) formulas, which would be the most natural approach
to tackle the problem, turns out to be difficult. The challenge arises because the FO(Mon) formulas
obtained by induction can have arbitrary arity, and transformer encoders do not seem capable of
handling the requirements imposed by such formulas. To address this issue, we take a different
approach. We employ Kamp’s Theorem, which establishes that the languages definable in FO are
precisely those that are definable in linear temporal logic (LTL) (Kamp, 1968).

3.3   U SING LTL(Mon) TO PROVE OUR MAIN RESULT

We first explain how LTL is defined, as this is crucial to understanding the remainder of the paper.
Let Σ be a finite alphabet. LTL formulas over Σ are defined as follows: if a ∈ Σ, then a is an LTL
formula. Additionally, LTL formulas are closed under Boolean combinations. Finally, if ϕ and ψ
are LTL formulas, then Xϕ and ϕUψ are also LTL formulas. Here, X is referred to as the next
operator, and U as the until operator.
LTL formulas are unary, i.e., they are evaluated over positions within a word. Let w̄ = a0 · · · an−1
be a word in Σ+ , and let i = 0, . . . , n − 1. We define the satisfaction of an LTL formula ϕ over w̄
at position i, written as (w̄, i) |= ϕ, inductively as follows (omitting Boolean combinations):
       • (w̄, i) |= a if and only if a = ai , for a ∈ Σ.
       • (w̄, i) |= Xϕ if and only if i < n − 1 and (w̄, i + 1) |= ϕ. In other words, ϕ holds in the
         next position after i (if such a position exists).
       • (w̄, i) |= ϕUψ if and only if there exists a position j = i, . . . , n − 1 for which (w̄, j) |= ψ
         and such that (w̄, k) |= ϕ for every k with i ≤ k < j. That is, ϕ holds starting from
         position i until the first position where ψ holds (and a position where ψ holds must exist).
We can extend LTL with unary numerical predicates in the same way we did it for FO. Formally,
we define LTL(Mon) as the extension of LTL with every formula of the form Θ, for Θ a unary
numerical predicate. We write (w̄, i) |= Θ to denote that θn (i) = 1, where n is the length of w̄. If ϕ
is an LTL(Mon) formula over Σ, we write L(ϕ) for the set of words w̄ ∈ Σ+ with (w̄, 0) |= ϕ.
Kamp’s Theorem establishes that for every FO sentence ϕ there exists an LTL formula ψ such that
L(ϕ) = L(ψ), and vice-versa. It is straightforward to see that this property extends to the logics
FO(Mon) and LTL(Mon).
Proposition 2. (Kamp, 1968) For every FO(Mon) sentence ϕ there exists an LTL(Mon) formula ψ
such that L(ϕ) = L(ψ), and vice-versa.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our proof of Theorem 1 is then derived directly from Proposition 2 and the following result.
Proposition 3. Let Σ be a finite alphabet and ϕ an LTL(Mon) formula defined over words from the
alphabet Σ. There is an UHAT T that accepts L(ϕ).

Before proving this result, we make the following important remark regarding the positional encod-
ing p used by T to accept L(ϕ). On a pair (i, n) ∈ N ×     N with i <   n, we
                                                                             have that p(i, n) is
                                                    −i               −i
composed of elements i, 1/(i+1), (−1)i , cos π(1−2 )/10 , sin π(1−2 )/10 , and θn (i), for every
unary numerical predicate Θ mentioned in ϕ.

Proof of Proposition 3. Let ϕ be a formula of LTL(Mon). We say that a UHAT realizes ϕ position-
wise if, given a word w̄ = a0 . . . an−1 ∈ Σ+ , the UHAT outputs a sequence:
                      I{(w̄, 0) |= ϕ}, I{(w̄, 1) |= ϕ}, . . . , I{(w̄, n − 1) |= ϕ};
that is, a binary word indicating for which positions ϕ is true on w̄ and for which is false. We show
by structural induction that every LTL(Mon) formula is realizable position-wise by some UHAT.
Let us consider first the base cases. If ϕ = a, for some a ∈ Σ, our goal is to obtain a sequence:
                              I{a0 = a}, I{a1 = a}, . . . , I{an−1 = a}.
This can easily be achieved by using a one-hot encoding as the embedding function. In turn, if ϕ =
Θ, for Θ a unary numerical predicate, then ϕ can be realized position-wise using the corresponding
positional encoding p(i, n) = θn (i).
We continue with Boolean combinations. They can be implemented position-wise by compositions
of affine transformation and max as follows: ¬x = 1 − x‘ and x ∨ y = max{2x−1,2y−1}+1
                                                                            2         .
For the cases when our formula is of the form Xϕ or ϕUψ, we need the following lemma.
Lemma 1. There is an UHAT that transforms each x0 , . . . , xn−1 ∈ {0, 1} as follows:
                                x0 , . . . , xn−2 , xn−1 7→ x0 , . . . , xn−2 , 0.

Let us assume now that our formula is of the form Xϕ. It is enough to design a unique hard
attention layer in which attention is always maximized at the next position. More precisely, we
construct an UHAT that outputs a sequence of vectors v1 , . . . , vn ∈ R3 , and a linear transformation
A : R3 → R3 , such that arg maxj∈N ⟨Avi , vj ⟩ = {i + 1}, for i = 0, . . . , n − 2. This will allow us
to “send” I{(w̄, i + 1) |= ϕ} = I{(w̄, i) |= Xϕ} to the ith position, for i = 0, . . . , n − 2. It only
remains then to apply Lemma 1 to obtain 0 = I{(w̄, n − 1) |= Xϕ} at the last position.
Using our positional encoding and an affine position-wise transformation, we can obtain:
                               π(1 − 2−i )           π(1 − 2−i )

                 vi = cos                    , sin                 , (−1)i · 10 .
                                   10                    10
Let A be a linear transformation that inverts the sign of the third coordinate. Observe that:
                                           π(2−i − 2−j )

                       ⟨Avi , vj ⟩ = cos                     + (−1)i+j+1 · 10.
                                                 10

We claim that, for a fixed i, this quantity is maximized at j = i + 1. First, those js that have the
same parity as i (in particular, j = i) cannot achieve the maximum because
                                                               −i   −j
                                                                             the second term is −10.
For js with a different parity, we have ⟨Avi , vj ⟩ = cos π(2 −2 )/10 + 10. Since all angles are
in [−π/10, π/10], this quantity is maximized when |2−i − 2−j | is minimized. For j < i, the last
quantity is at least 2−i , and for j > i, the minimum of this quantity is 2−i−1 , achieved at j = i + 1.
Let us finally assume that our formula is of the form ϕUψ. Observe that the value of ϕUψ at
position i can be computed as follows: we go to the right, starting from the ith position, until we see
a position ji where either ϕ is false, or ψ is true, or this is the last position. Then ϕUψ holds at i if
and only if ψ holds at ji . That is, (w̄, i) |= if and only if (w̄, ji ) |= ψ, where ji ∈ {i, . . . , n − 1} is
the minimal position with τ (j) = 1, where, in turn, the sequence τ is defined by τ (i) = I{(w̄, i) |=
¬ϕ ∨ ψ} ∨ I{i = n − 1}, for i = 0, . . . , n − 1. To compute the sequence τ , we first compute ϕ ∧ ¬ψ


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


position-wise (we can do that because we already have ϕ and ψ at our disposal), then we add the
conjunction with I{i ̸= n−1} by Lemma 1, and then we take the negation of the resulting sequence.
To show the lemma, it is enough to create a unique hard attention layer, where for every position
i the attention is maximized at ji . Using our positional encoding and the induction hypothesis, we
can obtain a sequence of vectors v1 , . . . , vn ∈ R4 such that:
                                  π(1 − 2−i )                π(1 − 2−i )

                    vi = cos                        , sin                  , 1, τ (i) .
                                        10                       10
                                          4       4
Consider a linear transformation  B  : R     →  R    such  that
                                  π(1 − 2−i )                π(1 − 2−i )


                   Bvi = cos                         , sin                  , 10τ (i), 0 .
                                        10                       10
                                 −i −j
                                 π(2 −2 )
Observe that ⟨vi , Bvj ⟩ = cos         10        + 10τ (j). We claim that this expression is maximized
at j = ji . First, because of the last term in it, it cannot be maximized at j with τ (j) = 0. It remains
to show that among the js with (w̄, j) ̸|= ϕ, this quantity  is minimized on the minimal j which
                                                                      π(2−i −2−j )
is at least i. In fact, in this case we have ⟨vi , Bvj ⟩ = cos            10         + 10. All the angles in
                                                                             −i      −j
question are in [−π/10, π/10], so the cosine is maximized when |2 − 2 | is minimized. Now,
this absolute value is at least 2−i when j < i. In turn, this absolute value is smaller than 2−i for
j ≥ i, and it is the smaller the smaller is j, as required.

3.4   A PPLICATIONS OF OUR MAIN RESULT

We show two applications of our main result. First, UHATs accept all regular languages in AC0 .
Second, UHATs are strictly more expressive than regular and context-free languages in terms of the
acceptance of languages up to letter-permutation.

Regular languages in AC0 . There is an important fragment of FO(Mon) which is interesting in
its own right. This is the logic FO(Mod), i.e., the extension of FO with unary numerical predicates
of the form Modrp , for p > 1 and 0 ≤ r ≤ p − 1. We have that Modrp (i) = 1 if and only if
i ≡ r (mod p). In fact, by using a characterization given in Barrington et al. (1992), one can show
that the languages definable in FO(Mod) are precisely the regular languages within AC0 . Then:
Corollary 1. Let L ⊆ Σ+ be a regular language in AC0 . There is an UHAT that accepts L.

Recognizing regular languages up to letter-permutation. Although not all regular languages
are accepted by UHATs (e.g. parity), we can use Theorem 1 to show that, up to letter-permutation,
UHAT is in fact strictly more powerful than regular and context-free languages.
To formalize our result, we recall the notion of semilinear sets and the Parikh image of a language.
                                    d
A
Plinear     set S is a subset
                          Pr of N (for some positive integer d, called dimension) ofdthe form v0 +
   r
   i=1 vi N := {v0 +        i=1 ki vi : k1 , . . . , kr ∈ N} for some vectors v0 , . . . , vr ∈ N . A semilinear
set S over Nd is a finite union of linear sets over Nd . Semilinear sets have a very tight connection
to formal languages through the notion of the Parikh image a language L (Parikh, 1966), which
intuitively corresponds to the set of “letter-counts” of L. More precisely, consider the alphabet
Σ = {a1 , . . . , ad } and a language L over Σ. For a word w ∈ Σ, let |w|ai denotes the number
of occurrences of ai in w. The Parikh image P(L) of L is defined to be the set of tuples v =
(|w|a1 , . . . , |w|ad ) ∈ Nd for some word w ∈ L. For example, if L = {an bn : n ≥ 0} and
L′ = (ab)∗ , then P(L) = P(L′ ). In this case, we say that L and L′ are Parikh-equivalent. Note
that L′ is regular, while L is context-free but not regular. This is not a coincidence based on the
celebrated Parikh’s Theorem (cf. Parikh (1966), also see Kozen (1997)).
Proposition 4 (Parikh (1966)). The Parikh images of both regular and context-free languages coin-
cide with semilinear sets.
In other words, although context-free languages are strict superset of regular languages, they are in
fact equally powerful up to letter-permutation. What about UHATs? We have that they are strictly
more powerful than regular and context-free languages up to letter-permutation.
Proposition 5. Each regular language has a Parikh-equivalent language accepted by an UHAT. In
turn, there is an UHAT language with no Parikh-equivalent regular language.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     L ANGUAGES BEYOND AC0
Transformer encoders with unique hard attention can only recognize languages in AC0 , but a slight
extension of the attention mechanism allows to recognize languages lying outside such a class (Hao
et al., 2022). In this section, we show that in fact such an extended model can recognize all languages
definable in a powerful logic that extends LTL with counting features. This logic can express inter-
esting languages outside AC0 , such as majority and parity.

4.1    AVERAGE HARD ATTENTION

For the results in this section, we consider an extended version of transformer encoders that utilize
an average hard attention mechanism (Pérez et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2022). Following the literature,
we call these AHAT.

Encoder layer with average hard attention. As before, these layers are defined by two affine
transformations, A, B : Rd → Rd and one feed-forward neural network N : R2d → Re with ReLU
activation function. For every i ∈ {0, . . . , n−1}, we define Si as the set of positions j ∈ {0, . . . , n−
1} that maximize ⟨Avi , Bvj ⟩. We then set
                                                  X
                                        ai ←           vj /|Si |.
                                                  j∈Si
                    ′
After that, we set vi ← N (vi , ai ), for each i = 0, . . . , n − 1. That is, attention scores under average
hard attention return the uniform average value among all positions that maximize attention.
We also use future positional masking that allows us to take into account only positions up to i. If the
future positional masking is used, the sets Si are defined as sets of positions j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , i} that
maximize ⟨Avi , Bvj ⟩. Positional masks have been employed on several occasions in theoretical
papers (Yao et al., 2021; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2022) as well as in practice, for
example, for training GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019).

4.2    LTL EXTENDED WITH COUNTING TERMS

We present here LTL(C, +), an extension of LTL(Mon) that allows us to define counting properties
over words in a simple manner. This requires the introduction of counting terms as defined next.
                                                                  ←−       −→
Counting terms. Suppose ϕ is a unary formula. Then #ϕ and #ϕ are counting terms. The
interpretation of these terms in position i of a word w̄ of length n is defined as follows:
 ←−                                                  −→
 #ϕ(w̄, i) = |{j ∈ {0, . . . , i} | (w̄, j) |= ϕ}| , #ϕ(w̄, i) = |{j ∈ {i, . . . , n − 1} | (w̄, j) |= ϕ}| .
         ←−                                                                                        −→
That is, #ϕ(w̄, i) is the number of positions to the left of i (including i) that satisfy ϕ, while #ϕ(w̄, i)
is the number of positions to the right of i (including i) that satisfy ϕ. Notice that, for words of length
n, counting terms take values in {0, 1, . . . , n}.

Counting formulas. With counting terms and unary numerical predicates we can create new for-
mulas in the following way. Let ϕ be a unary formula and Θ a unary numerical predicate. We define
                   ←−         −→
new formulas Θ(#ϕ) and Θ(#ϕ). The interpretation of such formulas on position i of a word w̄ of
length n is as follows:
                    ←−         ←−                                    −→            −→
      (w̄, i) |= Θ(#ϕ) ⇔ θn (#ϕ(w̄, i)) = 1             (w̄, i) |= Θ(#ϕ) ⇔ θn (#ϕ(w̄, i)) = 1.
That is, the number of positions to the left (resp., right) of i (including i) that satisfy ϕ satisfies the
predicate Θ. As counting terms can take value n, the value of θn on n becomes useful.
We also incorporate into our logic the possibility of checking linear inequalities with inte-
ger coefficients over counting terms. More specifically, for any finite set of unary formulas
ϕ , . . . , ϕk , ψ1 , . . . , ψk , and for any coefficients c1 , . . . , ck , d1 , . . . , dk ∈ Z we can create a formula:
P1 k          ←−−           Pk          −−→
   j=1 cj · #ϕj +              j=1 dj · #ψj ≥ 0, which is interpreted as follows:
             k                k                 k                    k
             X          ←−−   X      −−→        X      ←−−           X      −−→
(w̄, i) |=         cj · #ϕj +   dj · #ψj ≥ 0 ⇐⇒   cj · #ϕj (w̄, i) +   dj · #ψj (w̄, i) ≥ 0.
             j=1               j=1                              j=1                        j=1


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The logic LTL(C, +). We denote by LTL(C, +) the logic that is recursively defined as follows:

       • Every formula LTL(Mon) is also an LTL(C, +) formula.
       • Boolean combinations of LTL(C, +) formulas are LTL(C, +) formulas.
       • If ϕ and ψ are LTL(C, +) formulas, then so are Xϕ and ϕUψ.
                                                                                             ←−
       • If ϕ is an LTL(C, +) formula and Θ is a unary numerical predicate, then Θ(#ϕ) and
            −→
         Θ(#ϕ) are LTL(C, +) formulas.
                                                                             Pk        ←−−  Pk
       • If ϕ1 , . . . , ϕk , ψ1 , . . . , ψk are formulas of LTL(C, +), then j=1 cj · #ϕj + j=1 dj ·
         −−→
         #ψj ≥ 0, is a formula of LTL(C, +).

4.3   LTL(C) DEFINABLE LANGUAGES ARE ACCEPTED BY ENCODERS

Next, we state the main result of this section: languages definable by LTL(C, +) formulas are
accepted by transformer encoders with average hard attention.
Theorem 2. Let Σ be a finite alphabet and ϕ an LTL(C, +) formula defined over words from the
alphabet Σ. There is an AHAT T that accepts L(ϕ).

As a corollary to Theorem 2, we show that AHATs are rather powerful in counting. To make this
claim more formal, we study permutation-closed languages, i.e., languages L such that v̄ ∈ L iff any
letter-permutation of v̄ is in L. For a language L, we write perm(L) to be the permutation-closure of
L, i.e., perm(L) = {w̄ : P(w̄) = P(v̄), for some v̄ ∈ L}. Observe that perm((abc)∗ ) consists of
all strings with the same number of occurrences of a, b, and c; this is not even context-free. Owing
to Parikh’s Theorem, to recognize perm(L), where L is a regular language, an ability to perform
letter-counting and linear arithmetic reasoning (i.e. semilinear set reasoning) is necessary. AHATs
possess such an ability, as shown by the following corollary.
Corollary 2. The permutation closure perm(L) of any regular language L is accepted by an AHAT.
Moreover, any permutation-closed language over a binary alphabet is accepted by an AHAT.

Both majority and parity are permutation-closed and are over a binary alphabet. Hence, by the
previous result, they are both accepted by AHATs. While for majority this was known (Hao et al.,
2022), the result for parity is new.

5     C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have conducted an investigation of the problem of which languages can be accepted by trans-
former encoders with hard attention. For UHATs, we have demonstrated that while they cannot
accept all languages in AC0 , they can still accept all languages in a ’monadic’ version of it defined
by the logic FO(Mon). Crucial to the proof of this result is the equivalence between FO and LTL,
as provided by Kamp’s Theorem. In turn, we have shown that AHATs are capable of expressing any
language definable in a powerful counting logic, LTL(C, +), that can express properties beyond
AC0 . This implies, among other things, that the parity language can be accepted by an AHAT.
In a work of Angluin et al. (2023), contemporaneous to ours, it was shown that the logic FO(Mon)
exactly captures languages, accepted by UHATs with positional masking and finite-valued positional
encoding. At the same time, with our technique, it can be shown that there are languages beyond
FO(Mon) that can be accepted by UHATs with infinite-valued positional encoding, for instance,
the language of palindromes. The idea is that since we do not use positional masking, we can use
arbitrary order on positions, in particular, one that puts the language of palindromes into FO(Mon).
Due to the space constraints, we omit a more detailed discussion of this.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Barceló and Kozachinskiy are funded by ANID–Millennium Science Initiative Program - ICN17002
and by the National Center for Artificial Intelligence CENIA FB210017, Basal ANID. Anthony
Lin was supported by European Research Council under European Union’s Horizon research and
innovation programme (grant agreement no 101089343).


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
                 P1
Miklós Ajtai.    1 -formulae on finite structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Log., 24(1):1–48, 1983.

Dana Angluin, David Chiang, and Andy Yang. Masked hard-attention transformers and boolean
  rasp recognize exactly the star-free languages, 2023.
Pablo Barceló, Alexander Kozachinskiy, Anthony Widjaja Lin, and Vladimir Podolskii. Logical lan-
  guages accepted by transformer encoders with hard attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03817,
  2023.
David A. Mix Barrington, Kevin J. Compton, Howard Straubing, and Denis Thérien. Regular lan-
  guages in nc1 . J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 44(3):478–499, 1992.
David A. Mix Barrington, Neil Immerman, Clemens Lautemann, Nicole Schweikardt, and Denis
  Thérien. First-order expressibility of languages with neutral letters or: The crane beach conjec-
  ture. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 70(2):101–127, 2005.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. On the ability and limitations of transformers
  to recognize formal languages. In EMNLP, pp. 7096–7116, 2020.
David Chiang and Peter Cholak. Overcoming a theoretical limitation of self-attention. In ACL, pp.
  7654–7664, 2022.
David Chiang, Peter Cholak, and Anand Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer
  encoders. In ICML, volume 202, pp. 5544–5562. PMLR, 2023.
Edmund M. Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Daniel Kroening, Doron A. Peled, and Helmut Veith. Model
  checking, 2nd Edition. MIT Press, 2018.
Merrick L. Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-time
 hierarchy. In FOCS, pp. 260–270. IEEE Computer Society, 1981.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Trans. Assoc.
 Comput. Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020.
Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention trans-
  formers: Perspectives from circuit complexity. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:800–810,
  2022.
Neil Immerman. Descriptive complexity. Graduate texts in computer science. Springer, 1999.
H. W. Kamp. Tense Logic and the Theory of Linear Order. PhD thesis, University of California,
  Los Angeles, 1968.
Dexter C. Kozen. Automata and Computability. Springer, 1997.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision trans-
 formers, 2023.
William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-
 depth threshold circuits. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:843–856, 2022. URL https:
 //transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/3465.
Rohit Parikh. On context-free languages. J. ACM, 13(4):570–581, 1966. doi: 10.1145/321356.
  321364. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/321356.321364.
Jorge Pérez, Pablo Barceló, and Javier Marinkovic. Attention is turing-complete. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 22:75:1–75:35, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Lena Strobl. Average-hard attention transformers are constant-depth uniform threshold circuits,
  2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, pp. 5998–6008,
  2017.
Emanuele Viola. On approximate majority and probabilistic time. Computational Complexity, 18:
  337–375, 2009.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In ICML, volume 139, pp.
  11080–11090, 2021.
Shunyu Yao, Binghui Peng, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Karthik Narasimhan. Self-attention
  networks can process bounded hierarchical languages. In ACL/IJCNLP, pp. 3770–3785, 2021.


                                               11
