Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V I C OR : B RIDGING V ISUAL U NDERSTANDING AND
C OMMONSENSE R EASONING WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In our work, we explore the synergistic capabilities of pre-trained vision-and-
         language models (VLMs) and large language models (LLMs) for visual common-
         sense reasoning (VCR). We categorize the problem of VCR into visual common-
         sense understanding (VCU) and visual commonsense inference (VCI). For VCU,
         which involves perceiving the literal visual content, pre-trained VLMs exhibit
         strong cross-dataset generalization. On the other hand, in VCI, where the goal
         is to infer conclusions beyond image content, VLMs face difficulties. We find
         that a baseline where VLMs provide perception results (image captions) to LLMs
         leads to improved performance on VCI. However, we identify a challenge with
         VLMs’ passive perception, which often misses crucial context information, lead-
         ing to incorrect or uncertain reasoning by LLMs. To mitigate this issue, we sug-
         gest a collaborative approach where LLMs, when uncertain about their reasoning,
         actively direct VLMs to concentrate on and gather relevant visual elements to sup-
         port potential commonsense inferences. In our method, named ViCor, pre-trained
         LLMs serve as problem classifiers to analyze the problem category, VLM com-
         manders to leverage VLMs differently based on the problem classification, and
         visual commonsense reasoners to answer the question. VLMs will perform visual
         recognition and understanding. We evaluate our framework on two VCR bench-
         mark datasets and outperform all other methods that do not require in-domain
         supervised fine-tuning.



1   I NTRODUCTION

The problem of visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al., 2019; Hessel et al., 2022;
Schwenk et al., 2022) expands upon the traditional visual question answering (Antol et al., 2015;
Goyal et al., 2017). VCR requires machines to utilize commonsense knowledge for drawing novel
conclusions or providing explanations go beyond the explicit information present in the image. To
solve these problems, existing state-of-the-art methods mainly treat VCR as an image-text alignment
task between the image content and candidate commonsense inferences (Hessel et al., 2022; Zhang
& Fernando, 2023). These approaches, however, lack explicit modeling of the underlying reasoning
steps, limiting their ability to generalize beyond the training data distribution. Recent methods have
also been leveraging large language models (LLMs) for VCR problems (Hu et al., 2022; Shao et al.,
2023).
However, these methods have several drawbacks. Firstly, they all require supervised training or
fine-tuning on each specific dataset. Since different visual commonsense reasoning datasets have
different focuses and data distributions (e.g. human-centric reasoning (Zellers et al., 2019) and rea-
soning in general topics (Schwenk et al., 2022)), the trained models struggle to generalize effectively
to different datasets. Secondly, current state-of-the-art methods on different datasets are either based
on supervised VLMs (Zellers et al., 2019; 2021) or combine VLMs (fine-tuned on in-domain VCR
datasets) with LLMs (Hu et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2023). Notably, to the best of our knowledge, there
is no comprehensive discussion on how VLMs and LLMs compare in the context of VCR problems
and how to best harness their complementary capabilities.


                                                   1
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 1 comparing image-text matching with LLM guided image-text matching in VCR

                            Q: What is the person in the
                            middle standing up to do?
                            A: A: washing dishes                 BLIP2-ITA                 A: washing dishes.
                            B: serving someone
                            …

                                                                      What visual factor                 What will be this
                                                                      can help answer                    factor to support
                                                                      the question?                      each choice?
                            Q: What does the appearance
                            of the grass indicate?                              The appearance of                  A: swaying B: wet
                            A: A: wind B: rain C: drought    GPT                the grass.                         C: dry and yellow D: still
                            D: still wind

                                                            A: wind          GPT                A: swaying                   BLIP2-ITA


     Figure 1: Two examples demonstrating different kinds of visual commonsense reasonings require
     different model capabilities. Upper: Visual commonsense understanding (VCU)                    requires the
                                                                                              Candidate
                                                                                                              According to the caption,
                                                                                                              There is no information
     model to understand high-level concepts and attributes such as actions, events, relations,
                                                                                             Evaluationetc, which
                                                                                                              suggesting this, score: 0
     pre-trained     VLMs can achieve via image-text alignment (ITA). Lower: Visual commonsense in-
              Global caption: a                                                                                Support: the woman looks
     ference woman
                (VCI)      requires
                       standing in a the model to generate conclusions or explanations based on
                                                                                             Visualinput
                                                                                                    Clue   image.
                                                                                                               sad.
              living room, wearing
     Overlooking
              …         visual clues can result in erroneous conclusions. LLMs steer VLMsReasoning
                                                                                                in discovering Contradict: the woman is
                                                                                                               playing a video game.
     vital visual cues for answer support. The LLM employs the top ITA-scored visual clue (e.g.,“It is
                                                                                             Visual ITM       Support clue score: 0.01
     cloudy.”) to perform commonsense inference.                                             Verification     Contradict clue score: 0.47

                                                                                                                                            The woman is not looking
                                                                                                                        Adjust
                                                                                                                                            sad. Adjusted score: 0,
                                                                                                                      Reasoning             ranking: 10 / 10
     To address these issues, in this work, as shown in Figure 1, we first systematically study the problem
     of visual commonsense reasoning and categorize it into two sub-problems – visual commonsense
     understanding (VCU) and visual commonsense inference (VCI). The visual commonsense under-
     standing (VCU) problem requires the model to recognize various low-level visual patterns and then
     understand high-level concepts like actions, events, and relations in the image. The visual com-
     monsense inference (VCI) problem requires the model to deduce conclusions or form explanations,
     likely to be true, based on visual observation. It requires a broad array of commonsense knowledge
     about the world, including cause-and-effect relationships, intentions, and mental states (Sap et al.,
     2020).
     As prior work does not adopt this categorization, we instruct LLMs to classify these tasks, pro-
     viding problem type descriptions along with a limited number of manually-annotated in-context
     samples. Based on the categorization, we assess the performance of VLMs (Li et al., 2023) and
     LLMs (equipped with image captions from VLMs) on VCU and VCI. Our findings (in Table 1)
     show that VLMs perform slightly better in VCU tasks, while also being more efficient. Conversely,
     in VCI tasks, LLMs outperform VLMs in most cases. This observation aligns with previous findings
     indicating that LLMs excel in text-based commonsense benchmarks (Anil et al., 2023).
     We observe that image captions provided by VLMs such as (Li et al., 2023), often lack crucial
     contextual information necessary for answering questions. This poses a particular challenge for
     commonsense inference problems, as inferences are often defeasible given additional context (Choi,
     2022). To illustrate this issue, consider the example depicted in Figure 1 (bottom). At first glance,
     it may appear that there’s nothing noteworthy beyond horses on a grassy farm, leading one to select
     “D: still wind” as an answer. However, upon closer examination of the swaying grass, we must
     revise our conclusion to “A: wind.” Existing perception modules, including VLMs, operate in a
     feed-forward manner and cannot adjust their perception based on a high-level understanding or
     inference. To address this, we propose instructing LLMs to intervene with VLMs in cases where
     they are uncertain about inference, typically indicative of a lack of sufficient visual evidence. This
     intervention would guide VLMs to focus on specific visual factors, such as weather or emotions, to
     support commonsense inferences.
     We propose the ViCor framework, which employs the following components: (1) LLMs function-
     ing as problem type classifiers (VCU and VCI), VLM commanders for directing VLMs based on
     problem classification, and visual commonsense reasoners to harness their extensive world knowl-
     edge and reasoning capabilities. (2) Pre-trained VLMs are responsible for visual recognition and
     understanding. Communication between LLMs and VLMs occurs through text, such as image cap-
     tions, as they are universal medium for all existing models. On VCR (Zellers et al., 2019) and
     A-OKVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022), our method achieves state-of-the-art results among methods
     without supervised in-domain fine-tuning. On A-OKVQA, the result of ViCor is close to supervised
     state-of-the-art methods.


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Visual Commonsense Reasoning Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) Zellers et al. (2019);
Hessel et al. (2022); Schwenk et al. (2022) is an emerging research area that aims to endow AI mod-
els with a human-like understanding and reasoning of visual scenes, beyond what can be directly
observed. The goal is to understand high-level concepts such as events, relations, and actions and
infer unobservable aspects such as intents, causal relationships, and future actions, requiring the
integration of visual perception, understanding, and commonsense knowledge. The VCR task was
introduced by Zellers et al. (2019), where models must answer a question about an image, given
a set of four possible answers. Further, more datasets focus on more types of reasoning were pro-
posed Park et al. (2020); Hessel et al. (2022); Schwenk et al. (2022). Most state-of-the-art methods
treat VCR as an image-text alignment problem, where they encode the commonsesense inference
and the visual input, then predict the alignment score of the image-text pair via a classification head
or image-text similarity Zellers et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2020); Zellers et al. (2022); Hessel et al.
(2022). Although achieving impressive performance, the generalizability of these methods is lim-
ited by supervised training. Recently, several works have leveraged large language models for visual
commonsense reasoning Hu et al. (2022); Shao et al. (2023); You et al. (2023). However, Hu et al.
(2022); Shao et al. (2023) require some VLMs trained on the datasets to provide visual information.
You et al. (2023) use LLMs to decompose the main problem and use VQA models to acquire visual
information. Our work systematically studies the visual commonsense reasoning problem and better
leverages the strength of different pre-trained VLMs and the reasoning abilities of LLMs, which can
be generalized to different visual commonsense reasoning datasets.

Large Language Models for Vision-and-Language Tasks Benefiting from the rich knowledge
in LLMs, they have been used for various vision-and-language tasks in a zero-shot or few-shot
manner. Yang et al. (2022); Hu et al. (2022); Shao et al. (2023) leverage LLMs for OK-VQA
task Marino et al. (2019) by feeding the caption, question, candidate answers by VQA models, etc.
to GPT3 models, and prompt the GPT model to answer the question with its pre-trained knowledge.
Wang et al. (2022b) propose to use LLMs with image descriptors for video-language tasks. More
recently, with the discovery of LLMs’ tool using ability Yao et al. (2023); Schick et al. (2023), LLMs
were equipped with various visual tools Gupta & Kembhavi (2023); Dı́dac et al. (2023); Shen et al.
(2023); Lu et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023) and achieved significant performance in Compositional
Visual Question Answering, Science Question Answering tasks Suhr et al. (2018); Hudson & Man-
ning (2019); Lu et al. (2022). Different from these works, we study a more complex and challenging
task with different levels of reasoning, including requiring reasoning beyond direct image observa-
tion. In our method, the LLMs will perform reasoning for problem classification, visual information
query, and commonsense reasoning.

3     V ISUAL C OMMONSENSE R EASONING
3.1   V ISUAL C OMMONSENSE U NDERSTANDING

The visual commonsense understanding (VCU) problem requires the model to judge if a text T
describing a concept or an attribute aligns with the image I:
                                             e = F (I, T )                                          (1)
where e stands for evaluation of T by model F . To answer these questions, the model needs to
be able to map the low-level visual observations, such as objects and spatial relations to various
high-level visual concepts and attributes, such as landmarks, actions, events, and relations.

3.2   V ISUAL C OMMONSENSE I NFERENCE

The visual commonsense inference (VCI) problem usually requires the model to evaluate the plau-
sibility of an inference about the image. Besides understanding the literal content in the image as
in VCU, evaluating the inferences T in VCI problems needs involves drawing novel conclusions or
explanations from these visuals, often using (non-visual) commonsense knowledge and rules, based
on some visual observations {oi } derived from the image:
                                           e = F ({oi }, T )                                        (2)


                                                   3
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For revision
                                                                                                                                            LLM modules

                                                                                  Text
                                                                                                                                            BLIP2 modules
                                                                               Transform              BLIP2-ITA             Output
       Caption: a large body of       Initial                                                                                               Module outputs
       water with a bridge in the   Reasoning                          VCU
       background …                                                                                    Instruction:
                                                 No     Problem              Instruction: What         Value of the
       Question: What will the      Confident?
                                                      Classification         visual factor is          visual factor that
       people face?
                                                                             required? …               support choice...
       Answers:                     Yes
       A: earthquake B: raining                                        VCI       Required                 Visual Clue
       C: sunburn D: tsunami         Output                                    Visual Factor              Reasoning            BLIP2-ITA

                                                                              What is the               Clear, cloudy,            Final
                                                                              weather now?
                                                                                                 or                                              Output
                                                                                                        sunny, windy            Reasoning


                                                                                                        BLIP2-VQA


   Figure 2: Our ViCor framework. Given a visual commonsense reasoning problem and a caption,
   our framework will leverage LLM to perform initial reasoning and confidence check. If the reason-
   ing is not confident, the LLM will perform problem classification and acquire visual information
   according to the problem type. ∗Note that the final reasoning takes the question and the caption as
   input as well.
   Here, oi could be some low-level visual observations or high-level visual commonsense understand-
   ing. Examples of non-visual commonsense knowledge could be the purpose of an object, people’s
   opinions about an object, potential future events, etc.

   3.3        V ISUAL C OMMONSENSE R EASONING F ORMULATION

   Both categories of visual commonsense reasoning tasks share a common formulation. In visual
   commonsense reasoning, the input consists of two parts: an image denoted as I and a multiple-
   choice question input represented as q, ci , where q corresponds to the question, and ci stands for the
   i-th answer choice. The model needs to choose the choice ci that is most likely to be true based on
   the image I.

   4        M ETHOD
   As shown in Figure 2, our approach involves a multi-step process. Initially, a pre-trained large
   language model (LLM) first takes the initial perception result (i.e., image caption), a question-answer
   pair, and instructions as input to evaluate potential answer candidates. Then, if the LLM is not
   confident about its reasoning, it will reason about what visual factors should be perceived from the
   image to make a confident commonsense inference. Using this information as a guidance, a vision-
   and-language model (VLM) will focus on specific aspects of the image, returning the perception
   result back to the LLM. Finally, the LLM re-evaluates the candidates in light of new perception
   results.

   4.1        L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS VCR R EASONER

   Evaluating answer choices VCR requires drawing new conclusions based on commonsense knowl-
   edge, which LLMs excels at (Anil et al., 2023). On the other hand, pre-trained vision-and-language
   models have exhibited a capability for visual understanding, including tasks such as image cap-
   tioning and image-text alignment, with a demonstrated ability to generalize across various datasets,
   as highlighted in (Li et al., 2023). Therefore, we decided to harness the strengths of vision-and-
   language models for visual understanding and the capabilities of large language models for evaluat-
   ing answer candidates in the context of visual commonsense reasoning.
   Captioning serves as a fundamental unsupervised pre-training task and most generalized capabilities
   of pre-trained VLMs, which captures the most salient information from an image. Moreover, consid-
   ering that text serves as a universal interface for both VLMs and LLMs, employing image captions
   serves as an effective means to connect VLMs with LLMs without necessitating any model-specific
   fine-tuning. Therefore, we first prompt the LLMs to take the caption of the image CI as the initial
   information and perform chain-of-thought reasoning on the question:
                                                            r1 = LLM ({ci }, q, CI ).                                                                     (3)


                                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                      Someone just had an accident in front
                                                                      of them


 Please classify the question into one     You will be provided with a visual
 of the following categories.              commonsense reasoning question about an   You are given
 1. Visual commonsense understanding:      image and four candidate choices.         1. A main question and four choices for
 questions that require understandings     Your task is to analyze what visual       an image.
 of the image's current visual status.     factors are needed to evaluate the        2. A question about a visual factor for
 2. Visual commonsense reasoning:          choices. Then, list the factors you       the image.
 questions require some visual             need in the format of a list of           Your task is to think about an answer
 understanding of the image, then need     questions.                                for the visual factor question to
 some commonsense knowledge to reason                                                support each choice in the main
 about the answer.                         Examples:                                 question.
                                           Question: Where is the plant on the
 Examples:                                 sign usually found?                       Examples:
 Question: What animal will most likely    Choices: A. desert B: tropics ......      Question: Where is the plant on the
 eat this meal?                                                                      sign usually found?
 Choices: A: elephant B: human ......      Analysis: To answer the question, we      Choices: A. desert B: tropics ......
                                           need to know the category of the plant    Visual factor question: What is the
 Analysis: This question requires          on the sign.                              category of the plant on the sign?
 understanding what is the meal in the     Required visual factors:
 image, then using commonsense to reason   What is the category of the plant on      Reasoned answers:
 which animal likes to eat it.             the sign?                                 A: cactus B. rainforest ......
 ......                                    ......


Figure 3: Three simplified prompt examples demonstrating how we define prompts to classify the
problem (left), reason visual factors (middle), and think about visual observations regarding visual
factors (right).

The reasoning result r1 includes both intermediate reasoning steps and the final answer. However,
it’sBLIP2-COCO
     important to note that the image caption may not encompass all the relevant information within
the image, potentially omitting critical contextual details essential for answering the question. In
such cases, it becomes necessary to gather additional relevant visual observations from the image.
Before this, we must first judge whether there is a lack of supportive visual evidence that would allow
us to make a confident decision. As in Figure 2, we let the LLM take the initial reasoning r1 and the
history prompt as input to judge if current visual information adequately supports the decision. If it
does, the model will directly output the result. Conversely, if there is a lack of sufficient evidence,
the model will progress to the second stage, where it will seek additional visual evidence.

4.2    L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS VCR P ROBLEM C LASSIFIER

As defined in the last section, there are two kinds of VCR problems, each requiring different levels of
visual reasoning. Therefore, we propose to leverage VLMs in distinct manners when facing different
problem types. To this end, we first prompt the LLM to classify the problem into two categories.
To achieve this, we provide the definitions of these two categories in the prompt. Additionally, we
include a set of manually annotated in-context examples to aid in problem classification, where the
questions of in-context examples are selected from the training set. Figure 3 illustrates the prompt.

4.3    L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS VLM C OMMANDER

The pre-training dataset of vision-and-language models contains millions to billions of image-text
pairs. Therefore, we propose a hypothesis that vision-and-language models have learned the map-
ping between visual features and the high-level commonsense concept during the pre-training. In
light of this, for visual commonsense understanding (VCU) problems, we propose to leverage pre-
trained VLM in a zero-shot manner. Specifically, for each choice ci , we first instruct the LLM to
transfer it and the question to a declarative sentence with instruction and in-context examples:
                                                   si = LLM (q, ci )                                                        (4)
For instance, for the question What will the people face? and the choice earthquake,
we will transform them to The people will face earthquake. Then, we feed si and the
image I to the pre-trained VLM to calculate the image-text alignment score. Following (Li et al.,
2023), we use the sum of ITM and ITC scores to compare choices:
                                           Si = IT M (I, si ) + IT C(I, si )                                                (5)
We will directly take the choice with the highest score as the final output.
For the visual commonsense inference (VCI) problems, the model needs to acquire related visual
observations and use relevant commonsense knowledge to reason about the answer. This knowledge
often neglected in the descriptions of the image. Therefore, as in Figures 2 and 3, we first prompt the
LLMs to think about some visual factors fj that influence the answer to the question, like ‘the action
of the person’, ‘the interaction between people’, etc. Then, we could acquire the visual observation


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the visual factor in the image with a visual question-answering model by asking a question about
the visual factor:
                                           oj = V QA(I, fj )                                          (6)
where oj is the answer to the question which we call visual clue. However, although pre-trained
VLMs have zero-shot visual question-answering (VQA) capabilities (Li et al., 2023), VQA datasets
require human labeling and are not one of the pre-training tasks of VLMs. Therefore, the accuracy
and the quality of zero-shot VQA may hinder the performance of the reasoning for the question.
Furthermore, the answer of VQA does not consider the context of the main question and therefore
may lack the most useful information. To this end, we further propose to prompt the LLM to reason
about the potential instantiations of the visual factors that can support the choices as in Figure 3:
                                        oij = LLM (fj , ci , q)                                      (7)
As an illustration, when fj is “category of the plant,” the potential values for oij may include specific
plant names like “cactus.” Then, we could leverage the image-text matching (ITM) and image-text
contrastive (ITC) functions of pre-trained VLMs to select the observation that most align with the
image among the observations for each choice i:
                    oj = ojk where k = arg max{IT M (oij , I) + IT C(oij , I)}                       (8)
                                              i

Finally, we append the visual clues {oj } after the caption as extra information for LLM to perform
final reasoning:
                                  r2 = LLM ({ci }, q, CI , {oj })                                (9)

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   DATASETS

We evaluate our approach using two datasets focused on visual commonsense reasoning:
VCR (Zellers et al., 2019) and AOKVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022). Both datasets formulate vi-
sual commonsense reasoning as 4-choice QA problems about an image, containing various visual
commonsense understanding and inference problems. VCR dataset focuses on human-centric visual
commonsense reasoning problems. In contrast, A-OKVQA dataset requires various commonsense
knowledge about common objects and events in daily life. For A-OKVQA, we use the validation
set with 1145 examples. For VCR dataset, we randomly sample 3000 / 26534 examples from the
validation set for the ablation study, and sample 500 examples to compare with other methods due
to the cost of GPT4. We divide the image from left to right into three bins and name the person
depending on which bin they are located in when feeding text to VLMs and LLMs, similar to (You
et al., 2023). The performance of both datasets is evaluated by accuracy.

5.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In our experiments, we use GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 and GPT-4-0613 as the LLMs for reasoning. To
ensure reproducibility, we set the temperature of the LLMs to 0. For image captioning, we employ
LLAVA-7B-v1.1. Furthermore, we use the pre-trained BLIP2 model for image-text alignment and
BLIP2-FlanT5 XL for visual question answering on both datasets. The number of in-context ex-
amples used in the prompts shown in Figure 3 is 6, 1, and 3, respectively. All the questions in the
in-context examples are from training set.

5.3   BASELINES

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework, we implement the following zero-shot
baselines for comparison:

       • BLIP2-Pretrain (Li et al., 2023): We use the pre-trained BLIP-2 model directly to perform
         image-text alignment on both datasets. On both datasets, we utilize GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 to
         transform the questions and choices into declarative sentences and feed them to the BLIP-2
         model to calculate the image-text alignment score. We select the choice with the highest
         alignment score as the answer.

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Ablations on the effect of problem categorization and clue generation on VCR Zellers et al.
(2019) and A-OKVQA Schwenk et al. (2022) datasets. We use GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 for LLM-based
methods. *Orig means using the declarative sentences transformed by LLM (Eq.5). *Clue means
using the clues generated by LLM for image-text alignment (Eq.10). All numbers indicate accuracy
(%). “Conf” indicates the samples where the LLM-Caption baseline shows confidence in its initial
reasoning, while “!Conf” indicates cases where it lacks confidence.

                                                   AOKVQA                        VCR
      Decision Model       Visual Info         VCU         VCI             VCU         VCI
                                            Conf !Conf Conf !Conf       Conf !Conf Conf !Conf
                             Orig*          76.5   66.3   56.5   50.9   70.0   56.3   59.2   47.4
      BLIP2-Pretrain
                           LLM Clue*        74.4   63.0   60.2   56.1   70.6   56.7   63.3   49.2
                             Caption        78.9   55.1   85.2   50.9   75.3   46.6   65.3   41.9
          LLM          Caption + VQA Clue   77.5   56.2   82.4   54.9   75.9   51.9   65.3   47.3
                       Caption + LLM Clue   79.2   65.6   81.5   64.2   72.9   58.1   57.1   52.9
                Num. of Examples            289    575    108    173    170    1779   49     1002

       • IdealGPT (You et al., 2023): A concurrent method leveraging LLMs for visual reasoning.
         IdealGPT prompts LLMs to iteratively query a VQA model to answer questions for visual
         reasoning tasks, including VCR (Zellers et al., 2019). In our experiments, we employ the
         original source code of IdealGPT while utilizing the same version of LLM and VLMs for
         caption, VQA, and reasoning as our method.

6     R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
6.1   A BLATION S TUDY

We conduct ablation studies of our ViCor method on VCR and AOKVQA datasets. Results are
shown in Table 1.

How do VLM and LLM compare on visual commonsense reasoning? By comparing the first
row and the third row in Table 1, we can validate our hypothesis on the comparison between VLM
and LLM. We observe that, in VCU problems, the VLMs perform significantly better than LLM
reasoning based on the caption on both datasets, with an average accuracy of 63.6% vs. 56.0%.
While on VCI problems, LLM based on caption performs better on average at 53.6% vs. 50.5%. We
could also observe that BLIP2 has a significant performance gap between the two kinds of problems
while LLM performs similarly. The significant difference between the two models and two datasets
also validates the effectiveness of the problem classification performed by LLM.

How do visual factors and LLM clue reasoning help visual commonsense reasoning? We val-
idate the effectiveness of visual factors reasoning and LLM clue reasoning on both BLIP2-Pretrain
and LLM-based decision paradigms. Here, we describe how we adapt the clue generation method
(as in Eq. 7) for BLIP2-Pretrain decision paradigm: we first prompt the LLM to generate the re-
quired visual factors fj , then generate visual clues oij of these factors that can support each choice
i. When applying the clues to BLIP2-Pretrain, we take the average of the image-text alignment
scores within the same choice as the image-text alignment score for the choice i:
                                    1X
                               Si =        (IT M (I, oij ) + IT C(I, oij ))                        (10)
                                    n j

where n is the number of required visual factors determined by LLM. The choice with the highest
score will be selected.
From Table 1, we can first find that visual factors and visual clues are less helpful in VCU prob-
lems. On VCU problems, besides directly taking the concept being asked by the original question
as the visual factor. The model will also consider low-level visual features as visual factors for
the question. For example, for the question What is the event in the image, and the
choice dinner, the visual factor could be objects in the image, and the reasoned visual
clues could be plates with food on the table.
On BLIP2-Pretrain, using clues for image-text alignment is not better than using the transferred
declarative sentences. This validates that BLIP2 can already align visual features with different


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Table 3: Comparison between ViCor and
Table 2: Comparison between ViCor and                   other methods on A-OKVQA dataset. *Both
other methods on VCR Q→A task. * Re-                    PromptCap and Prophet trained VLMs on
sults on full validation set. † CoT indicates           A-OKVQA dataset as part of the module.
the same setting as ‘Caption’ baseline in Ta-           Sup. indicates supervised methods, and ICL
ble. 1: given caption and perform chain-of-             means methods using in-context learning.
thought reasoning.
                                                                Method                            Acc.(%)
        Method                            Acc.(%)               GPV-2 Kamath et al. (2022)         60.3
        R2C Zellers et al. (2019)          67.3                 *PromptCap Hu et al. (2022)        73.2


                                                         Sup.
 Sup.


        *MERLOT Zellers et al. (2021)      79.4                 *Prophet Shao et al. (2023)        76.4
        BLIP2-Pretrain Li et al. (2023)    51.2                 InstructBLIP Dai et al. (2023)     81.0
        GPT-3.5                                                 BLIP2-Pretrain Li et al. (2023)    65.6
        †                                                       GPT-3.5
          CoT                              43.8
        IdealGPT You et al. (2023)         47.9                 CoT                                63.3
  ICL


        ViCor (ours)                       55.4                 ViCor (ours)                       70.9


                                                          ICL
         GPT-4                                                  GPT-4
        CoT                                57.8                 CoT                                70.3
        ViCor (ours)                       59.8                 AssistGPT Gao et al. (2023)        74.7
                                                                ViCor (ours)                       75.6

concepts well. However, introducing visual factors and observations as extra context improves per-
formance on LLM reasoning, especially when the LLM is not confident about its initial judgment,
i.e., initial provided visual information (caption) is insufficient. In this case, the performance of
LLM reasoning (‘Cap + Clue’ in Table 1) is comparable with pre-trained BLIP2.
For VCI problems, visual factors and visual clue generations help both reasoning paradigms. First,
the improvement in the BLIP2-Pretrain paradigm validates that (1) pre-trained BLIP2 cannot well-
align statements that go beyond literal visual content, requiring commonsense inference; (2) LLM
can reason about the visual factors that may contribute to supporting candidate commonsense infer-
ences, and guide the VLM to focus on relevant factors accordingly.
Second, the improvement in the LLM reasoning paradigm shows that LLM clues successfully pro-
vide subtle details of the scene that are crucial for solving the problem. Third, visual clues reasoned
by LLM are better than VQA as the visual information provider. There are mainly two reasons.
First, the pre-trained VLM sometimes could not understand or correctly answer the question due to
the lack of language alignment. Second, the VQA model lacks the main question as the context and
may not get the intention of the visual factor. Therefore, it may produce irrelevant answers. We
provide examples to further illustrate these in Section 6.3.

How to determine the reasoning process based on confidence and problem category? When
deciding the reasoning process, we need to consider both the performance and efficiency, evaluating
by the number of LLM calls. From Table. 1, we can observe that when the LLM is confident
about its initial reasoning, the performance is the best or almost the best on both VCU and VCI
problems. Therefore, using LLM+caption is the best choice. When the LLM is not confident about
its initial reasoning on VCI problems, LLM+Caption+LLM clue significantly outperforms other
decision paradigms. On VCU problems, we can observe that the performance of BLIP2 is similar to
LLM+Caption+LLM clue. However, the LLM+Caption+LLM clue requires five LLM calls, which
is three times more than using BLIP2. Therefore, using BLIP2-ITA is the best choice in this case.

6.2     M AIN R ESULTS

VCR The results on VCR dataset are in Table 2. Our method achieves the best result compared
with other methods without supervised training. Specifically, our method outperforms the Ideal-
GPT (You et al., 2023) since it is able to leverage the visual recognition and understanding abilities
of VLMs more effectively by considering the types and definitions of problems. However, we notice
that there is still a significant gap between ICL methods and methods with supervised training. This
could be due to the loss of information in approximating the naming and labeling of the persons
mentioned in Section 5.1.

A-OKVQA On A-OKVQA dataset, on both GPT models, our method can improve on chain-of-
thought baseline by a significant margin. Compared with concurrent method AssistGPT (Gao et al.,
2023), which utilizes GPT4 to call more visual tools such as object detection (Liu et al., 2023), text


                                                    8
                                                                                       Someone just had an accident in front
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                                       of them


         Question             What is person in the             Why is woman holding         What is the appearance of
                              middle standing up to do?         umbrella?                    the grass indicating?
         Choices              A: washing dishes B: serve        A: block sun B: repelling    A: wind B: rain C: drought
                              someone                           rain C: to dance             D: still wind
         LLAVA Caption        A man and a woman                 A group of people sitting    A field with a tractor, a
                              sitting at a table in a           at a table outside, with a   horse, and a cow. The
                              restaurant. The man is            woman sitting at the end     tractor is parked in the
                              holding a bottle.                 under an umbrella.           grass.
         Initial Evaluation   Given it’s in a restaurant        Since the caption does not   The animals may not stand
                              and the man is holding a          mention any bad weather      in rain or drought. The grass
                              bottle, it is likely that he is   such as rain, the umbrella   seems not moving – no
                              serving someone.                  is to block sun.             strong wind.
         Category             VCU                                VCI                          VCI
                              A                                 A                            D
                                                                                                                             1.   VCU, no info, ITM corre
         BLIP2-ITA results
                                                                                                                             2.   VCI, ITM wrong, init wr
         Visual factors       N/A                               The weather                  Appearance of the grass
                                                                                                                             3.   VCI, no info, VQA wors
         LLM clues            N/A                               A: sunny B: rainy C: sunny   A: sway B: wet C: wither D:
                                                                                             motionless
         VQA result           N/A                               rainy                        It is a grassy field

         Final result         A: washing dishes                 B: repelling rain            A: wind

         Ground truth         A                                 B                            A


Figure 4: Qualitative examples. All the examples are in the case of initial reasonings are not
confident. Left: An example in the VCR dataset, where the ITA corrects the initial reasoning.
Middle: An example in the A-OKVQA dataset, where the LLM corrects the initial reasoning after
giving the observation of the visual factor. Right: An example in the A-OKVQA dataset, where the
reasoned clue provides more useful information than VQA.
detection, and region grounding (Wang et al., 2022a), our method with only BLIP2 and LLAVA can
achieve better results. Meanwhile, we can observe that our method ViCor, without any training on
the dataset, can achieve results close to the best supervised methods. This shows that our analysis
and modeling for visual commonsense reasoning makes our framework tackle the VCR problems
more efficiently.

6.3   Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

In Fig. 4, we demonstrate several qualitative examples. The left example shows a case where the
problem is classified as VCU, and the BLIP2-Pretrain selects the correct answer. The middle exam-
ple presents a case where the initial evaluation is incorrect, and both the VQA and clue reasoning
methods give the correct observation for the visual factor ‘weather’, based on which the LLM selects
the correct answer. The BLIP2-Pretrain here selects ‘block sun’ due to the lighting condition of the
image. The example on the right demonstrates a case when the LLM reasoned answer is better than
the answer generated by the VQA model. Here, the VQA does not understand the intention of the
visual factor without the context of the main question. The LLM reasoned answer, however, can pro-
vide the most relevant information to the question and help the final reasoning. The BLIP2-Pretrain
fails here due to the textual similarity between ‘wind’ and ‘still wind’.

7     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this work, we study the problem of visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) based on the capabili-
ties of pre-trained vision-language models and large-language models and define two sub-problems
– visual commonsense understanding (VCU) and visual commonsense inference (VCI). Based on
this, we propose the ViCor framework that efficiently uses visual recognition and understanding ca-
pabilities of VLMs and commonsense reasoning capabilities of LLMs to overcome the challenges
in VCR. The experiment results validate our analysis of VCR problems and the effectiveness of our
framework. Currently, our method lags behind best performing methods in the field which are based
supervised fine-tuning. Also, text is the only communication medium between LLMs and VLMs.
The loss of visual details caused by captions may be hindering on certain scenarios. Future work
could explore fine-tuning approach with alternative mediums such as visual embeddings.


                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence
  Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.

Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In ECCV, 2020.

Yejin Choi. The Curious Case of Commonsense Intelligence. Daedalus, 151(2):139–155, 05 2022.
  ISSN 0011-5266. doi: 10.1162/daed a 01906. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_
  a_01906.

Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning, 2023.

Surı́s Dı́dac, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
  reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08128, 2023.

DiFei Gao, Lei Ji, Luowei Zhou, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Joya Chen, Zihan Fan, and Mike Zheng
  Shou. Assistgpt: A general multi-modal assistant that can plan, execute, inspect, and learn. 2023.

Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the V
  in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in Visual Question Answering. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.

Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 14953–14962, June 2023.

Jack Hessel, Jena D Hwang, Jae Sung Park, Rowan Zellers, Chandra Bhagavatula, Anna Rohrbach,
  Kate Saenko, and Yejin Choi. The Abduction of Sherlock Holmes: A Dataset for Visual Abduc-
  tive Reasoning. In ECCV, 2022.

Yushi Hu, Hang Hua, Zhengyuan Yang, Weijia Shi, Noah A Smith, and Jiebo Luo. Promptcap:
  Prompt-guided task-aware image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09699, 2022.

Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.

Amita Kamath, Christopher Clark, Tanmay Gupta, Eric Kolve, Derek Hoiem, and Aniruddha Kem-
 bhavi. Webly supervised concept expansion for general purpose vision models. In European
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 662–681. Springer, 2022.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, 2023.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.

Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains
  for science question answering. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=HjwK-Tc_Bc.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
  question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Jae Sung Park, Chandra Bhagavatula, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Visual-
  comet: Reasoning about the dynamic context of a still image. In In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Maarten Sap, Vered Shwartz, Antoine Bosselut, Yejin Choi, and Dan Roth. Commonsense rea-
 soning for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts, pp. 27–33, Online, July 2020. As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-tutorials.7. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-tutorials.7.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. 2023.
Dustin Schwenk, Apoorv Khandelwal, Christopher Clark, Kenneth Marino, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
  A-okvqa: A benchmark for visual question answering using world knowledge. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 146–162. Springer, 2022.
Zhenwei Shao, Zhou Yu, Meng Wang, and Jun Yu. Prompting large language models with an-
  swer heuristics for knowledge-based visual question answering. In Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 14974–14983, 2023.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
  Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.
Alane Suhr, Stephanie Zhou, Ally Zhang, Iris Zhang, Huajun Bai, and Yoav Artzi. A corpus for
  reasoning about natural language grounded in photographs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00491,
  2018.
Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Zhikang Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou,
  Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. Ofa: Unifying architectures, tasks, and modalities through a
  simple sequence-to-sequence learning framework. CoRR, abs/2202.03052, 2022a.
Zhenhailong Wang, Manling Li, Ruochen Xu, Luowei Zhou, Jie Lei, Xudong Lin, Shuohang Wang,
  Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Derek Hoiem, Shih-Fu Chang, Mohit Bansal, and Heng Ji. Language
  models with image descriptors are strong few-shot video-language learners. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh
  Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2022b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=_LceCyuVcH.
Chenfei Wu, Shengming Yin, Weizhen Qi, Xiaodong Wang, Zecheng Tang, and Nan Duan. Vi-
  sual chatgpt: Talking, drawing and editing with visual foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04671, 2023.
Zhengyuan Yang, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaowei Hu, Yumao Lu, Zicheng Liu, and Lijuan Wang.
  An empirical study of gpt-3 for few-shot knowledge-based vqa. In AAAI, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Haoxuan You, Rui Sun, Zhecan Wang, Long Chen, Gengyu Wang, Hammad A. Ayyubi, Kai-Wei
  Chang, and Shih-Fu Chang. Idealgpt: Iteratively decomposing vision and language reasoning via
  large language models, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), June 2019.
Rowan Zellers, Ximing Lu, Jack Hessel, Youngjae Yu, Jae Sung Park, Jize Cao, Ali Farhadi, and
  Yejin Choi. Merlot: Multimodal neural script knowledge models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:23634–23651, 2021.
Rowan Zellers, Jiasen Lu, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Yanpeng Zhao, Mohammadreza Salehi, Aditya
  Kusupati, Jack Hessel, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Merlot reserve: Multimodal neural script
  knowledge through vision and language and sound. In CVPR, 2022.
Hao Zhang and Basura Fernando. Fine-grained regional prompt tuning for visual abductive reason-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10428, 2023.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Table 4: Ablations on VCR with more decoding configurations.

                                                               VCU             VCI
                 Decision Model          Decoding Config
                                                            Conf !Conf     Conf !Conf
                                               Orig         72.9    58.1    57.1   52.9
                                             Temp 0.1       72.4    58.8    57.1   53.9
           LLM + Caption + LLM Clue
                                             Temp 0.2       72.4    58.5    61.2   52.2
                                           ICL examples     74.7    56.7    59.2   54.2
                         Num. of Examples                   170     1779     49    1002


                         Table 5: The result of ViCor on OKVQA dataset.

                                      Method          Accuracy
                                  LLM+Caption             34.3
                                  BLIP2-T5XL              36.0
                                   ViCor (ours)           38.4


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
A.1   R ESULTS ON M ORE LLM D ECODING C ONFIGURATIONS

To validate the robustness of our method, we ran the experiments on the VCR dataset with more
decoding configurations using LLM + Caption + LLM Clue decision branch. Specifically, we ran
on two more LLM decoding temperatures 0.1 and 0.2, and used different in-context examples for the
prompt in Fig.3 (right) to guide the LLM to think about observations for visual factors based on can-
didate choices. From the results in Table. 4, we can observe that different decoding configurations
influence the results by a small margin and do not affect the main conclusions.

A.2   R ESULTS ON OKVQA DATASET

We adapt our method and baselines to OKVQA Marino et al. (2019) dataset. The results are in
Table. 5. We use GPT-3.5-Turbo for LLM modules. Since OKVQA is an open-ended dataset, we
use the Caption+VQA clue version of our method in Table 1 to tackle unconfident VCI problems.
As shown above, our framework can still leverage the advantage of both VLMs and LLMs to achieve
better results owing to problem classification and active visual information acquisition.


                                                 13
