Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACCESS: P ROMPT E NGINEERING FOR AUTOMATED
W EB ACCESSIBILITY V IOLATION C ORRECTIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         With the increasing need for inclusive and user-friendly technology, web acces-
         sibility is crucial to ensuring equal access to online content for individuals with
         disabilities, including visual, auditory, cognitive, or motor impairments. Despite
         the existence of accessibility guidelines and standards such as Web Content Ac-
         cessibility Guidelines (WCAG) and the Web Accessibility Initiative (W3C), over
         90% of websites still fail to meet the necessary accessibility requirements. For
         web users with disabilities, there exists a need for a tool to automatically fix web
         page accessibility errors. While research has demonstrated methods to find and
         target accessibility errors, no research has focused on effectively correcting such
         violations. This paper presents a novel approach to correcting accessibility vio-
         lations on the web by modifying the document object model (DOM) in real time
         with foundation models. Leveraging accessibility error information, large lan-
         guage models (LLMs), and prompt engineering techniques, we achieved greater
         than a 51% reduction in accessibility violation errors after corrections on our novel
         benchmark: ACCESS. Our work demonstrates a valuable approach toward the di-
         rection of inclusive web content, and provides directions for future research to
         explore advanced methods to automate web accessibility.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Web accessibility refers to the extent to which online information is readily available to people, re-
gardless of their physical or cognitive capabilities and the technical specifications of the devices they
use (Wu et al., 2017). When web content, such as images, language, or display is not transmitted
in a comprehensible manner, a web accessibility barrier is formed between the information and its
receiver (Abu Addous et al., 2016). Particularly for websites largely dependent on graphical or mul-
tidimensional presentation formats, many individuals with impairments or disabilities are unable to
effectively perform practical tasks such as navigating the website or completing forms (Kottapally
et al., 2002). As a result, laws such as the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) have been
established as international standards for enforcing accessibility. The WCAG follows thirteen guide-
lines to ensure accessible websites, organized under four principles: 1) perceivable, 2) operable, 3)
understandable, and 4) robust (Wille et al., 2016).
Despite the enactment of laws aimed at promoting web accessibility, numerous websites still fail to
meet the necessary accessibility standards. A 2023 study on the highest trafficked one million home
pages found that each site presented 50 accessibility violations on average. Furthermore, the study
found that 96.3% of all home pages had WCAG 2.0 failures, including the 22.1% of home pages that
had missing alternate text for images (webaim, 2023). This issue can be attributed to the expensive,
time-consuming, error-prone, and labor-intensive nature of manually detecting and individually ad-
dressing accessibility violations. Moreover, it is time-consuming for the Cognitive and Learning
Disabilities Accessibility Task Force (COGA) to implement new accessibility guidelines, as issues
surrounding the ability to clearly, objectively, and universally verify the implementation of guide-
lines can be an obstacle to their acceptance (Lewis & Seeman, 2019). Unless assistive technologies
are designed in a way to address the need for interpretation by users, barriers to accessibility will
continue to exist (Craven, 2006).
In recent years, research has suggested new possibilities for addressing web accessibility violations
in a less resource-intensive manner, offering promising solutions to help developers detect viola-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The big picture approach of our research. By automating accessibility violation correc-
tions, we aim to eliminate the inefficiency and inaccuracy associated with manual error correction.


tions. Early research in Assistive Technology (AT) have been widely integrated into the validation
process; however, early AT tools have shown to function poorly when used on dynamic content
and web pages (Petrie et al., 2008). More recently, in order to efficiently and accurately identify
web violations of a website according to WCAG standards, web evaluation tools standards such as
Playwright, Tenon, and AChecker have been created. Most evaluation tools work by performing
an automatic test for potential accessibility issues by traversing web page’s DOM and performing
complex rule-based checks in accordance to regulation standards. These tools are critical in ensur-
ing compliance with accessibility requirements, and since a combination of multiple tools is often
used to increase the percentage of detected errors. There exists a broad field of study for the devel-
opment of web error detection tools, especially through the application of advanced programming
techniques derived from artificial intelligence (Tiwary & Mahapatra, 2022). However, it remains
important to note that violation detection tools can only help developers who actively seek to ensure
compliance with accessibility requirements. Individuals with disabilities still cannot fully access the
vast majority of web pages that fail to meet compliance requirements.
Consequently, by leveraging data gathered from these evaluation tools, recent research has empha-
sized the potential of automatically improving accessibility. For example, researchers have explored
computer vision techniques to automatically correct alternate-text errors (Draffan et al., 2020). How-
ever, the flaws of current automatic strategies are twofold. First, their scope in current research is
limited to the generation of alternate text for images. Furthermore, fully automatic strategies can
have flaws in accuracy, especially with the lack of research in adaptive web accessibility (Baptista
et al., 2016). Research examining Facebook’s automatic alt-text feature demonstrated that although
it increased user engagement, the automated alt-text was not significantly accurate or reliable, failing
to understand objects in context. For example, Facebook’s automatic alt-text approach was shown
to overemphasize body parts and beards, while neglecting other parts of the image, leaving users
confused about the true relevance of sections of the image (Abou-Zahra et al., 2018), (Yao et al.,
2023).
Despite the promise of automatic accessibility violation corrections for alt-text generation, stud-
ies have undermined their functionality due to their shortcomings. Rather than a fully automatic
approach, a semi-automatic approach has been explored, using similar automatic computer vision
algorithms first but following with manual testing and improvements to increase accuracy (Adam &
Kreps, 2006). For example, Tiwary and Mahapatra’s semi-automatic algorithm used computer vi-
sion techniques followed by manual recommendations, achieving higher accuracy when compared
to the human-written alt text, effectively striking a balance between detection and accuracy in correc-
tion (Wille et al., 2016). Emerging research has also introduced a representation learning approach
for web pages, which addresses the computational expense, time, and lack of useful information
limitations from previous research by utilizing a transformer-based encoder to learn generalizable
representations of HTML documents via self-supervised learning. The proposed approach outper-
forms baseline models designed for these tasks, suggesting the attractiveness of a natural language


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Three example visual website violations that could affect web accessibility for individuals
with impairments. (a) Contrast between foreground and background colors do not meet WCAG
2AA minimum contrast ratio thresholds. (b) Button does not have discernable text. (c) All page
content is not contained by landmarks.


processing (NLP) approach to handling HTML documents and its utility toward real-world web
applications (Deng et al., 2022).
The goal of our project is to create a novel automatic web accessibility correction tool for individuals
with impairments. Through the use of prompt engineering, we can reap the inherent cost-efficient
nature of automatic approaches while gaining the accuracy of semi-automatic approaches through
prompt engineering. Currently, no accessibility correction tool exists with the intent of serving
users with a tool to correct web pages on-the-go. While the scope of previous studies was lim-
ited to addressing alt-text generation with computer vision, our tool can be used more ubiquitously
and purposefully by web users to handle web accessibility violations when desired. Our approach
utilizes the Playwright API and a data set of website URLs to perform web accessibility tests to
explore the viability of machine learning algorithms in addressing the limitations of previous web
accessibility research in an efficient manner. Leveraging prompt engineering techniques, we aim
to improve the accuracy of web accessibility violation corrections, minimize the inconveniences of
manual corrections, and improve the resource and cost optimization involved in enhancing web ac-
cessibility. Such a tool will enable users to easily pinpoint accessibility errors and their corrections,
effectively addressing the widespread issue of web accessibility errors for individuals who rely on
ATs. In a commercial setting, such an approach can decrease annual web accessibility lawsuits
raised in federal court.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the creation of our dataset benchmark sys-
tem for evaluating error correction. Section 3 details the role of ACCESS Agent in implementing
corrections in the Document Object Model (DOM). Section 4 provides the results from prompt en-
gineering approaches. Section 5 and 6 summarize our results and explores their implications for
future work.

2     ACCESS B ENCHMARK
To evaluate the success of our models, we created the first general automatic accessibility violation
correction benchmark. In order to numerically measure the severity of violations, we follow regu-
lation standards and map certain errors to one of five impact categories: critical, serious, moderate,
minor, and cosmetic. Additionally, we introduce a numerical weighting to each category and calcu-
late an aggregated severity score, which is used to evaluate the performance of a correction-proposal
model. The initial severity score of the benchmark was 614, with an average of 24.56 for our dataset
of 25 URLs.

2.1   DATA C OLLECTION

We used the Playwright API to perform tests on website URLs and acquire web accessibility vi-
olation errors (e.g. empty headings, image tags without alternate text, and website links without


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Overview of the violation correction approach. (a) The violations dataset includes columns
extracted from Playwright accessibility tests, used for prompt generation. (b) We generate the
prompt using prompt engineering techniques and traverse the dataset to obtain corrected HTML tags
from LLMs. (c) Our benchmark compares initial and final severity scores of errors in the DOM.


Table 1: Description of dataset variables. Additional columns were included in our dataset but
information was only extracted or modified from these main columns.

                   Name                        Description                      Type
                webURL             website URL passed into dataframe            text
              numViolations          number of violations from URL            integer
                     id                       violation type                    text
               initialScore         sum of numerical values of impact         integer
               description            purpose of accessibility feature          text
                   help            describes accessibility requirements         text
                   html           HTML elements from violation nodes         HTML tags
                  DOM                  gives DOM structure of URL               text
              DOMCorrected        DOM structure with errors corrected           text


discernible text). Playwright tests return a string of information relating to all the accessibility vi-
olations of a given URL. We generated a dataframe that organized violations for every website for
approximately 25 URLs, which resulted in 171 rows of violations. Our data set includes website
URLs hand-selected from research on commonly used, accessible, non-accessible, and older web-
sites. Some example websites included were Google Calendar, Slack, Audible, BBC, Quora, New
York Times, and ResearchGate. This dataset is valuable for the research community for various ap-
plications, such as predicting web accessibility failures, categorizing accessible websites, developing
adaptive methodologies, and evaluating web accessibility improvements over time (Acosta-Vargas
et al., 2020).
We extracted HTML and failure summary information from Playwright tests to include as columns
in our data set. A DOM column was created to access the logical structure of the webpages and
modify the HTML code. Analyzing our dataset, approximately 40% of URLs exhibited fewer than
5 violations and 60% exhibited 5 or more violations.
To generate the severity scores, a 1 was assigned to each ”cosmetic” error (as specified by Play-
wright), 2 for ”minor,” and up to 5 for ”critical.” Each URL was assigned an initial severity score
that was calculated by summing the total severity scores of all individual errors for the URL.


3   ACCESS AGENT

ACCESS Agent produces corrected DOM for websites in the dataset by feeding an LLM model with
the error, description, suggested change, and incorrect HTML tag. The LLM returns a corrected


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


HTML tag and ACCESS Agent implements the correction process by inserting corrected elements
into the DOM.

3.1   R E ACT P ROMPTING

To obtain web accessibility violation corrections from our models, we first leveraged ReAct prompt-
ing with the action space being a 2D array of the corrected elements. By accessing incorrect HTML
tags from our dataset, we built the prompt to feed to our transformer models. We provided a system
message that served as a guideline for the model, presenting clear references to the identified incor-
rect HTML, error type, error description, suggested change, and the desired response format. This
structured approach enabled the model to focus on specific accessibility issues and their respective
corrections. To implement the ReAct prompting, we included an example response in our system
message that structured the thought. This thought process acts as a validation mechanism, confirm-
ing that the model understands the task and the context of the accessibility violation. Our prompting
system ensures that every response returned by our models includes reasoning for the correction and
a corrected HTML tag.


Figure 4: Example ReAct prompt messages for a color contrast error. Additional example errors
were included in the system message for other prompting techniques.


3.2   F EW-S HOT G UIDED P ROMPTING

We implemented Few-Shot guided prompting by providing more violation-correction examples in
our system message. We utilized four example input and output messages, clearly labeled like the
ReAct prompts. However, the Few-Shot prompt included only the incorrect and correct lines of
HTML and did not include a thought. The examples included a missing header, a missing image
description, a missing href URL, and a missing landmark as violation errors. This prompting style
enables the model to better learn in context and prepare for subsequent examples in which a response
is desired.

3.3   T RANSFORMER M ODELS

Based on the prompt engineering techniques presented above, a system was created to generate the
system and user messages for the desired prompt format, which could be used to generate prompts
for correcting any individual error. We generated the system and user messages by accessing specific
columns of the dataset for each error and formatting the information through prompt engineering
(see Figure 4 for an example). These generated prompts were fed into our model. RegEx was used
to search for the correction returned by the GPT response and return the correct HTML header.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To implement all the corrections on the entire dataset, we iterated through groups of the same URL,
modifying the DOM by finding the incorrect HTML and replacing it with the corrected HTML
returned by our model. By the end of the correction process, a new column in our dataframe was
created, storing the corrected DOM for each URL. This process was repeated to test other large
language models and prompt engineering techniques.


           Figure 5: The DOM correction process using prompt engineering and LLMs.


Figure 6: Example DOM correction process for one individual violation. This process was repeated
for all violations in the dataset.

3.4   ACTION S PACES

Our goal is to demonstrate the efficacy of LLMs at correcting website accessibility violations in the
DOM. This section describes how we implement HTML corrections and compute the improvement
in violations.
We define S to be the set of tuples comprising error type, description of error, suggested change, and
incorrect HTML tag. MLLM is the LLM which takes S in the form of a user message and system
message. MLLM outputs a thought along with a corrected HTML tag.
We define the set of incorrect HTML tags obtained from Playwright tests as P W (S).
To implement the corrections obtained from MLLM (PW(S)), we substitute the incorrect HTML tag
with the correction generated from MLLM . Let FHTML fix represent the set of HTML code in which
the incorrect HTML is replaced with the correction generated by MLLM .

                             FHTML fix = {sub(PW(S), MLLM (PW(S))}

We then compare the impact scores before and after LLM corrections. For the dataset, we compute
Rinitial and Rfix , the average impact score of all URLs in the violations dataset, where n is the number
of violations per URL, m is the total number of URLs in the dataset.
                                                m   n
                                            1 XX
                                      R=              impact(S)
                                            m j=1 i=1


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, we evaluate the results by computing I, the percentage average decrease in the number of
violations after implementing FHTML fix .

                                                 Rfix
                                      I =1−              × 100%
                                                Rinitial

4     R ESULTS
After receiving corrected DOMs for the URLs and violations in our dataset, we ran the modified
DOM through Playwright again to test for remaining violations. A severity score was calculated
again after the DOM corrections, and we compared scores before and after the corrections to evaluate
the success of our models.
The results are shown in table 2 below.

                     Table 2: Initial and Final Violation Severity Score Results

         Model                 Prompt            Initial / Avg    Final / Avg   % Score Decrease
    GPT-3.5-turbo-16K    Few-Shot Guidance        614 / 24.56     372 / 14.88         39.414%
    GPT-3.5-turbo-16K     Chain of Thought        614 / 24.56     334 / 13.36         45.603%
    GPT-3.5-turbo-16K          ReAct              614 / 24.56     299 / 11.96         51.303%

Examining Table 2, our prompt engineering approach was able to successfully decrease severity
scores for all three prompting methods using the GPT-3.5-turbo-16K models. A notable observation
is the performance of ReAct prompting, which can be attributed to its effectiveness in overcom-
ing the hallucinations that chain-of-thought prompting commonly suffers from. Chain-of-thought
prompting requires the model to generate its own internal representations of knowledge, which can
lead to hallucinations without a verification system like ReAct prompting or the ability to guide the
model in a specific direction by pre-feeding it a thought (?). In comparison to other prompt engineer-
ing techniques, ReAct prompting’s superior performance stems from its ability to blend reasoning
with action, utilizing in-context examples to adapt to different environments.
Furthermore, in a baseline test involving a dataset of 10 URLs, we applied the same methodology
and found that the GPT-4 model outperformed the GPT-3.5-turbo 16K by 4.891% in ReAct prompt-
ing. The enhanced performance of GPT-4 is likely due to its training on a more extensive dataset
and its improved capability in processing complex concepts. However, testing our larger dataset of
25 URLs was limited by GPT-4’s smaller token limit. Table 3 details the categorization of websites
included in our dataset. Labels were assigned by hand; the distribution illustrates a range of websites
that can be impacted by accessibility issues, which were represented in our dataset.
These findings underscore the LLM’s capability to reduce accessibility violation errors through
DOM correction. As detailed in Table 4, the model demonstrated strong proficiency in address-
ing text-based web accessibility issues, achieving 100% success rates in correcting violations of
landmark-no-duplicate-content, label, skip-link, and ARIA-required-attribute. These violations,
more straightforward text modifications or matching, are more easily processed by the model com-
pared to those needing a comprehensive understanding of visual and layout aspects, such as meta-
viewport and region. The model’s moderate success (> 60%) in correcting visual violations such as
color-contrast, meta-viewport, and region, however, indicates some capability in handling respon-
sive design elements, albeit with limitations. The lower success rate of the region violation reflects
the complexity involved in discerning the semantic structure of web pages, a task demanding an in-
depth understanding of both content organization and ARIA landmark roles. ARIA, or Accessible
Rich Internet Applications, is a suite of attributes and roles designed to enhance the semantic value
of web elements and complex interfaces, particularly for assistive technologies, by conveying states,
properties, and roles beyond what’s inherently available in HTML. Consequently, ARIA errors,
which are especially prevalent in compound components and nested elements, often originate from
different parts of the code, making automated correction a challenge. This complexity necessitates
a nuanced understanding of the entire DOM, which the GPT Model, limited to correcting only one
line of incorrect HTML, currently lacks. Addressing ARIA errors effectively may require a more


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Table 4: Most Frequently Corrected Er-
                                          rors After Prompt Engineering.
Table 3: Percentage of Types of Web-
sites Within Dataset.
                                             Error ID                  Percentage Corrected
 Category                  Percentage        landmark content                  100%
                               40%           label                             100%
 Shopping/Transaction                        skip link                         100%
                               20%
 Communication/Social                        ARIA required attribute           100%
                               4%            landmark one main                  86%
 Government/Important
                               16%           linked name                        78%
 Research
                               4%            color contrast                     75%
 Organization                                HTML has lang                      75%
                               16%
 News/Information                            meta viewport                      67%
                                             region                             62%


comprehensive approach, possibly extending the input of violations from one line to the entire DOM
or incorporating other technologies, such as GPT-4 Vision to address a wider range of accessibility
issues, including those based on visual elements.


Table 5: Most Common Violations within Dataset. The most common error, region errors, refer to
content inappropriately contained by landmarks

                                Error Type              Percentage
                                                         12.28%
                                region
                                                          7.02%
                                color contrast
                                                          6.43%
                                landmark-unique
                                                          5.85%
                                heading-order
                                                          5.26%
                                duplicate-id
                                                          5.26%
                                link-name
                                                          4.68%
                                image-alt
                                                          4.09%
                                landmark-one-main


Additionally, the prevalence of non-text-based violations, such as region and color-contrast, which
make up 12.28% and 7.02% of our data set respectively (Table 5), highlights the limitations of
current LLMs. This insight is vital for guiding future research and development, suggesting areas
where LLMs could be improved or combined with other technologies, like GPT-4 Vision, to address
a wider range of accessibility issues, including those based on visual elements. Future work, as
indicated by Table 3, could also focus on datasets primarily consisting of Government/Important,
Research, and News/Information websites, as these categories typically have higher numbers of
text-based violations and to test what specific text-based violations the model performs better in.


5   D ISCUSSION

With the ubiquitous influence of the internet and the increasing societal reliance on online tools,
ensuring unimpeded access to web content for all users, irrespective of their physical or cognitive
challenges, stands as a paramount concern (Illingworth, 2001),(Pascual-Almenara et al., 2015). Our
research pioneers an innovative automated approach using LLMs for efficient, low-cost violation
corrections. To our knowledge, existing approaches for correcting accessibility violations do not
automate the correction process using prompt engineering techniques in a way that can be easily
adapted as a tool for users. It is imperative to acknowledge the broader societal ramifications of
such results: an absence of comprehensive web accessibility may prevent individuals with impair-


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ments from utilizing indispensable online services, notably services such as healthcare, banking, or
document signing.
Our methodology involves correcting HTML tags of the Document Object Model. Web accessibility
violations were systematically identified from a spectrum of websites via the Playwright API. This
process yielded a comprehensive dataset composed of detailed violation specifications and the as-
sociated DOM. Following data acquisition, ACCESS Agent implements the correction automation
process, utilizing OpenAI’s GPT models. Through prompt engineering techniques, the model was
fed violations, and revised HTML code suggestions were extracted to remediate the violations in
each website’s respective DOM. ACCESS Benchmark is our proposed evaluation schema, which
compares summed numerical representations of the severity of website violations before and after
correction to quantify the effectiveness of the automated process.
Our findings provide compelling evidence of the existing gaps in website accessibility corrections
and the potential of our proposed solutions to address them. In the context of these results, it be-
comes evident that the ever-increasing reliance on the internet and websites for communication,
commerce, and acquisition of knowledge accentuates the urgency of implementing comprehensive
and effective web accessibility solutions. Accessibility barriers not only inhibit user experience
but potentially ostracize a subset of the population from engaging fully in a digital society (Kurt,
2018),(Abu Addous et al., 2016). This is particularly consequential in critical domains such as
healthcare, where web inaccessibility can translate into a denial of vital services (Sarita et al., 2021).
Therefore, this research not only holds significance beyond the realms of digital design and Natural
Language Processing, but also promotes broader dialogue on societal inclusivity and equality in the
digital era. It underscores the importance of our project as a practical tool for end-users, emphasizing
its role in facilitating more accessible and equitable digital environments.


6    C ONCLUSION

Our research efficiently identifies and corrects web accessibility violations according to the Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) using OpenAI’s GPT models and prompt engineering
techniques. The outcome was a marked decrease in severity scores, dropping by 51% using the
GPT 3.5-turbo-16K model. While our results still leave accessibility violations to be corrected, it is
notable that an automated approach was able to identify and correct HTML in the DOM without the
need for manual individual error correction. Ultimately, our results are a major step toward digital
inclusivity, inventing a new sub-field of automated accessibility that leaves more to be discovered.
Moreover, the real-world implications of our study are significant. Such automated violation correc-
tion methods could be adapted into a web-based tool or extension to enable users to correct acces-
sibility violations of websites when needed. This research lays the groundwork for a user-friendly
and robust correction approach, which not only benefits web developers and companies but also
significantly enhances the online experience for people with disabilities. The widespread adoption
of such a tool could lead to a host of advantages: enhanced digital accessibility, increased business
revenue through more inclusive websites, reduced legal issues related to website accessibility, lower
maintenance costs, and, most importantly, the creation of a truly inclusive online environment for
everyone.
Looking forward, future efforts could approach augmenting the diversity of our violations dataset.
Expanding the dataset to encompass websites from varied industries, sectors, and geographic regions
would empower our models to effectively address an even broader spectrum of accessibility chal-
lenges. The integration of deep learning techniques, such as coupling computer vision with natural
language processing, could introduce the ability to detect and rectify issues spanning multimedia
elements and textual content, further elevating the comprehensiveness of accessibility enhancement.


7    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Supplementary materials include the violations dataset generated by Playwright, the code used to run
ACCESS benchmark and ACCESS agent, and the dataset with corrected DOM elements. Results
may vary when running the models as the responses returned from GPT models are not necessarily
replicable.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shadi Abou-Zahra, Judy Brewer, and Michael Cooper. Artificial intelligence (ai) for web accessibil-
  ity: Is conformance evaluation a way forward? W4A ’18. Association for Computing Machinery,
  2018. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3192714.3192834.
Hayfa Abu Addous, Mohd Zalisham, and Nurlida Basir. Web accessibility challenges. International
  Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 7, 10 2016. URL http://dx.doi.
  org/10.14569/IJACSA.2016.071023.
Patricia Acosta-Vargas, Mario González, and Sergio Luján-Mora. Dataset for evaluating the acces-
  sibility of the websites of selected latin american universities. Data in Brief, 28:105013, 2020.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2019.105013.
Alison Adam and David Kreps. Web accessibility: A digital divide for disabled people? In Eileen M.
  Trauth, Debra Howcroft, Tom Butler, Brian Fitzgerald, and Janice I. DeGross (eds.), Social Inclu-
  sion: Societal and Organizational Implications for Information Systems, pp. 217–228. Springer
  US, 2006. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-34588-4_15.
Ana Baptista, José Martins, Ramiro Gonçalves, Frederico Branco, and Tânia Rocha. Web ac-
  cessibility challenges and perspectives: A systematic literature review. In 2016 11th Iberian
  Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), pp. 1–6, 2016. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1109/cisti.2016.7521619.
Jenny Craven. Web accessibility: a review of research and initiatives. 2006. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:107165316.
Xiang Deng, Prashant Shiralkar, Colin Lockard, Binxuan Huang, and Huan Sun. Dom-lm: Learning
  generalizable representations for html documents, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2201.10608.
E. A. Draffan, Chaohai Ding, Mike Wald, Harry Everett, Jason Barrett, Abhirami Sasikant, Calin
  Geangu, and Russell Newman. Can a web accessibility checker be enhanced by the use of ai?
  In Klaus Miesenberger, Roberto Manduchi, Mario Covarrubias Rodriguez, and Petr Peňáz (eds.),
  Computers Helping People with Special Needs, pp. 67–73. Springer International Publishing,
  2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58796-3_9.
Nicola Illingworth. The internet matters: Exploring the use of the internet as a research tool. Socio-
  logical Research Online, 6(2):79–90, 2001. URL https://doi.org/10.5153/sro.600.
K. Kottapally, C. Ngo, R. Reddy, E. Pontelli, T. C. Son, and D. Gillan. Towards the creation of
  accessibility agents for non-visual navigation of the web. SIGCAPH Comput. Phys. Handicap.,
  (73–74):134–141, 2002. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/960201.957229.
S. Kurt. Moving toward a universally accessible web: Web accessibility and education. Assis-
   tive Technology, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 199–208, 2018. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
   10400435.2017.1414086.
Clayton Lewis and Lisa Seeman. Policy and Standards on Web Accessibility for Cognitive and
  Learning Disabilities, pp. 281–299. Springer London, 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1007/978-1-4471-7440-0_16.
Afra Pascual-Almenara, Mireia Ribera Turró, and Toni Granollers. Impact of web accessibility
  barriers on users with hearing impairment. DYNA, 82:233–240, 2015. URL https://doi.
  org/10.15446/dyna.v82n193.53499.
Helen Petrie, Christopher Power, and Gerhard Weber. Web accessibility - automatic/manual evalu-
  ation and authoring tools. In Klaus Miesenberger, Joachim Klaus, Wolfgang Zagler, and Arthur
  Karshmer (eds.), Computers Helping People with Special Needs, pp. 334–337. Springer Berlin
  Heidelberg, 2008. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70540-6_49.
K. Sarita, P. Kaur, , and S. Kaur. Accessibility of healthcare sites: Evaluation by automated tools.
  Proceedings of International Conference on Data Science and Applications, pp. 625–636, 2021.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5348-3_50.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tejal Tiwary and Ranjendra Prasad Mahapatra. Web accessibility challenges for disabled and gener-
  ation of alt text for images in websites using artificial intelligence. In 2022 3rd International Con-
  ference on Issues and Challenges in Intelligent Computing Techniques (ICICT), pp. 1–5, 2022.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1109/icict55121.2022.10064545.
webaim. Webaim: The webaim million - an annual accessibility analysis of the top 1,000,000
  home pages. Technical report, webaim.org, 2023. URL https://webaim.org/projects/
  million/.
Kathrin Wille, Reiner R. Dumke, and Cornelius Wille. Measuring the accessability based on web
  content accessibility guidelines. In 2016 Joint Conference of the International Workshop on Soft-
  ware Measurement and the International Conference on Software Process and Product Measure-
  ment (IWSM-MENSURA), pp. 164–169, 2016. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
  document/7809604.
Shaomei Wu, Jeffrey Wieland, Omid Farivar, and Julie Schiller. Automatic alt-text: Computer-
  generated image descriptions for blind users on a social network service. In Proceedings of the
  2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW
  ’17, pp. 1180–1192. Association for Computing Machinery, 2017. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1145/2998181.2998364.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2210.03629.


                                                  11
