Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NHANCING GROUP FAIRNESS IN FEDERATED LEARN -
ING THROUGH PERSONALIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                             A BSTRACT

         Instead of producing a single global model for all participating clients, personal-
         ized Federated Learning (FL) algorithms aim to collaboratively train customized
         models for each client, enhancing their local accuracy. For example, clients could
         be clustered into different groups in which their models are similar, or clients
         could tune the global model locally to achieve better local accuracy. In this pa-
         per, we investigate the impact of personalization techniques in the FL paradigm
         on local (group) fairness of the learned models, and show that personalization
         techniques can also lead to improved fairness. We establish this effect through nu-
         merical experiments comparing two types of personalized FL algorithms against
         the baseline FedAvg algorithm and a baseline fair FL algorithm, and elaborate on
         the reasons behind improved fairness using personalized FL methods. We further
         provide analytical support under certain conditions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a pivotal paradigm with the objective of
collaboratively training a global model while safeguarding data privacy by circumventing direct
data access from local clients (Kairouz et al., 2021). FL offers the distinct advantage of potentially
yielding superior model performance compared to models trained solely at local levels, owing to its
capacity to aggregate knowledge from diverse clients. One of the most popular FL algorithms, Fe-
dAvg, introduced by McMahan et al. (2017), demonstrates commendable performance, particularly
in scenarios where samples from different clients are independently and identically distributed (IID).
However, real-world applications often involve heterogeneous data points across clients, a situation
where the performance of FedAvg can considerably deteriorate (Li et al., 2019b). Moreover, the
classical FL approach yields a single global model, devoid of customization for individual clients.
Consequently, clients with heterogeneous datasets may encounter local accuracy degradation. To
address these limitations, a spectrum of personalized techniques has been proposed in the FL litera-
ture, as discussed further in Section 2. These techniques are designed to enhance the local accuracy
of the learned models, while keeping some of the benefits of collaborative learning.
In addition to handling issues of data heterogeneity, training FL models that can uphold societal
values, as formalized through notions of algorithmic fairness (Barocas et al., 2019), is an impor-
tant consideration. Consider as an example the scenario where FL is used to train a foundation
model/LLM on local datasets, contributed by diverse participants from different regions and com-
munities. Without careful oversight, the resulting model will favor language and content preferred
by the majority contributors, often disregarding the unique linguistic nuances and cultural contexts
of minority groups (Durmus et al., 2023). As another example, existing research (Kirdemir et al.,
2021) finds structural and systemic bias in YouTube video recommendation systems. In this case,
the collaboratively trained recommendation model begins to favor certain perspectives over others,
inadvertently reinforcing biases present in the data. As a result, users are fed information that perpet-
uates stereotypes, causing harm to underrepresented communities. To address these fairness issues,
a number of ideas have also been proposed in the FL literature, as discussed further in Section 2.
In this paper, we establish an alignment between these two directions: we show that personalization
techniques can also bring fairness benefits. Consider the concept of clustered FL, a personalized FL
technique, as exemplified by the works of Ghosh et al. (2020); Nardi et al. (2022), where clients
are organized into groups based on model similarities, so that knowledge is effectively aggregated
within clusters of similar clients. We argue that this clustering can be seen as a means to foster a


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model that is both more precise and more equitable. It effectively treats information originating from
other clusters as noise, which, if left unaddressed, would have led to model divergence, potentially
compromising both cluster-specific performance and fairness.
Furthermore, collaborative learning algorithms in essence have access to more “information” (data)
from diverse clients. We argue that they can enhance both local accuracy and fairness, especially
when dealing with imbalanced samples within each client, as in these scenarios issues of algorithmic
unfairness can be attributed to under-representation of samples from the disadvantaged group in the
data. Moreover, we identify cases where the sample distribution within clients is such that improving
accuracy (over standalone learning) also promotes fairness; in these cases, the incorporation of
personalization techniques into the FL paradigm may not only enhance local accuracy, but also
yield improvements in local fairness, essentially providing a dual benefit.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to identify the (unintended) fairness benefits of
personalization techniques in federated learning. Most existing work primarily focus on refining
algorithms to attain either improved local accuracy (the personalized FL literature), or, enhanced
(global) fairness (the fair FL literature); we discuss related work from each direction in Section 2. In
contrast, our work examines the influence of existing personalization techniques on group fairness
through theoretical analysis and numerical experiments, and points to inherent features of collabo-
rative learning and personalization that can advance fairness. Additionally, prior work points to the
challenge of balancing the trade-off between fairness and accuracy of an algorithm, as enhancing
fairness often comes at the cost of accuracy degradation (Gu et al., 2022; Ezzeldin et al., 2023). In
contrast, we identify instances that federated learning in general, and personalized FL in particular,
can improve both accuracy and fairness compared to standalone/independent learning.
Summary of findings and contributions. Our main findings and contributions are as follows:
  1. We show that collaborative learning algorithms can enhance local fairness compared to stan-
     dalone training, especially in the (commonly arising) situation where samples are imbalanced
     between two protected groups among clients (Section 4).
  2. We numerically show that introducing personalization techniques can improve local fairness
     compared to a (non-personalized) FedAvg algorithm on real-world data (the Retiring Adult
     dataset Ding et al. (2021)) (Section 4) and synthetic data (Section 5).
  3. We analytically show that, under certain conditions, personalization through clustering can lead
     to improved local fairness compared to a (non-personalized) FedAvg global model (Section 5).

2   R ELATED WORKS
In this section, we present an overview of the existing personalization techniques and the methods
for achieving fairness in the FL literature. We review additional related work in Appendix A.
Personalized FL. Existing literature can be categorized based on how personalization is achieved.
Model regularization: Hanzely & Richtárik (2020); Sahu et al. (2018); Li et al. (2021) add a regu-
larization term with mixing parameters to penalize the distance between the local and global models.
In particular, Sahu et al. (2018) has a pre-set regularization parameter and allows for system hetero-
geneity, where each client can have a different amount of work to do. Li et al. (2021) consider
improving accuracy, while being robust to data and model poisoning attacks, and fair. Similarly,
T Dinh et al. (2020) formulate a bi-level optimization problem, which helps decouple personalized
model optimization from learning the global model. Huang et al. (2021) propose the FedAMP algo-
rithm which also introduce an additional regularization term, but differ from the previous works in
that they encourage similar clients to collaborate more.
Clustering: Mansour et al. (2020) use a hypothesis-based clustering approach by minimizing the
sum of loss over all clusters. Sattler et al. (2020) use the idea that cosine similarity between weight
updates of different clients is highly indicative of the similarity of data distribution. Nardi et al.
(2022) use a decentralized learning idea by exchanging local models with other clients to find the
neighbor/group which has a high accuracy even using other clients’ models. Zheng et al. (2022)
learn a weighted and directed graph that indicates the relevance between clients. Ghosh et al. (2020)
use a distributed learning idea by broadcasting all clients models to others, and collecting back the
cluster identity from clients who can identify good performance when using others’ models.
Local fine-tuning: Fallah et al. (2020) propose using a Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML)
framework, where clients run additional local gradient steps to personalize the global model. Ari-


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


vazhagan et al. (2019); Jiang & Lin (2022) propose using deep learning models with a combination
of feature extraction layers (base) and global/local head (personalization). Jiang & Lin (2022), in-
spired by Arivazhagan et al. (2019), further consider robustifying against distribution shifts.
In this paper, we investigate the fairness achieved by the clustering and local fine-tuning categories.
Fairness in FL. This literature, surveyed recently in Shi et al. (2023); Rafi et al. (2023), can also be
categorized depending on the adopted notion of fairness as follows:
Performance fairness: This line of work measures fairness based on how well the learned model(s)
can achieve uniform accuracy across all clients. Li et al. (2019a) propose the q-fair FL algorithm
which minimizes the aggregate reweighted loss. The idea is that the clients with higher loss will be
assigned a higher weight so as to encourage more uniform accuracy across clients. Li et al. (2021)
further extend this by considering robustness and poisoning attacks; here, performance fairness and
robustness are achieved through a personalized FL method. Zhang et al. (2021) aim to achieve small
disparity in accuracy across the groups of client-wise, attribute-wise, and potential clients with ag-
nostic distribution, simultaneously. Wang et al. (2021) discuss the (performance) unfairness caused
by conflicting gradients. They detect this conflict through the notion of cosine similarity, and itera-
tively eliminate it before aggregation by modifying the direction and magnitude of the gradients.
Social fairness: This notion, which is also our notion of fairness in this paper, aims to minimize
the disparity in decisions made across different demographic/protected groups. Abay et al. (2020)
propose pre-processing (reweighting with differential privacy) and in-processing (adding fairness-
aware regularizer) methods to mitigate biases while protecting the data privacy. Zhang et al. (2020)
propose a fair FL framework consisting of a deep multi-agent reinforcement learning framework
and a secure information aggregation protocol. They design the reward aligned with maximizing the
global accuracy while minimizing the discrimination index between groups to overcome the accu-
racy and fairness trade-off challenge. Du et al. (2021) propose a fairness-aware agnostic FL frame-
work to train a globally fair model with unknown testing data distribution or with domain adaptation
through a kernel reweighting technique on both loss function and fairness constraints. Gálvez et al.
(2021) mimic the centralized fair setting and introduce an algorithm to enforce group fairness in
FL by extending the modified method of differential multiplier to empirical risk minimization with
fairness constraints. Zeng et al. (2021); Ezzeldin et al. (2023) propose an in-processing approach
to update the weight for each group based on the performance at each round, but they differ in the
reweighting technique. Ezzeldin et al. (2023) propose fairness-aware aggregation by adjusting the
weight based on how far the local fairness compared to global fairness, whereas Zeng et al. (2021)
update the weights according to iteratively solving a bi-level optimization problem similar to the
centralized fair learning algorithm. In contrast to all these works, we do not aim to impose a fairness
constraint, but show that improved group social fairness (and a better fairness-accuracy tradeoff) can
be achieved by personalization alone.


3    P ROBLEM FORMULATION


In this study, we consider a FL scenario involving a total of n clients, which can (potentially) be
categorized into two clusters denoted as c = {}, ⇤} based on similarities in their data distributions.
The number of clients in each cluster is denoted as |}| and |⇤|, where a fraction p of the clients
belong to the cluster }, such that |}| = np and |⇤| = n(1 p). Each client i is tasked with
a binary classification problem, where data points are randomly drawn from the joint distribution
fgy,c . A data point z = (x, y, g) comprises a feature or score denoted as x 2 R and a true label
denoted as y 2 {0, 1}. In this context, y = 1 and y = 0 represent qualified and unqualified
agents, respectively. Additionally, each data point is associated with a group membership denoted
as g 2 {a, b}, determined by demographic or protected attributes (e.g., race or gender). To classify
the data points, each client employs threshold-based, binary classifiers h✓ (x) : X ! {0, 1}.1 Here,
✓ represents the decision threshold for each client. Any data point belonging to group g with a
feature value x ✓g is assigned the label 1. The objective for each client may involve minimizing
the classification error, maximizing profit, or pursuing other relevant goals. For instance, the formula
    1
      Existing work in Corbett-Davies et al. (2017, Thm 3.2) and Raab & Liu (2021) show that threshold clas-
sifiers can be optimal if multi-dimensional features can be properly mapped into a one-dimensional space; we
could consider using the last layer outputs from a neural network as this one-dimensional representation.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for minimizing classification error can be expressed as follows, where ↵gy represents the fraction of
data in group g with label y and grg represents the fraction of data in group g:
                             X         ⇣ Z ✓                     Z 1            ⌘
                                          1       1            0
                     min           grg ↵g        fg (x)dx + ↵g        fg0 (x)dx                   (1)
                       ✓                       1                  ✓
                            g2{a,b}

FL algorithms. The FedAvg algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017) operates by establishing connections
between a central server and n distinct clients. The objective is to learn a global model w that
minimizes the average loss across all clients. During each communication round t, individual client i
receives the global model from the previous round wt 1 , performs a local update, and sends back the
updated model wit to the server. The server then (weighted) aggregates all the received local models
to create a new global model for the next round. In contrast, the clustered FL algorithm (Ghosh et al.,
2020) introduces additional steps beyond the FedAvg approach. It begins by clustering clients based
on model similarities. Once the clients are organized into clusters, the server (weighted) aggregates
the local models from each cluster, forming a cluster-specific model to be used for the next round
of training in that cluster. Similarly, the MAML FL algorithm (Fallah et al., 2020) also takes an
extra step beyond the FedAvg approach. It updates the received global model by running additional
gradient steps locally, and then the server (weighted) aggregates the updated models from each client
used for the next round of training.
Fairness metric: Considering the sensitive demographic information g in each data point within
our problem setting, our goal is to ensure fairness across different demographic groups. To measure
fairness, we adopt the statistical parity fairness metric (Dwork et al., 2012; Ezzeldin et al., 2023),
which emphasizes equalizing the positive classification rate for each group. Formally:
                          ASP D = |P r(ŷ = 1|g = a) P r(ŷ = 1|g = b)|
For the sake of simplicity in our theoretical analysis, we make the assumption that clients within the
same cluster are identical. Consequently, the ASP D calculated for each client can also serve as a
representation of the local fairness performance for the cluster to which the client belongs. Given
that the local fairness performance for an algorithm can be computed as a weighted sum of the local
fairness performance from each cluster, we also introduce the concept of average local fairness.
Definition 1. Let (✓) denote the cluster-wise average local statistical parity fairness gap under
different models’ optimal solution ✓, such that
                                  (✓) = pASP D} + (1 p)ASP D⇤


4   N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS


In this section, we compare the average local statistical parity fairness achieved by two personalized
FL algorithms (clustered FL Ghosh et al. (2020) from the clustering category, and MAML Fallah
et al. (2020) from the local fine-tuning category), against FedAvg and standalone learning (where
each client learns by itself, and there is no collaborative training).
We show experiments on the pre-processed Retiring adult dataset (Ding et al., 2021). The dataset
consists of census data collected from all 50 states in the US and Puerto Rico. In our context, each
individual state is a client within the FL framework. Each data sample includes multi-dimensional
features x (e.g., age, education, citizenship, etc.), a true label (denoted as y), and a protected at-
tribute (referred to as g, e.g., gender, race). To provide a more clear comparison of the effects of
personalization, we have manually scaled the feature set (x) by 60% for the states with IDs {1, 10,
20, 30, 40, 50}; this exacerbates the data heterogeneity. We focus on two binary classification tasks:
Employment (ACSEmployment) and Income (ACSIncome), and employ a two-layer neural network
for both tasks. Each client is provided with 1000 training samples and 2000 testing samples. The
local accuracy of FedAvg is computed as the average across all 51 clients when the common global
model is applied to their local datasets. For the clustered FL algorithm, this performance metric is
derived based on the corresponding cluster model for each client, and for MAML FL, it is from the
local model obtained after local fine-tuning. The values reported are the averages from 5 runs.
Further details regarding the datasets and models, and large (full) figures can be found in Ap-
pendix B. We also provide additional experiments on synthetic datasets in Section 5 and Appendix D.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   DATASETS WITH IMBALANCED GROUPS

We first consider the ACSEmployment dataset with race as the protected attribute. Fig 1(a) shows
the fraction of samples in each group/label, from several states, highlighting an imbalance between
samples from the White and Non-White groups. This is further evident in Figure 1(b), which shows
that most states have only ⇠ 10% qualified (label 1) samples from the Non-White group, in contrast
to ⇠ 35% qualified samples from the White group.


       (a) Fraction of samples      (b) Normalized sample frequency (c) Local accuracy vs. fairness gap
      Figure 1: Experiments using ACSEmployment dataset with imbalanced groups (Race)
From Fig 1(c), we can see that all collaborative training algorithms (FedAvg, MAML, Clustered FL)
have better local fairness (smaller gap) compared to standalone learning. This is expected because
each client has limited samples in their disadvantaged group, leading to poorly trained models with
high local fairness gaps (and low accuracy). However, collaborative training in essence has access to
more data, improving both metrics. For the same reason, the clustered FL algorithm which partitions
clients into two clusters, has (slightly) worse local fairness performance compared to FedAvg. In
contrast, the MAML (fine-tuning) algorithm, which effectively sees the global dataset when training
the global model, has both better local fairness compared to the FedAvg algorithm, indicating that
the introduction of personalization techniques can improve both local accuracy and fairness.

4.2   DATASETS WITH BETTER - BALANCED GROUPS

We next conduct experiments with more balanced groups. We again consider the ACSEmployment
dataset, but with gender as the protected attribute. We can see from Fig 2(a) that the fractions of
samples are more evenly distributed across groups and labels. Furthermore, Figure 2(b) confirms
that many states exhibit similar sample fractions between male and female groups, as indicated by
the greater overlap of the bars compared to Figure 1(b).


       (a) Fraction of samples       (b) Normalized sample frequency (c) Local accuracy vs. fairness gap
   Figure 2: Experiments using ACSEmployment dataset with better-balanced groups (Gender)
We first notice from Fig 2(c) that all collaborative training algorithms still have better local fairness
performance compared to standalone learning. Furthermore, we observe that both Clustered FL
and MAML FL achieve both better local accuracy and local fairness compared to FedAvg. This
is because for each client, due to similarity of the data for the male and female groups (as seen in
Figure 2(b)) the objective of maximizing local accuracy is aligned with reducing the fairness gap.
Therefore, bringing the personalization techniques into the FL paradigm can also improve local
fairness performance for free.
We also conduct experiments on another task, the ACSIncome dataset, again with gender as the pro-
tected attribute. We observe from Fig 3(a) that the fraction of samples is comparable across groups
for unqualified (label 0) data, but differs for qualified (label 1). From Fig 3(c), we observe that this


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) Fraction of samples      (b) Normalized sample frequency (c) Local accuracy vs. fairness gap
        Figure 3: Experiments using ACSIncome dataset with gender as protected attribute
time, all collaborative training algorithms have worse local fairness compared to standalone learn-
ing. Furthermore, we observe that the personalized FL algorithms slightly improve local fairness
compared to FedAvg, but this is less significant compared to the results in Fig 2(c). We believe
this is due to the objective of maximizing local accuracy not aligning with fairness. In other words,
collaborative training algorithms maximize the local accuracy performance while sacrificing the lo-
cal fairness performance. However, as we discussed in Fig 1(c), collaborative training could have
a chance to improve local fairness performance by seeing more information from diverse clients.
Therefore, a combined effect makes the overall local fairness advantages less significant.

4.3   C OMPARISON WITH FAIR FL ALGORITHMS

A natural question that may arise is why we do not utilize an existing fair FL algorithm to improve
fairness, as these might offer superior fairness compared to a personalized FL algorithm. Indeed, if
one only focuses on improving (global) fairness, choosing a dedicated Fair FL algorithm could be
the best choice. However, here we point to the additional (cost-free) local fairness improvements
achieved through the incorporation of personalization in FL. Our finding also suggest that this leads
to a more favorable trade-off between fairness and accuracy.
To show this, we consider the existing FairFed algorithm
(Ezzeldin et al., 2023), which adjusts the aggregation weight
according to a fairness metric with the goal of improving
(global) fairness. We also consider an extension of the al-
gorithm, FairFed-AF, which adjusts the aggregations weights
according to both accuracy and fairness metrics. The experi-
ments in Fig 4 use the ACSEmployment dataset with gender as
the protected attribute. We observe that fair FL algorithms can
achieve the best fairness among all other algorithms. However,     Figure 4: Comparison between Fe-
they have worse local accuracy compared to other collabora-        dAvg, fair FL, personalized, and
tive training algorithms, as they focus (at least partially) on    standalone training.
improving fairness and not accuracy.


5     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS AND ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES


To support and validate our findings from the numerical experiments, in this section, we provide
analytical results showing that clustered FL can lead to better fairness (measured by ASP Dc ) than
FedAvg under certain conditions. We provide additional intuition with numerical experiments show-
ing the impact of cluster sizes on the (cluster-wise) average local fairness (measured by (✓)). We
provide additional examples on synthetic data in Appendix D.
Fairness comparison setup: Let ✓⇤,c , ✓F A , and Fgy,c represent the optimal solutions for cluster
c in the clustered FL, the FedAvg algorithm, and the cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of
the data distributions of cluster c = {}, ⇤}, label y 2 {0, 1}, and group g 2 {a, b}, respectively.
Additionally, ↵gy,c denotes the fraction of group g data in cluster c with label y. To compare the local
fairness performance between the clustered FL and FedAvg algorithms, we for simplicity assume
that clients within the same cluster are identical. According to this assumption and the FedAvg
aggregation technique, the optimal solution for the FedAvg algorithm would lie between ✓⇤,} and


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


✓⇤,⇤ . Without loss of generality, we assume that ✓⇤,} < ✓⇤,⇤ . At the optimal solutions, for cluster
}, the local fairness can be expressed as follows:
   P r(ŷ = 1|g = a, c = }) = P r(ŷ = 1, y = 1|g = a, c = }) + P r(ŷ = 1, y = 0|g = a, c = })
                 Z 1                       Z 1
         = ↵a1,}       fa1,} (x)dx + ↵a0,}     fa0,} (x)dx = 1 ↵a1,} Fa1,} (✓⇤,} ) ↵a0,} Fa0,} (✓⇤,} )
                    ✓ ⇤,}                   ✓ ⇤,}
Therefore, the ASP D} = |↵b1,} Fb1,} (✓⇤,} ) + ↵b0,} Fb0,} (✓⇤,} )                 ↵a1,} Fa1,} (✓⇤,} )
↵a Fa (✓ )|, and the (✓ ) for the clustered FL algorithm is:
 0,} 0,} ⇤,}                     ⇤,c
               ⇣                                                                                    ⌘
    (✓⇤,c ) = p |↵b1,} Fb1,} (✓⇤,} ) + ↵b0,} Fb0,} (✓⇤,} ) ↵a1,} Fa1,} (✓⇤,} ) ↵a0,} Fa0,} (✓⇤,} )|
                  ⇣                                                                                    ⌘
       + (1 p) |↵b1,⇤ Fb1,⇤ (✓⇤,⇤ ) + ↵b0,⇤ Fb0,⇤ (✓⇤,⇤ ) ↵a1,⇤ Fa1,⇤ (✓⇤,⇤ ) ↵a0,⇤ Fa0,⇤ (✓⇤,⇤ )|
Similarly, the cluster-wise average local fairness for the FedAvg algorithm could be written in the
same manner. Considering the expressions presented above, we can observe that the first term
in (✓⇤,c ), weighted by the cluster size parameter p, represents the statistical parity fairness gap
within cluster } evaluated at its optimal decision threshold. Similarly, the second term, weighted
by 1 p, reflects the same phenomenon but within cluster ⇤. Consequently, the following propo-
sitions elucidate the impact of transitioning from the clustered FL solution, denoted as ✓⇤,c , to the
FedAvg solution, represented as ✓F A , on individual clusters. In essence, if the FedAvg solution
✓F A causes a deterioration in fairness for both clusters in comparison to the clustered FL solutions,
the cluster-wise average statistical parity fairness gap (✓F A ) will consequently exhibit a worse
local fairness performance than the clustered FL solutions. However, if the FedAvg solution ✓F A
results in worsened fairness for one cluster while simultaneously enhancing fairness for the other
cluster, the cluster-wise average fairness performance under the clustered FL solution could still be
improved, provided that the cluster experiencing an improvement in fairness has a larger cluster size.
For simplicity, the following propositions specifically focus on the scenario within cluster }, where
samples are drawn independently and identically from corresponding Gaussian distributions. The
analysis could also be applied to the cluster ⇤ in the same manner. These Gaussian distributions
exhibit equal variances denoted as but possess different mean estimates µyg . In this context, we
assume that µ0b  µ0a  µ1b  µ1a . Furthermore, both propositions investigate cases where there is
an equalized gap between mean estimates such that µ1a µ0a = µ1b µ0b . To provide a comprehensive
understanding, we also offer illustrative examples under scenarios where the gap is not equalized in
Appendix D. Proposition 1 considers an assumption of equalized label participation rates, where ↵gy
are the same across labels and groups. In contrast, Proposition 2 relaxes this assumption. In the
following analysis, we omit the cluster notation when it is clear from the context. Detailed proofs
are presented in Appendix C.
Proposition 1. Consider the problem setup and fairness comparison setup in Section 3 and 5,
within one cluster (e.g., }), we assume samples from label y and group g follow the Gaussian
distributions with equal variance and the corresponding mean estimates µyg . Furthermore, we
consider that each label distribution of the disadvantaged group (g = b) is located on the left-hand
side of the corresponding label distribution of the advantaged group (g = a) with equal distance
such that µ0b  µ0a  µ1b  µ1a and µ1a µ0a = µ1b µ0b . For simplicity, we assume the size of
samples with different labels y is balanced in two groups such that ↵gy are the same across labels and
groups. Let ✓⇤,} be the optimal decision threshold for cluster } obtained by solving 1. W.o.l.g., we
consider ✓⇤,} < ✓⇤,⇤ , the optimal decision threshold for the other cluster ⇤. Then, if the condition
       (µ1b µ0a )2                     (µ1a µ0b )2
exp(       8 2     )(µ1b µ0a ) exp(        8 2     )(µ1a µ0b ) holds, then there exist a cluster size weight
p such that the FedAvg solution ✓  FA
                                       := p✓   ⇤,}
                                                    + (1 p)✓⇤,⇤ will make the cluster } unfairer.
Proposition 2 (Extension of Prop. 1). Consider the setup in Proposition 1, we relax the balanced
label participation rate in two groups such that ↵gy could be different. Let ✓⇤,} and ✓¯ be the optimal
decision threshold for cluster } obtained by solving 1 and the algorithmic average of µyg . Then,
when the majority of samples are labeled 1 in two groups (e.g., ↵g1             ↵g0 ), or when grb       gra
and the majority of samples are labeled 1 in one group where the other group has a better balance
in label but the majority of samples are labeled differently (e.g., ↵a1 > ↵b0 > ↵b1 > ↵a0 ), if the
                      (✓¯ µ0a )2 ¯                   (✓¯ µ1b )2 ¯                      (✓¯ µ0b )2 ¯
condition ↵0 exp(
            a               22 )(✓ µ0 ) ↵1 exp(
                                     a       b           2  2 )(✓   µ1 )
                                                                     b       ↵0 exp(
                                                                              b         2     2 )(✓   µ0 )
                                                                                                      b
        (✓¯ µ )
              1 2
↵a1 exp( 2 a2 )(✓¯ µ1a ) holds, then there exist a cluster size weight p such that the FedAvg solution
✓F A := p✓⇤,} + (1 p)✓⇤,⇤ will make the cluster } unfairer.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Numerical illustration. We now conduct numerical experiments to illustrate the findings in Propo-
sition 1 and 2. The results are presented in Table 1 and 2. We proceed as follows: 10000 random
samples are drawn from Gaussian distribution for each group g 2 {a, b} with mean µyg and standard
deviation . The number of qualified (y = 1) and unqualified (y = 0) samples in each group is
proportional to the label participation rate ↵gy . Although the samples were generated in a consistent
manner across different parameter settings, we assumed an optimal decision threshold ✓⇤,⇤ = 8
for cluster ⇤, as both Propositions investigate the fairness performance for cluster }. In Table 1,
we consider the scenario where ↵gy = 0.5 8g, y. In contrast, different values of ↵gy are applied in
Table 2. Both results in Table 1 and 2 consider an equalized group rate such that gra = grb and
an equalized gap between mean estimates. We conducted each experiment 5 times and reported
the average value of the fairness gap. Additional comparative experiments, including cases with
unequalized group rates and gaps between mean estimates, are presented in Appendix D.
From Table 1, we can find that it offers crucial insights into the conditions required for Proposition 1
to hold. For fixed mean estimates µyg (rows 1-2), we observe that smaller values of are preferable
to satisfy the specified conditions. Similarly, for fixed (row 1, 3 and row 2, 4), larger differences
between µ1g and µ0g are advantageous in fulfilling the conditions outlined in Proposition 1. This
observation becomes intuitive at the extreme cases where the is sufficiently small or the distances
between µ1g and µ0g are sufficiently large. In these extreme scenarios, it becomes possible to consider
the samples as linearly separable. Therefore, the optimal decision threshold ✓⇤,} could achieve a
perfect classification as well as perfect fairness. As a result, the FedAvg solution ✓F A deviated from
the optimal solution will lead to a worse performance in both accuracy and fairness.
                 Table 1: Cluster } fairness performance with equalized gap and label rate
                    Distribution              Condition                           ASP D} (✓F A )
                                                              ASP D} (✓⇤,} )
                (µ1a , µ0a , µ1b , µ0b , )     satisfied                         p = 23   p = 12
                     (7, 4, 6, 3, 1)               Yes              0.1359      0.1814 "    0.1945 "
                     (7, 4, 6, 3, 2)               No               0.1499      0.1417 #    0.1315 #
                     (7, 5, 6, 4, 1)               No               0.1747      0.1638 #    0.1511 #
                     (8, 3, 6, 1, 2)               Yes              0.1866      0.1968 "    0.2033 "
Table 2 reveals insights regarding the influence of label distribution on fairness performance and
decision thresholds. Specifically, when the majority of samples in both groups are labeled as 1
(rows 1-2), the optimal decision threshold (✓⇤,} ) shifts leftward compared to the balanced scenario.
However, since ✓⇤,} < ✓⇤,⇤ , the FedAvg solution ✓F A will be greater than ✓⇤,} . Moreover, based
on the expression of the fairness gap (✓) = ↵b0 Fb0 (✓) + ↵b1 Fb1 (✓) ↵a0 Fa0 (✓) ↵a1 Fa1 (✓) and our
assumptions, we can find that ✓ will have even larger fairness gap when it is shifted to the right
because the rate of change in Fb1 (✓) is larger than that of Fa1 (✓), while the rate of change in Fg0 (✓) is
dominated by the terms Fg1 (✓), who have heavier weights, especially when the standard deviation
is small. Another intriguing observation is that in cases where the majority of samples have different
labels (row 3), the FedAvg solution (✓F A ) yields worse fairness performance when p = 2/3 but not
when p = 1/2. This outcome aligns with expectation, as the fairness gap approaches 0 as ✓ ! 1
in the definition of (✓). As the cluster size weight p enlarges (resp. reduces), the FedAvg solutions
✓F A will be closer to the ✓⇤,} (resp. ✓⇤,⇤ ), which also indicates a significant role played by the
cluster size weight (p) in shaping the overall cluster-wise average fairness performance, especially
when assessing the impact of FedAvg solutions on two clusters, } and ⇤.
                            Table 2: Cluster } fairness performance with equalized gap
     Distribution                   Label rate             Condition                         ASP D} (✓F A )
                                                                         ASP D} (✓⇤,} )
 (µ1a , µ0a , µ1b , µ0b ,   )   (↵a1 , ↵a0 , ↵b1 , ↵b0 )    satisfied                       p = 23   p = 12
                                (0.7, 0.3, 0.6, 0.4)          Yes            0.2062        0.2832 "    0.3041 "
                                (0.6, 0.4, 0.7, 0.3)          Yes            0.0453        0.1433 "    0.1961 "
     (7, 4, 6, 3, 1)
                                (0.7, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6)          Yes            0.3797        0.3962 "    0.3676 #
                                (0.6, 0.4, 0.3, 0.7)          No             0.3797        0.3598 #    0.3189 #
In Table 3, we delve into the cluster-wise average statistical parity fairness gap (✓) achieved with
different decision thresholds (optimal clustered FL solutions ✓⇤,c and FedAvg solutions ✓F A ). In
this investigation, we maintain the parameters in cluster ⇤ while varying those in cluster } to assess
fairness impact. We assume equalized group rates for this experiment, with additional experiments


                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


considering unequalized group rates provided in Appendix D. From the results in Table 3, we can
find that when both conditions are not satisfied (rows 5-6), there is a cluster size weight p such
that the FedAvg solutions would lead to better fairness performance for each cluster, consequently
yielding a lower cluster-wise average fairness gap. However, when only one cluster satisfies the
condition, meaning that there is a p such that the FedAvg solutions would only make one cluster
unfairer (rows 1-2), we could see that a relatively small p would let the clustered FL yield a better
fairness performance. Nevertheless, when p is sufficiently small, the FedAvg solutions will again
have superior fairness performance than the clustered FL solutions, similar to the results in rows 3-4.
Essentially, for each cluster c, there exists a range (pclow , pchigh ) such that, within this range, FedAvg
solutions result in worse fairness performance compared to clustered FL solutions. Consequently,
for any p 2 \c (pclow , pchigh ), clustered FL solutions yield a superior cluster-wise average statistical
parity fairness performance relative to FedAvg solutions.
                Table 3: Cluster-wise average fairness performance with equalized gap
           Distribution                   Label rate              Condition
       } :(µ1a , µ0a , µ1b , µ0b , )   (↵a1 , ↵a0 , ↵b1 , ↵b0 )               p     (✓⇤,c )    (✓F A )
       ⇤ :(µ1a , µ0a , µ1b , µ0b , )   (↵a1 , ↵a0 , ↵b1 , ↵b0 )   satisfied
             (7, 4, 6, 3, 2)           (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5)         No        4/5   0.147     0.144 #
            (10, 7, 9, 6, 1)           (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5)         Yes       1/3   0.141     0.160 "
             (7, 4, 6, 3, 2)           (0.8, 0.2, 0.3, 0.7)         Yes       1/4   0.205     0.199 #
            (10, 7, 9, 6, 1)           (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5)         Yes       1/2   0.274     0.277 "
             (7, 4, 6, 3, 2)           (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5)          No       1/3   0.254     0.222 #
            (10, 7, 9, 6, 1)           (0.7, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6)          No       2/3   0.202     0.166 #

6    C ONCLUSION , LIMITATIONS , AND EXTENSIONS

We studied the (unintended) fairness benefits of personalization techniques in federated learning.
Instead of relying on a dedicated fair FL algorithm, we can improve local fairness and have a po-
tentially more desirable fairness-accuracy tradeoff, through the introduction of personalization tech-
niques alone. We find that when samples are imbalanced, collaborative training (whether personal-
ized or not) can yield both better accuracy and better fairness than individual training. Moreover,
when the objectives of accuracy and fairness are aligned (as we identify in real-world datasets),
introducing personalization can also improve local fairness for free. Our analytical results provide
support for these findings under some conditions.
Distribution assumption. It’s essential to note that our analysis relies on the assumption that sam-
ples are drawn IID from the Gaussian distribution. Therefore, the derived conditions pertain specif-
ically to this distribution. An intriguing avenue for future work involves conducting a distribution-
agnostic investigation of fairness impacts. Furthermore, we’ve provided numerical support for sce-
narios with unequalized gaps between mean estimates in Appendix D. Extending the corresponding
theoretical analysis would be a valuable pursuit. The exploration of the existence of plow and phigh ,
as well as deriving closed-form expressions for these values, represents another intriguing direction.
Fairness. In this paper, our focus centers on local statistical parity fairness performance. However,
other fairness notions such as equality of opportunity and equalized odds, as well as the constrained
optimization problem remain unexplored and warrant further investigation. A comprehensive anal-
ysis, accompanied by numerical results, would also be worth exploring.
Personalization techniques. While this study treats clustering as a form of personalization tech-
nique, our analytical exploration primarily concerns the fairness impact between clustered FL algo-
rithms and FedAvg algorithms. In our experiments, we also explore the fairness impact using the
MAML FL algorithm. Extending the theoretical analysis to encompass other types of personalized
FL algorithms constitutes a promising avenue. Furthermore, investigating the impact of fairness
performance using a broader spectrum of personalized FL algorithms is a future direction.
FL setting. Our study focuses on a setting with two clusters, where clients within the same cluster
share identical data distribution and label fractions. Extending this framework to include multiple
clusters and acknowledging client heterogeneity within each cluster is a straightforward extension.
Additionally, allowing for drop-out clients, a scenario not considered in the current FL setting,
presents another avenue for exploration.


                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Annie Abay, Yi Zhou, Nathalie Baracaldo, Shashank Rajamoni, Ebube Chuba, and Heiko Ludwig.
  Mitigating bias in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02447, 2020.
Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Vinay Aggarwal, Aaditya Kumar Singh, and Sunav Choudhary. Fed-
 erated learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, 2019.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations
  and Opportunities. fairmlbook.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.
Lingyang Chu, Lanjun Wang, Yanjie Dong, Jian Pei, Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. Fedfair: Training
  fair models in cross-silo federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05662, 2021.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd acm sigkdd international conference
  on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 797–806, 2017.
Sen Cui, Weishen Pan, Jian Liang, Changshui Zhang, and Fei Wang. Addressing algorithmic dis-
  parity and performance inconsistency in federated learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:26091–26102, 2021.
Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Adaptive personalized federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13461, 2020.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:6478–6490, 2021.
Wei Du, Depeng Xu, Xintao Wu, and Hanghang Tong. Fairness-aware agnostic federated learning.
 In Proceedings of the 2021 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM), pp. 181–189.
 SIAM, 2021.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas I Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, et al. Towards mea-
  suring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.16388, 2023.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Yahya H Ezzeldin, Shen Yan, Chaoyang He, Emilio Ferrara, and A Salman Avestimehr. Fairfed:
  Enabling group fairness in federated learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7494–7502, 2023.
Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Personalized federated learning: A meta-
  learning approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07948, 2020.
Borja Rodrı́guez Gálvez, Filip Granqvist, Rogier van Dalen, and Matt Seigel. Enforcing fairness in
  private federated learning via the modified method of differential multipliers. In NeurIPS 2021
  Workshop Privacy in Machine Learning, 2021.
Avishek Ghosh, Jichan Chung, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. An efficient framework for
  clustered federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19586–
  19597, 2020.
Xiuting Gu, Zhu Tianqing, Jie Li, Tao Zhang, Wei Ren, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. Privacy,
  accuracy, and model fairness trade-offs in federated learning. Computers & Security, 122:102907,
  2022.
Filip Hanzely and Peter Richtárik. Federated learning of a mixture of global and local models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2002.05516, 2020.
Wei Huang, Tianrui Li, Dexian Wang, Shengdong Du, and Junbo Zhang. Fairness and accuracy in
 federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.10069, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang.
  Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In AAAI, pp. 7865–7873, 2021.
Liangze Jiang and Tao Lin. Test-time robust personalization for federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.10920, 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Baris Kirdemir, Joseph Kready, Esther Mead, Muhammad Nihal Hussain, Nitin Agarwal, and Don-
  ald Adjeroh. Assessing bias in youtube’s video recommendation algorithm in a cross-lingual and
  cross-topical context. In Social, Cultural, and Behavioral Modeling: 14th International Con-
  ference, SBP-BRiMS 2021, Virtual Event, July 6–9, 2021, Proceedings 14, pp. 71–80. Springer,
  2021.
Tian Li, Maziar Sanjabi, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Fair resource allocation in federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10497, 2019a.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
  learning through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6357–
  6368. PMLR, 2021.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019b.
Lingjuan Lyu, Xinyi Xu, Qian Wang, and Han Yu. Collaborative fairness in federated learning.
  Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 189–204, 2020.
Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jae Ro, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Three approaches for
  personalization with applications to federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10619, 2020.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Mehryar Mohri, Gary Sivek, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Agnostic federated learning. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4615–4625. PMLR, 2019.
Mirko Nardi, Lorenzo Valerio, and Andrea Passarella. Anomaly detection through unsupervised
 federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04184, 2022.
Afroditi Papadaki, Natalia Martinez, Martin Bertran, Guillermo Sapiro, and Miguel Rodrigues. Fed-
  erating for learning group fair models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01999, 2021.
Daniel Peterson, Pallika Kanani, and Virendra J Marathe. Private federated learning with domain
  adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06733, 2019.
Reilly Raab and Yang Liu. Unintended selection: Persistent qualification rate disparities and inter-
  ventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:26053–26065, 2021.
Taki Hasan Rafi, Faiza Anan Noor, Tahmid Hussain, and Dong-Kyu Chae. Fairness and privacy-
  preserving in federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08402, 2023.
Anit Kumar Sahu, Tian Li, Maziar Sanjabi, Manzil Zaheer, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06127, 3:3, 2018.
Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. Clustered federated learning: Model-
  agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints. IEEE transactions on neu-
  ral networks and learning systems, 32(8):3710–3722, 2020.
Yuxin Shi, Han Yu, and Cyril Leung. Towards fairness-aware federated learning. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Canh T Dinh, Nguyen Tran, and Josh Nguyen. Personalized federated learning with moreau en-
  velopes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21394–21405, 2020.
Zheng Wang, Xiaoliang Fan, Jianzhong Qi, Chenglu Wen, Cheng Wang, and Rongshan Yu. Feder-
  ated learning with fair averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14937, 2021.
Eric W Weisstein. Leibniz integral rule. https://mathworld. wolfram. com/, 2003.
Edvin Listo Zec, John Martinsson, Olof Mogren, Leon René Sütfeld, and Daniel Gillblad. Federated
  learning using mixture of experts. 2020.
Yuchen Zeng, Hongxu Chen, and Kangwook Lee. Improving fairness via federated learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2110.15545, 2021.
Daniel Yue Zhang, Ziyi Kou, and Dong Wang. Fairfl: A fair federated learning approach to re-
  ducing demographic bias in privacy-sensitive classification models. In 2020 IEEE International
  Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1051–1060. IEEE, 2020.
Fengda Zhang, Kun Kuang, Yuxuan Liu, Long Chen, Chao Wu, Fei Wu, Jiaxun Lu, Yunfeng Shao,
  and Jun Xiao. Unified group fairness on federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04986,
  2021.
Guojun Zhang, Saber Malekmohammadi, Xi Chen, and Yaoliang Yu. Proportional fairness in fed-
  erated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01666, 2022.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated
  learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.
Xue Zheng, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Aylin Yener. Diple: Learning directed collaboration graphs
  for peer-to-peer personalized learning. In 2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), pp.
  446–451. IEEE, 2022.


                                               12
