Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H YBRID R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR O PTIMIZ -
ING P UMP S USTAINABILITY IN R EAL -W ORLD WATER
D ISTRIBUTION N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         This article addresses the pump-scheduling optimization problem to enhance real-
         time control of real-world water distribution networks (WDNs). Our primary ob-
         jectives are to adhere to physical operational constraints while reducing energy
         consumption and operational costs. Traditional optimization techniques, such
         as evolution-based and genetic algorithms, often fall short due to their lack of
         convergence guarantees. Conversely, reinforcement learning (RL) stands out for
         its adaptability to uncertainties and reduced inference time, enabling real-time
         responsiveness. However, the effective implementation of RL is contingent on
         building accurate simulation models for WDNs, and prior applications have been
         limited by errors in simulation training data. These errors can potentially cause
         the RL agent to learn misleading patterns and actions and recommend suboptimal
         operational strategies. To overcome these challenges, we present an improved
         “hybrid RL” methodology. This method integrates the benefits of RL while an-
         choring it in historical data, which serves as a baseline to incrementally introduce
         optimal control recommendations. By leveraging operational data as a foundation
         for the agent’s actions, we enhance the explainability of the agent’s actions, fos-
         ter more robust recommendations, and minimize error. Our findings demonstrate
         that the hybrid RL agent can significantly improve sustainability, operational effi-
         ciency, and dynamically adapt to emerging scenarios in real-world WDNs.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Water is essential for sustaining life and supporting various economic activities, making its man-
agement a pressing global challenge. Effective water management crucially depends on optimizing
pump operations within water distribution networks (WDNs). These networks facilitate the seam-
less transportation of water from its sources to consumers and serve as the backbone of urban and
rural infrastructure (Abkenar et al., 2015).
In the water utility sector, electricity consumption costs have been an ongoing concern for water
providers. However, a recent global surge in electricity prices has pushed these costs to the fore-
front of challenges in operating WDNs (Mala-Jetmarova et al., 2017). Consequently, the effective
management of WDN resources not only encompasses safeguarding water availability but also in
optimizing its efficient utilization and transportation.
The complexity of this challenge becomes evident when one considers the multifaceted nature of
water networks. Demand patterns exhibit fluctuations, energy costs vary, and network conditions
evolve in real-time. Traditional rule-based control strategies, which have historically governed pump
operations in WDNs, struggle to adapt to the dynamic and uncertain nature of real-world systems.
The simultaneous pursuit of conflicting objectives, maximizing energy efficiency while guaranteeing
a consistent water supply, adds layers of intricacy.
In response to these challenges, reinforcement learning (RL), a branch of machine learning equip-
ping agents to make sequential decisions through interactions with their environment, emerges as
a promising solution (Dong et al., 2020). The application of RL techniques to WDNs unveils a
realm of exciting possibilities. It empowers water utilities to dynamically optimize pump opera-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tions, promising significant enhancements in efficiency, reduced energy consumption, and overall
system performance.
As this research unfolds, the transformative potential of this work on water management practices
becomes evident. It reveals formidable challenges that must be surmounted to realize this vision.
Addressing these challenges involves the meticulous design of reward functions, the development
of effective exploration strategies, and the utilization of advanced neural network architectures. The
overarching objective is to strike a delicate balance between energy efficiency and water supply
reliability, guided by the principles of data-driven decision-making.
In summary, this paper delves into the critical intersection of water management, electricity costs,
and the application of RL techniques to optimize WDNs. It explores the promise of enhanced
efficiency and sustainability while acknowledging the challenges that lie ahead in achieving this
vision.

2     BACKGROUND

2.1   G ENETIC A LGORITHMS FOR WDN O PTIMIZATION

In recent years, the field of operating WDNs has witnessed a surge in the application of various
optimization methods. These approaches can be broadly categorized into three primary groups:
Deterministic methods, Stochastic methods (also known as Metaheuristics), and Hybrid methods, as
detailed in Awe et al. (2019).
One of the most popular stochastic optimization methods is genetic algorithm (GA). Several research
studies have successfully demonstrated the use of GA for optimizing pump operations in WDNs, re-
sulting in energy cost savings (Boulos et al., 2001; Gupta et al., 1999). However, it’s worth noting
that standalone use of GA can face challenges. Van Zyl et al. (2004) showed a decrease in con-
vergence speed was observed when using GA exclusively. To address this issue, they proposed a
hybrid model that combines GA with a hill-climber search strategy, aiming to overcome the slow-
down in convergence. Similarly, Batista do Egito et al. (2023) focused on an optimization model
utilizing GA which aims to merge the efficient utilization of reservoirs with the identification of
the most effective operational rules for activating pumping systems. Parvaze et al. (2023) examines
several advancements in optimizing WDNs. It highlights the utilization of GA as a powerful search
method for addressing non-linear optimization challenges. In another study, Sangroula et al. (2022)
introduced the “Smart Optimization Program for Water Distribution Networks” (SOP-WDN), which
utilizes GA in conjunction with the EPANET hydraulic simulation solver to optimize WDN design.
While utilizing GA for real-world problem-solving, several challenges emerge. These hurdles find
effective solutions through the application of RL techniques. GAs involve computationally intensive
processes (Chugh et al., 2019; Katoch et al., 2021). RL addresses this challenge by employing learn-
ing algorithms that optimize decision-making through interactions with the environment, resulting
in reduced computational costs. While GAs may not consistently converge to optimal solutions
and offer no guarantee of reaching the best outcome (Katoch et al., 2021), RL agents continually
learn from feedback, refining their policies and converging to near-optimal solutions, providing a
more dependable approach. Moreover, GAs typically demand a substantial number of samples to
yield desirable results, and their time-consuming nature often takes hours to produce real-time pump
scheduling results (Hu et al., 2023). In contrast, RL excels in real-time recommendation systems,
making rapid decisions based on learned policies, outperforming GAs in this regard.

2.2   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR WDN O PTIMIZATION

In recent years, there has been a growing trend in favor of machine learning techniques, particularly
RL, which are increasingly recognized as reliable alternatives to traditional optimization methods.
For instance, Hu et al. (2023) introduced a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) framework to ad-
dress real-time pump scheduling challenges within water distribution systems, effectively reducing
energy costs without compromising water levels. Similarly, Hajgató et al. (2020) developed an agent
employing a dueling deep Q-network, trained to regulate pump speeds based on real-time nodal
pressure data. Additionally, Xu et al. (2021) proposed the incorporation of Knowledge-Assisted
learning into the framework (KA-RL) to enhance state value evaluation and guide reward function


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


design. This approach leverages historical data from WDNs to generate optimal trajectories while
considering parametric variations.
Although all of the aforementioned methods focus on enhancing performance using RL, this paper
goes a step further by introducing a novel hybrid RL approach. This strategy gradually integrates
RL-based solutions with existing query-based ones, ensuring long-term reliability and trust. It si-
multaneously enhances RL-based solutions and maintains system performance. By addressing the
challenges associated with GAs and harnessing the power of RL, this hybrid RL approach aims to
revolutionize the optimization of WDNs.


3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We define the problem of optimizing pumps in a WDN as a sequential Markov decision process
(MDP), which consists of the following key elements:

       • For the state space, we investigate two types of agents. For Agent 1, whose objective is to
         monitor constraint violations, each state s ∈ S1 is defined by the levels of six unique tanks,
         resulting in a state dimension of six. For Agent 2, whose objective is to monitor constraint
         violations and to optimize for cost savings, each state s ∈ S2 is defined by the levels of
         six unique tanks, a scalar representing temporal information, and 96 distinct energy tariffs,
         resulting in a state dimension of 103.
       • Each action a ∈ A is a 6-dimensional vector of real-valued control variables, representing
         the operational settings of components like pumps and valves. In our final configuration, we
         utilize six distinct control stations, with each dimension of the action vector corresponding
         to one of these stations.
       • The reward rt is designed for specific objectives, such as minimizing tank level constraint
         violations or with an aim to reduce energy costs. There’s a preference for simpler step-
         based rewards for minimizing tank level violations and a balanced multi-objective reward
         for integrating constraints with energy costs. A detailed reward function will be described
         in section 4.3.
       • The transition function is deterministic, where st+1 = f (st , at ).
       • Each episode is terminated at 96 timesteps, equivalent to a 1-day horizon with a 15-minute
         resolution.

We train an RL agent to learn an optimal policy πθ in order to maximize the expected discounted
rewards:

                                                  " T                 #
                                                   X
                                                           t
                                     max Eτ ∼πθ           γ r(st , at ) ,                                (1)
                                      πθ
                                                    t=0


where trajectory τ = (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , ..., sT , aT ), θ is the parameterization of policy π, and γ is the
discounted factor.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   DATASET

Data from a water utility company was used to train our RL agent and conduct experiments and
assessments. The environment used to train our RL agent is shown in Figure 1. The experiments
used this WDN’s historical operational data, collected at 15-minute intervals from 2019 to 2023.
Key parameters, including tank levels, pump flows/speed, pump power, water demands, and tariff
information were available for analysis. The primary objective was to generate optimized control
recommendations for components like pumps and valves for the following 24 hours.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: WDN of a water utility company with six pump/valve stations, six reservoirs, and 18
demand zones. A machine-learning based simulation was built for this complex structure to forecast
the demand for 24 hours and simulate the resulting tank levels.


4.2      RL T RAINING D ETAILS

All of our policies are trained using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.,
2017). We use RLlib’s1 implementation of PPO and its default hyper-parameters except
train batch size, with variations [192, 256, 512, 1024] and the configuration with the high-
est reward was selected. To optimize training efficiency and parallelization, an AWS EC2 instance,
namely the g4dn.16xlarge, was employed. This instance accommodated the simultaneous training
of multiple agents through the utilization of 15 worker processes, streamlining the experimentation
process.
In subsequent sections, we detail the reward function design for optimizing real-time pump schedul-
ing in the WDN using RL.

4.3      R EWARD F UNCTION :

Reward functions were tailored for specific objectives within the problem domain. Consideration
was given to both a singular objective of minimizing tank level constraint violations and a dual
objective of minimizing tank level constraint violations while reducing energy costs. Various reward
function designs, including step, linear distance-based, and exponential rewards, were explored.
The step reward design was ultimately selected for its simplicity and superior performance for the
singular objective of minimizing tank level constraint violations.
For the dual objective of reducing tank level constraint violations and minimizing energy costs, a
multi-objective reward function was devised according to Algorithm 1. This function integrated
the step reward for constraint violation reduction with an energy cost-based reward component.
The weights of these reward components were carefully adjusted to achieve a balance between the
dual objectives while keeping higher priority for the constraint violation reduction. This approach
allowed for the creation of an effective reward function tailored to the research problem, enabling
improved decision-making by the agent.
After training our RL agent, we prepared a list of experiments so that we can evaluate its perfor-
mance in energy saving and constraint violation, especially when introducing various real-world
initial conditions and abnormal demand patterns.
The following results are generated using a PPO agent from RLlib with a custom Gym environment.

   1
       RLlib: https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/rllib/index.html


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Reward Function for Dual Objectives Agent 2
 1: for t ∈ {1, . . . , 96} do
 2:     Agent takes an action at for state st
 3:
 4:     reward multiplier ← 1
 5:     constraint w, energy w ← 0.7, 0.3                      ▷ Assign weights for both objectives
 6:     rewardconstraint ← 0
 7:     rewardenergy ← 0
 8:     rewardmax ← length(level channels) × (reward multiplier)
 9:     rewardmin ← length(level channels) × (−reward multiplier)
10:     cost norm ← normalized tariff from 0 to 1
11:
12:     for tank channel in level channels do
13:         Lt ← level of tank channel
14:         lb, ub ← Get lower bound and upper bound for channel
15:         if lb ≤ Lt ≤ ub then
16:              rewardconstraint ← rewardconstraint + reward multiplier
17:         else
18:              rewardconstraint ← rewardconstraint − reward multiplier
19:         end if
20:     end for
                                      constraint −rewardmin
21:     rewardconstraint ← reward
                                rewardmax −rewardmin                 ▷ Normalize constraint reward
22:
23:     for energy channel in energy channels do
24:         Et ← energy of energy channel
                               t −Emin
25:         E normt ← EEmax      −Emin
26:         cost normt ← E normt × cost normt                   ▷ Calculate normalized energy cost
27:         rewardenergy ← rewardenergy + cost normt                       ▷ Update energy reward
28:     end for
29:
30:     reward(rt ) ← (constraint w × rewardconstraint ) + (energy w × rewardenergy )
31: end for



5     RL AGENT R ESULTS

Figure 2 illustrates reward curves corresponding to distinct agents each with tailored objectives.

5.1   AGENTS ’ P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON WITH M EASURED DATA

Table 1 summarizes the key findings of two RL agent configurations: prioritizing constraint ad-
herence (Agent 1) and addressing both constraint compliance and cost optimization (Agent 2). To
conduct testing, a total of 330 random sample cases were selected from history ensuring diversity of
tank level starting conditions, various demand patterns, and efficiency of pump operations.
Our results demonstrate remarkable improvements in constraint adherence. RL Agent 1, designed
for a single objective, achieved a remarkable 90% reduction in total out-of-boundary area compared
to historical operational data, along with a notable 93% reduction in number of violations. Equally
remarkable was the performance of the dual-objective RL Agent 2, achieving substantial reductions
of 88% in total out-of-boundary area and 87% in the number of violations. Despite the additional
objective of cost optimization, Agent 2 achieved a 0.2% cost savings, in contrast to a 1.1% loss when
cost was not considered. This underscores the high importance of minimizing constraint violations,
as reflected in the reward function’s design, which places a strong emphasis on this objective.
These findings underscore the tremendous potential of RL agents in addressing multifaceted opti-
mization challenges. By effectively balancing constraints and cost considerations, RL methods offer
a powerful solution for industries where system performance and cost-efficiency are paramount. As
the demand for adaptable and efficient systems continues to grow, our research highlights the im-


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Constraints               (b) Constraints + Cost           (c) Constraints + Cost + Toggle

Figure 2: Reward curves for different Agents serving different objectives. Agent 1 is primarily
focused on constraint violations, while Agent 2 is designed with a dual objective, aiming to reduce
both constraint violations and overall cost. Agent 3 adopts a dual objective approach with a focus on
frame-skipping for efficient toggle management. All these curves demonstrate robust and consistent
convergence patterns for all the agents, highlighting the stability of their performance.

               Table 1: Performance comparison of two agents with different objectives

      Source of Control Set-Points   Area Out of Boundary         Number of Violation        Cost
      Historical Operational Data            51475                       9493                  -
                                            5314                         661               1.1% loss
         Agent 1 (constraints)
                                      (90% improvement)           (93% improvement)
                                            5974                        1192             0.2% savings
      Agent 2 (constraints + cost)
                                      (88% improvement)           (87% improvement)


pact of RL agents in optimizing complex systems, ensuring compliance with critical constraints, and
minimizing operational costs.


5.2    F RAME -S KIPPING TO H ANDLE T OGGLE - COUNT R EQUIREMENT

The agent’s prior approach involved issuing action recommendations every 15 minutes for the up-
coming 24-hour period, which caused an undesirable lack of control smoothness. This frequent and
substantial alteration in pump operations and control introduced the potential for unforeseen system
issues. In response to this challenge, we explored the concept of “frame-skipping” (Kalyanakrish-
nan et al., 2021). This strategic methodology imposes restrictions on the agent’s action changes,
governed by a predefined “toggle-count,” thereby ensuring a more consistent set of control recom-
mendations. Frame-skipping deliberately omits action decisions at specified intervals, allowing the
agent to maintain its existing chosen action within the n-frame window. Moreover, the environment
updates the system’s state only after a specific number of frames and provides rewards within a cor-
responding frame window, enhancing the agent’s proficiency in making accurate decisions for the
subsequent frame window.
The results of an additional 40 test cases are presented in Table 2, illustrating the impact of setting
the frame-skipping window to two hours and permitting the agent to issue a maximum of 12 actions
over a 24-hour time frame. This marks a noteworthy reduction from the 96 actions allowed in the
absence of toggle-count constraints. While this additional constraint does affect performance with
regard to constraint violation objectives, it successfully achieves the objective of ensuring smoother
control. This adaptive approach significantly enhances system stability and efficiency, effectively
reducing the risk of unexpected disruptions in pump and valve operations, all while optimizing the
performance of real-time WDNs.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 2: Performance comparison of the agent without toggle-count vs. with toggle-count

     Source of Control Set-Points    Area Out of Boundary     Number of Violation     Cost Savings
     Historical Operational Data              6974                    1185                 -
                                             1136                     239                0.56%
    Agent 2 (without toggle count)
                                       (84% improvement)       (80% improvement)
                                             1958                     471                0.25%
     Agent 3 (with toggle count)
                                       (72% improvement)       (60% improvement)


6    H YBRID RL

Leveraging RL to control WDNs necessitates an emphasis on the interpretability and stability of
recommendations, particularly given the inherent risks of disruptions or violations of physical con-
straints. To engender trust and promote the seamless integration of RL-derived recommendations,
we have embraced a hybrid approach. This methodology seeks to gradually incorporate RL into
pump optimization strategies, grounded in a historical baseline given by a query model. In this
combined framework, the query-based model acts as a foundation for pump optimization rooted
in historical data and established rules. Concurrently, hybrid RL formulates control recommenda-
tions from the RL agent for a subset of the upcoming 24-hour window based on distinct criteria
and subsequently melds these with the outputs from the query-based model. This synergy between
machine learning and empirical data allows us to capitalize on the merits of RL, while ensuring that
recommendations not only adhere to the physical constraints of the system but also remain within
the comfort zone of historically routine operations.
To fully understand the advantage of using RL alongside results from a query-based model for build-
ing trust, it is essential to describe the workings of the query model itself. The recommendations
provided by this model are grounded in historical data that closely matches the current state of the
system. Factors such as current tank levels, network volume, and forecasted demand are observed
and matched against historical operational data. The resulting control points tied to the closest
matching historical state are then presented as the primary recommendations for the simulation.
However, even with this control-point input, the simulator’s outcome might still breach certain rules
and constraints due to cumulative simulation error, as shown in Figure 3a, and the possibility that
the most proximal historical matches to the current state were not similar enough.


    (a) Mean Absolute % Error (MAPE) Simulation          (b) Example of Area Outside of Boundary

Figure 3: Metrics used in evaluating performance of simulation and hybrid RL experiments. MAPE
of simulation shows error range comparing simulated tank levels vs. historical operational data when
simulating a subsequent 24-hour period. Area Outside of Boundary serves as a metric for success in
adhering to operational constraints. Reducing this metric quantifies progress and allows comparison
between hybrid RL strategies.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When the historical recommendation generates a simulation that violates physical constraints, the
RL agent can be utilized to inject its recommendation and align the recommendation with learned
boundaries. The inherent question then becomes the optimal timing, location, and extent of RL agent
injection with the simulation result from historical matching. We conducted several experiments to
determine the best answers to these questions, resulting in a hybrid RL recommendation effectively
leveraging both paradigms.
A dataset of time series that included constraint violations from simulation was collected and the RL
agent setup to inject its recommendation. The primary metric employed for evaluating the outcomes
of the experiments was the minimization of the area outside of boundary, specifically, the aggre-
gate distance from values exceeding the boundaries to their closest permissible boundary, shown in
Figure 3b. By monitoring this metric during and after injection, we could analyze different strate-
gies to both improve the simulation and give stable recommendations for future behavior. Multiple
scenarios were tested to observe the hybrid RL agent behavior and evaluate whether the agent was
reducing overall constraint violation results and improving the metric:
1. Untargeted Start/End Time: Constraint violations within a sample of 24-hour periods were
analyzed. The RL agent provided recommendations at static points, specifically not targeting the
start and end times of these violations. We examined two separate injection intervals: 0-2 hours and
12-14 hours. The aim was to determine whether total overall violations in the 24-hour span were
improved. This approach offered insights into understanding the RL agent’s performance under a
straightforward strategy, and the results demonstrated improvement even in this untargeted setting.
Notably, Figure 4 shows the injections during the hours 12-14 demonstrated superior performance
(-16.5% during and -13.1% after injection) compared to those between hours 0-2 (-12.5% during
and -9.4% after injection). This can be attributed to the higher likelihood of the untargeted injection
being more proximal to the violation itself.
2. Targeted Start/End Time: In this experiment, the RL agent’s recommendations were imple-
mented exclusively during the constraint violation time window. Figure 4 shows violations during
the injection period were further reduced from untargeted injection (-16.5% to -22.4%). An insignif-
icant worsening (-13.1% to -12.8% reduction) was noted in the post-injection metric. This strategy’s
ability to decrease simulation error while not significantly affecting the overall recommendation es-
tablished it as the foundational approach for subsequent experiments.


Figure 4: Reducing constraint violations across hybrid RL strategies. Starting with an untargeted
strategy (1a, 1b), then targeted (2), combined targeted-dynamic (3), and finally fully dynamic (4).
While violations during injection consistently improve, post-injection metrics deteriorate with the
fully dynamic approach, underscoring the benefit of only dynamically optimizing the end time.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3. Targeted Start/Dynamic End Time: Results from the previous experiment showed that while
violation periods were improved by targeted injection, new violations were sometimes introduced
in subsequent post-injection time. To rectify this behavior, we introduced a dynamic ending point
leveraging knowledge of the simulation’s behavior. It was observed that the simulation behavior
demonstrated a linear relative shift and not an absolute change when varying the initial point values.
This behavior facilitated rapid prediction and analysis of post-injection simulation. Figure 4 shows
that an optimal ending time for RL injection was found that reduced during-injection violations
further (-22.4% to -23.1%), while also improving post-injection violations (-12.8% to -14.8%).
4. Dynamic Start/Dynamic End Time: Building on the observed improvements from introducing
a dynamic end time, it was a natural next step to consider adjusting the injection start time dynam-
ically in hopes of further minimizing recommendation violations. While linear adjustments in the
simulation proved effective for optimizing the RL injection end time, this method was unsuitable
for altering the RL agent’s start time. Consequently, any variations of start time before the violation
meant a whole new inference by the RL agent. By searching these scenarios to find an optimal injec-
tion start time, we observed an improved reduction in during-injection metrics (-23.1% to -29.4%).
However, a significant degradation of post-injection metrics emerged (-14.8% to -10.2%), as shown
in Figure 4. Introducing the injection prematurely caused destabilization in the relationship between
agent and simulation, as measured by post-injection metrics. Subsequent work will explore the in-
jection timing not solely based on the start time but potentially as a function of the boundary value
itself or the series trend preceding violation.

7   C ONCLUSION
The integration of reinforcement learning (RL) into our methodology represents a substantial ad-
vancement over conventional techniques to optimize operations in water distribution networks
(WDNs). RL’s inherent strength lies in its dynamic adaptability to evolving conditions and its ca-
pability for real-time decision-making. RL enables the precise determination of optimal control
set-points which are responsive to the fluctuations of demand, energy costs, and network adjust-
ments within WDNs. Moreover, the efficiency of RL in terms of sample utilization accelerates its
convergence towards optimal solutions, resulting in a significant enhancement in overall operational
efficiency and performance in WDNs. By leveraging critical inputs such as initial tank levels, tariff
structures, and demand forecasts, our methodology identifies control set-points that strike a balance
between cost savings and adherence to operational constraints.
Our comprehensive hybrid RL approach combines RL-based techniques with a query-based warm
start strategy, empowering us to deliver real-time optimal control set-points for WDNs that are
grounded in historical operational data. The strategic combination of a query-based warm start
method with RL harnesses their respective advantages, offering operators dependable and econom-
ically viable recommendations for optimizing pump control in WDNs, thus ensuring efficient op-
eration while adhering to operational constraints. During the deployment phase, the gradual intro-
duction of RL-based control set-points not only serves to bolster the robustness of the final control
strategy, but integrates with the current operational routine to account for potential errors that may
arise during the simulation process. Ultimately, the hybrid RL approach combines the reliability of
historical data with the adaptability of reinforcement learning, providing an unparalleled solution
for enhancing the efficiency and reliability of WDN operations.

R EFERENCES
Seyed Mohsen Sadatiyan Abkenar, Samuel Dustin Stanley, Carol J Miller, Donald V Chase, and
  Shawn P McElmurry. Evaluation of genetic algorithms using discrete and continuous methods
  for pump optimization of water distribution systems. Sustainable Computing: Informatics and
  Systems, 8:18–23, 2015.
OM Awe, STA Okolie, and OSI Fayomi. Optimization of water distribution systems: A review. In
 Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 1378, pp. 022068. IOP Publishing, 2019.
Tuane Batista do Egito, José Roberto Gonçalves de Azevedo, and Saulo de Tarso Marques Bezerra.
  Optimization of the operation of water distribution systems with emphasis on the joint optimiza-
  tion of pumps and reservoirs. Water Supply, 23(3):1094–1105, 2023.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paul F Boulos, Zheng Wu, Chun Hou Orr, Michael Moore, Paul Hsiung, and Devan Thomas. Opti-
  mal pump operation of water distribution systems using genetic algorithms. In Distribution system
  symposium. Citeseer, 2001.
Tinkle Chugh, Karthik Sindhya, Jussi Hakanen, and Kaisa Miettinen. A survey on handling com-
  putationally expensive multiobjective optimization problems with evolutionary algorithms. Soft
  Computing, 23:3137–3166, 2019.
Hao Dong, Hao Dong, Zihan Ding, Shanghang Zhang, and Chang. Deep Reinforcement Learning.
  Springer, 2020.
Indrani Gupta, Apurba Gupta, and P Khanna. Genetic algorithm for optimization of water distribu-
  tion systems. Environmental Modelling & Software, 14(5):437–446, 1999.
Gergely Hajgató, György Paál, and Bálint Gyires-Tóth. Deep reinforcement learning for real-time
  optimization of pumps in water distribution systems. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
  Management, 146(11):04020079, 2020.
Shiyuan Hu, Jinliang Gao, Dan Zhong, Rui Wu, and Luming Liu. Real-time scheduling of pumps in
  water distribution systems based on exploration-enhanced deep reinforcement learning. Systems,
  11(2):56, 2023.
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan, Siddharth Aravindan, Vishwajeet Bagdawat, Varun Bhatt, Harshith
  Goka, Archit Gupta, Kalpesh Krishna, and Vihari Piratla. An analysis of frame-skipping in rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03718, 2021.
Sourabh Katoch, Sumit Singh Chauhan, and Vijay Kumar. A review on genetic algorithm: past,
  present, and future. Multimedia tools and applications, 80:8091–8126, 2021.
Helena Mala-Jetmarova, Nargiz Sultanova, and Dragan Savic. Lost in optimisation of water distri-
  bution systems? a literature review of system operation. Environmental modelling & software,
  93:209–254, 2017.
Sabah Parvaze, Rohitashw Kumar, Junaid Nazir Khan, Nadhir Al-Ansari, Saqib Parvaze, Dinesh Ku-
  mar Vishwakarma, Ahmed Elbeltagi, and Alban Kuriqi. Optimization of water distribution sys-
  tems using genetic algorithms: A review. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, pp.
  1–36, 2023.
Uchit Sangroula, Kuk-Heon Han, Kang-Min Koo, Kapil Gnawali, and Kyung-Taek Yum. Optimiza-
  tion of water distribution networks using genetic algorithm based sop–wdn program. Water, 14
  (6):851, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Jakobus E Van Zyl, Dragan A Savic, and Godfrey A Walters. Operational optimization of water
  distribution systems using a hybrid genetic algorithm. Journal of water resources planning and
  management, 130(2):160–170, 2004.
Jiahui Xu, Hongyuan Wang, Jun Rao, and Jingcheng Wang. Zone scheduling optimization of pumps
   in water distribution networks with deep reinforcement learning and knowledge-assisted learning.
   Soft Computing, 25:14757–14767, 2021.


                                                10
