Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GNRK: G RAPH N EURAL RUNGE -K UTTA     METHOD
FOR SOLVING PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Neural networks have proven to be efficient surrogate models for tackling partial
         differential equations (PDEs). However, they may perform poorly or even be in-
         applicable when deviating from the conditions for which the models are trained,
         in contrast to classical PDE solvers that rely on numerical differentiation. Strik-
         ing a balance between efficiency and versatility, this study introduces a novel ap-
         proach called Graph Neural Runge-Kutta (GNRK), which integrates graph neural
         network modules with a recurrent structure inspired by the classical solvers. The
         GNRK operates on graph structures, ensuring its resilience to changes in spatial
         and temporal resolutions during domain discretization. Moreover, it demonstrates
         the capability to address general PDEs, irrespective of initial conditions or PDE
         coefficients. To assess its performance, we benchmark the GNRK against exist-
         ing neural network based PDE solvers using the 2-dimensional Burgers’ equation,
         revealing the GNRK’s superiority in terms of model size and accuracy. Addition-
         ally, this graph-based methodology offers a straightforward extension for solving
         coupled differential equations, typically necessitating more intricate models.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In the fields of science, engineering, and economics, the governing equations are given in the form
of partial differential equations (PDEs). Solving these equations numerically for cases where the
analytical solution is unkown is a crucial problem. Historically, various types of PDE solvers have
been developed. Recently, neural network (NN)-based PDE solvers have been intensively studied in
the field of scientific machine learning.
The prototype of an NN solver with a solution ansatz using initial and boundary conditions was first
proposed in 1998 (Lagaris et al., 1998). By extending this concept to automatic differentiation in
backpropagation, an equation-based model reflecting the PDE, and the initial and boundary condi-
tions of the loss function has been successfully proposed (Raissi et al., 2019). This is a data-free
function learning method that maps the PDE domain (position, time, etc.) to a solution function.
More recently, an operator learning models that map the initial or source functions of PDEs to the
solution functions were proposed (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019). These are the equation-free, data-
based learning methods based on universal approximators of neural networks for operators (Chen
& Chen, 1995). In the latter case, myriad of variants have been proposed from the view point of
operator parameterization (Shin et al., 2022) and geometry adaptation (Li et al., 2022; 2023). The
background of NN solvers is well summarized in the survey paper (Huang et al., 2022).
Owing to these successful studies, recent NN solvers have exhibited remarkable performance and
have become time-efficient surrogate models through inference. However, the performance of these
models are mostly validated under simple experimential situations, and it is still difficult to robustly
train NN solvers when the conditions of PDEs, such as the initial condition, PDE coefficients and
spatiotemporal mesh change with the data.
Unlike NN solvers, classical solvers such as finite-element method (FEM), finite-difference method
(FDM), and finite-volume method (FVM) can find the solution of the PDE regardless of its form,
initial and boundary conditions, given an exact PDE. There is a trade-off in terms of versatility
and usability between classical solvers utilizing analytical techniques and NN solvers relying on
expressive data-based NN training. We can naturally assume that a hybrid model that appropriately


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


utilizes the advantages of each scheme will be a characteristic of the ideal PDE solver. Several
attempts have been made to apply classical solver schemes to NN solvers. In Karlbauer et al. (2022),
the changes in the initial and boundary conditions were addressed by applying a FVM scheme to
physics-informed neural networks (PINNs). In Brandstetter et al. (2022), a message passing neural
operator model that can train changes in PDE coefficients and boundary conditions in spatial mesh
data was proposed.
Meanwhile, coupled differential equations with a graph spatial domain rather than the usual Eu-
clidean space have not received much attention. The coupled systems with numerous interacting el-
ements exhibit rich sets of properties. This includes the effect of underlying topology on the solution
in addition to the conventional PDE conditions. No solid model for coupled differential equations
and coupled systems has been extensively addressed.
In this study, we developed a Graph Neural Runge-Kutta (GNRK) method that combines the RK
method, a representative classical solver, with graph neural networks (GNNs).

      1. In the GNRK, the RK method is reconstructed as a recurrent structure with residual con-
         nections, and the governing function is approximated by a GNN.
      2. The proposed method does not depend on spatial as well as temporal discretization and can
         robustly predict the solution despite changes in the initial conditions and PDE coefficients.
      3. This method can control the prediction accuracy by adjusting the RK order given by the
         recurrent depth.

To the best of our knowledge, the GNRK is the first model that can solve a PDE regardless of the
initial conditions, PDE coefficients, and the spatiotemporal mesh. It can even predict solutions with
higher precision than the training data by modifying its’ structure without retraining or fine-tuning.
We verified that the GNRK predicts PDE solutions superiorly compared to the representative NN
solvers of equation-, neural operator-, and graph-based algorithms in challenging scenarios, where
the above conditions vary in the two-dimensional (2D) Burgers’ equation. In addition, the GNRK
is applied to three different physical systems governed by coupled ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), each of which has linear, nonlinear, and chaotic properties. In addition to the robustness of
the conditions discussed in the Euclidean space, we confirmed that the GNRK accurately predicts
solutions irrespective of topological changes in the graph structure.

2     G RAPH N EURAL RUNGE -K UTTA

In this section, we describe the GNRK, a new data-driven approach for solving PDEs. This is a hy-
brid approach that combines the well-studied methods of numerical PDE solvers with the powerful
expressiveness of artificial neural networks, particularly the GNN.
First, the following PDEs are considered:
                                         ∂s(x, t)
                                                  = f (s; C).                                      (1)
                                           ∂t
A dynamic system with state s(x, t) evolves over time according to the governing equation f with
constant coefficients C. The PDE is defined in a spatial domain Ω with the boundary condition (BC)
specifying the constraint of s(x, t) at the boundary x ∈ ∂Ω. The BC can take different forms; for
example, when no condition is given, an open BC is assumed, and when boundaries are connected,
a periodic BC is used. The time domain of interest is denoted as T ≡ [0, T ].

2.1   C LASSICAL SOLVER

Temporal discretization. Because it is impossible to compute continuous values, most classical
solvers are based on discretization of both Ω and T . For discretization over T , the time interval ∆t
is chosen for each time step. In the PDE given in equation 1, the state s(t + ∆t) depends only on
s(t), which is the state at the immediate previous time. Although it is common to have a constant
∆t over time, we use a nonuniform discretization of T with time steps {∆tk }M     k=1 where M is the
number of time steps.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Euclidean space discretization. When the spa-
tial domain Ω is a Euclidean space, it is often
discretized into a square grid. Similar to dis-
cretization over T , a uniform square grid is of-
ten used, in which all grid points are equally
spaced. We choose a more general, nonuniform
square grid that does not change over time but
has a different spacing between grid points, as     Figure 1: Discretization of spatial domain Ω.
shown in Fig. 1(a). Assuming that f is differen-    (a) 2D Euclidean spatial domain discretized by
tiable or localized over space, the state at grid   a nonuniform square grid. The spacing between
point i is updated using only the states of the     grid points can be different. (b) Graph spatial do-
neighboring points N (i) in the grid.               main, represented by nodes and edges. Both (a)
                                                    and (b) consist of 12 nodes and 17 edges but have
Graph spatial domain. We also consider Ω            different topologies.
to be the graph spatial domain. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), a graph domain consisting of nodes
and edges is discretized by itself. Similar to the Euclidean spatial domain, we assume that the state
of node i depends directly only on the state of its neighboring nodes N (i). However, there are some
crucial differences between the graph spatial domain and the Euclidean space. First, each node is
not fixed in the coordinate system; therefore no metric defines the distance or direction between the
nodes. In addition, because there are no boundaries in the graph, the boundary condition is absent.
Regarding the connection pattern of the nodes, degree |N (i)| is defined as the number of neighbors
of node i. Grids can be considered regular graphs where all nodes have the same degree, with special
care required for nodes on ∂Ω depending on the BC. Hereafter, we consider an arbitrarily discretized
Ω as a graph G.
Runge-Kutta method. Among the many classical solvers, we use the explicit Runge-Kutta method,
an effective and widely used method proposed by Runge (1895), and later developed by Kutta
(1901). This algorithm has an order m that sets the trade-off between the computation and accu-
racy of the result. For node i, the m-th order explicit Runge-Kutta method (RKm ) updates s(xi , t)
to the next state s(xi , t + ∆t) using m different intermediate values {wil }m
                                                                             l=1 as
                                                                m
                                                                X
                              s(xi , t + ∆t) = s(xi , t) + ∆t         bl wil .                      (2)
                                                                l=1

Assuming the spatially localized f , each wil is computed in parallel for i and recurrently for l as
follows:
                    wi1 = f (Si ; C)
                     wi2 = f (Si + a2,1 W1i ∆t; C)
                        ..                                                                          (3)
                         .
                     wi = f (Si + am,1 W1i + · · · + am,m−1 Wim−1 ∆t; C).
                      m


For simplification, we abuse the set notation Si ≡ {sj |j ∈ {i} ∪ N (i)} and Wli ≡
{wjl |j ∈ {i} ∪ N (i)} where si ≡ s(xi , t). The coefficients of the RK method, a and b, can be
selected from the Butcher tableau (Butcher, 1964).

2.2   A RCHITECTURE OF GNRK

Recurrent structure with residual connection. There have been many approaches for understand-
ing classical solvers as neural networks with residual connections, especially those that consider the
entire RKm step to be a single layer (Lu et al., 2018; Queiruga et al., 2020). However, this leads to
the problem of optimizing the deep network, which was addressed using the adjoint method (Chen
et al., 2018). By contrast, the neural network fθ in the GNRK approximates the governing equa-
tion f (s; C) where θ denotes trainable parameters. As shown in Fig. 2(a), RKm is reproduced by
the recurrent structure of depth m (Rico-Martinez et al., 1992) using the approximator fθ with the
residual connections. The coefficients of the element-wise linear combinations at the residual con-
nections are defined by the Butcher tableau and ∆t. Note that fθ is shared across the m sub-steps of
RKm as shown in equation 3; therefore, a fixed size of GNRK can be used for different m.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The full structure of the GNRK. (a) The RKm step is reproduced by the recurrent structure
of depth m with residual connection. Unlike the traditional residual connection, the results of all
previous blocks are used for the next step. (b) Typical structure of GNN fθ with three different types
of input features: node V , edge E, and global features g represented by colors.


Graph Neural Network. Consider the first substep of equation 3, which computes W 1 ≡
[w11 , . . . , wN
                1
                  ] from S ≡ [s1 , . . . , sN ]. Neural network structures, including multi-layer percep-
trons (MLPs), are capable of this operation; however, GNNs are among the most efficient (Iakovlev
et al., 2021). Similar to RKm , it computes wi1 in parallel using only the nodes and their neighbors
(Si ) by sharing the parameters for all nodes. In addition to efficiency, another benefit of GNNs is
that they can handle generic graphs where each node has a different degree and even domains with
a different number of nodes and edges. The typical structure of fθ used in the GNRK is shown in
Fig. 2(b), following the graph network (GN) framework (Battaglia et al., 2018).
Inputs. The inputs to the GNN are categorized into three types: node features V ≡ [vi ]T , edge
features E ≡ [ei,j ]T , and global features g. The state of each node si or the linear combination of
si and {wil } are typical examples of node features, because the state of the system is assigned to the
node. Note that all input features except the state are fixed, whereas fθ is evaluated m times along
the recurrent structure.
Encoder. Each input feature is embedded into a higher dimension by a 2-layer MLP encoder. Bor-
rowing the parameter sharing property of the GNN, we share the node encoder Encv across all the
node features viemb = Encv (vi ), ∀ i. Similarly, all the edge features ei,j are embedded by sharing
Ence . As only a single g exists per graph, Encg is not shared.
Graph Network Module. The GN is a framework that explains the operations on a graph and
covers popular message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017). It can describe a
wide variety of operations on the graph, including updating edge and global features that the MPNN
cannot address. As shown in the Fig. 2(b), the GN module used in GNRK is computed as follows:

             e′ij = ϕe (vi , vj , eij , g),   ē′i = ρ(e′ij , ∀ j ∈ N (i)),   wi = ϕv (ē′i , vi , g).   (4)
Initially, the edge features are updated in parallel by sharing the per-edge update function ϕe . Then,
e′ij is aggregated into the corresponding nodes by a permutation-invariant operation ρ such as the
sum or average. Finally, the node features are updated in parallel by sharing the per-node update
function ϕv . The two update functions ϕe , ϕv and one aggregation function ρ can be designed in
various ways, and the appropriate form depends on the given PDE f .
Decoder. After the GN module, we use a 2-layer MLP decoder to output W . Like the encoding
process, one decoder is shared over all updated node features.
Optimization. For a given dynamic system, a trajectory is defined as a collection of states that
change over time [s(t0 ), s(t1 ), . . . , s(tM )]. The GNRK is trained by a one-step prediction: for given
s(t), minimize the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the next state s(t + ∆t) and the prediction
s̃(t + ∆t). Because the recurrent structure is limited to depth m, the backprapagation is tractable.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, most of the trainable parameters for fθ are shared across nodes or edges, allowing data-
efficient training. Note that training the GNRK does not require prior knowledge of the governing
equation f . After optimization, the model predicts entire trajectory in a rollout manner. Starting from
the given initial condition s̃(0) ≡ s(0), it recursively generates s̃(t + ∆t) using s̃(t) as input.


3   G ENERALIZATION CAPABILITY

For a given dynamic system consisting of a PDE f and domain Ω, T , many conditions exist which
determine the solution. In this section, we classify the criteria into the following four categories, and
provide intuitions on why GNRK can be generalized to each of them without retraining.

       • Initial conditions

       • PDE coefficients

       • Spatial discretization

       • Temporal discretization and the order of RK

From a practical standpoint, a good PDE solver should deliver a robust performance across a wide
range of criteria. In other words, even when unseen values for each criteria are probided, the solver
should accurately infer the trajectory. The previously proposed NN solvers are only applicable to a
very limited subset of the above regimes or show poor performance even when they are applicable.
Initial conditions. The initial condition s(0) is the state in which a dynamic system starts and
solving the PDE with different initial conditions is a routine task. The GNRK excels at this task
because it uses localized information to predict the next state. Even for different input states, if
they have common values in any localized space, the computations in that region are the same. This
allows the GNRK to learn various local patterns using few initial conditions, leading to data-efficient
training.
PDE coefficients. Depending on the constant coefficient C in the governing equation f , the system
may exhibit different trajectories. We categorize C into three types, node, edge, and global coeffi-
cients, in line with the input of the GNN fθ . Unlike most NN solvers that do not take C as the input,
the GNRK is designed to work with different C. Similar to the case of state, with parameter sharing,
the GNRK learns the effect of C in various transitions from a single data sample. The other NN
solvers can be modified to allow the model to use C as input; however, such efficient training is not
possible.
Spatial discretization. For the Euclidean spatial domain, the discretization of space G affects the
accuracy of the trajectory, and different discretizations are commonly considered depending on the
application. Because the GNRK can be applied to a nonuniform square grid, it is possible to estimate
the state at an arbitrary position. The position of each node in Euclidean space can be encoded as
node or edge features: coordinates assigned as node features or the relative positions between two
neighboring nodes as edge features. If the governing equation depends directly on the coordinates,
the node encoding strategy is appropriate; otherwise, both are valid. In the graph spatial domain,
the role of G becomes much larger because the trajectories can vary dramatically depending on the
connectivity structure of G and the numbers of nodes and edges.
Temporal discretization and the order of RK. Similar to spatial discretization in the Euclidean
spatial domain, the temporal discretization {∆tk }M  k=1 can vary with the quality of the trajectory.
By using ∆t of different sizes, the GNRK can make predictions at arbitrary times. In the GNRK,
both {∆tk }Mk=1 and order m are captured in the recurrent structure, as shown in Fig. 2(a), leaving
trainable fθ independent. Therefore, the GNRK model can be tuned to have a different m without
retraining and can make predictions using unseen ∆t. This property is particularly beneficial when
only low-quality data are available for training and a more precise trajectory is required for deploy-
ment. The method of improving accuracy is most evident in chaotic systems, where the trajectories
are very sensitive to numerical precision.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Time=0.1                     Time=0.5                 Time=0.9            1


      True
                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                 1
      Prediction


                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                 0.01
      Error


                                                                                                 0.00


                                                                                                     0.01
                   u              v            u                v        u              v


Figure 3: Three snapshots of the trajectory of the 2D Burgers’ equation, GNRK prediction, and its
error. The error is defined as the difference between the true and predicted trajectory, and is plotted
in zoomed-in colormaps for visibility.


4        E XPERIMENT

4.1          E UCLIDEAN SPATIAL DOMAIN

2D Burgers’ equation.
                                          ∂2u ∂2u                                     ∂2v  ∂2v

      ∂u      ∂u    ∂u                                      ∂v      ∂v    ∂v
         = −u    −v    +ν                     + 2       ,      = −u    −v    +ν           + 2        .      (5)
      ∂t      ∂x    ∂y                    ∂x2  ∂y           ∂t      ∂x    ∂y          ∂x2  ∂y
We consider a 2D Burgers’ equation which is given as a coupled nonlinear PDE. It describes the
convection-diffusion system for a fluid of viscosity ν with velocities of u(x, y; t), v(x, y; t) in each
x and y direction, respectively. The spatial domain is selected as Ω ≡ [0, 1]2 with a periodic BC,
and the time domain is T ≡ [0, 1]. The method for numerical differentiation on nonuniform square
grid is described in Appendix. A.
To demonstrate the robustness of NN solvers over each criteria, we build the following four datasets.
Dataset I consists of the trajectories starting from different initial conditions. Dataset II varies the
PDE coefficient ν over a limited range, and Dataset III tests spatial invariance by using nonuni-
form square grids of different sizes. Dataset IV is composed of samples created with nonuniform
{∆tk }M
      k=1 . In addition, the trajectory quality for training and testing is set differently by changing
the Runge-Kutta order m to 1 and 4, respectively. Detailed settings can be found in Appendix. B.
Across all the datasets, we generate a limited number of 20 training samples, and 50 test samples to
evaluate the model.
Figure 3 shows a successful prediction of the GNRK for a trajectory in Dataset I. The predicted
trajectory captures the characteristics of the Burgers’ system; the initial formation of shockwaves
and their subsequent dissipations owing to diffusion.
The mean absolute error (MAE) between the true and predicted trajectories is used to quantify the
predictive performance of the models. Figure 4 shows the evolution of MAE for the test data from
the four datasets on a logarithmic scale. The errors are averaged over all nodes in the spatial domain
and two states, u and v. Becase the predictions of GNRK are made in a rollout manner, the errors
tend to accumulate over time. However, the errors are consistent across samples, indicating that the
GNRK is robust in all cases, and not only for test data that are similar to some of the trained data.
We compare the results with those of the GraphPDE proposed in Iakovlev et al. (2021). Similar to
the GNRK, GraphPDE is one of the few models that can be trained and tested on all four datasets.
In Table 1, we report the performances of the GNRK along with those of other NN solvers.
PINN (Raissi et al., 2019) maps the spatiotemporal domain directly to the solution of the PDE.
This makes it impossible to make predictions for different initial conditions and PDE coefficients.


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         PINN             FNO∗                GNO∗           GraphPDE         GNRK (ours)
                                                        −2              −1              −1
      Dataset I      -             3.46 × 10   1.65 × 10   1.24 × 10   1.04 × 10−3
      Dataset II     -             1.24 × 10−3 5.58 × 10−3 7.53 × 10−2 1.13 × 10−3
                              −1
     Dataset III     2.72 × 10     -           5.59 × 10−2 7.89 × 10−2 4.56 × 10−3
                              −1
     Dataset IV      2.58 × 10     -           -           6.05 × 10−2 1.44 × 10−3
Number of parameters 17,344        2,376,610   550,658     21,602      10, 882
 Wall clock (second) 0.593 ± 0.003 1.76 ± 0.01 5.16 ± 0.05 0.34 ± 0.08 7.32 ± 0.10
GPU memory (MiB) 122               609         317         237         153

Table 1: Mean absolute errors of test datasets using various NN solvers. The results marked with
- are cases where training is impossible due to the numerical limitations of corresponding PDE
solvers. ∗ For FNO and GNO, we use 100 train samples to obtain comparable results to GNRK. The
wall clock is 1.525 ± 0.006 second, when using a classical numerical solvers.


In contrast, Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2019) approximates the kernel integral oper-
ator which maps the function s(t) to the next time step s(t + ∆t). Since fast Fourier transform is
used, it only applies to uniform spatial grids and fixed temporal intervals. As a member of the same
neural operator architecture, graph neural operator (GNO) (Anandkumar et al., 2019) approximates
the kernel integral with the GNN, which can cover nonuniform grids. GraphPDE (Iakovlev et al.,
2021) uses a MPNN which approximates the governing equation, and NeuralODE to compute the
time evolution of the trajectory. This allows the GraphPDE to be applicable to all four datasets, but
its performance is worse than the GNRK. Employing the least number of trainable parameters, the
GNRK shows the best performance across all datasets. The detailed implementation of each model
can be found in Appendix B.

4.2   G RAPH SPATIAL DOMAIN

In this section, three physical systems governed
by coupled ODEs defined in the graph spatial            10 1
domain are considered. Rather than examining
the generalization domain of the GNRK indi-             10 3
vidually, as in the Euclidean spatial domain,                  (a)                      (b)
                                                    MAE


we use a dataset in which all the four crite-           10 1
ria are different. In particular, for the spatial
domain G, we used three random graph mod-               10 3             GraphPDE
els to investigate the effect of the graph topol-              (c)       GNRK (ours)    (d)
                                                             0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
ogy. They are distinguished by the homogene-                                     Time
ity of the degree distributions, where the most
homogeneouse being the random regular (RR)            Figure 4: The mean absolute error (MAE) over
graph, where all nodes have the same degree,          time for (a) Dataset I, (b) Dataset II, (c) Dataset
similar to a grid. The next is the Erdős-Rényi      III, (d) Dataset IV in logarithmic scale. The light
(ER) graph (Erdős & Rényi, 1960), where the         colored lines are the results for 50 test samples,
degree distribution follows a Poisson distribu-       and the dark colored lines are the average over the
tion, and the last is the Barabási-Albert (BA)       light lines.
graph (Barabási & Albert, 1999), which is the
most heterogeneous as the degree distribution
follows a power-law.
Heat equation.
                                    dTi   X
                                        =   Dij (Tj − Ti ).                                               (6)
                                     dt
                                            j∈N (i)

First, we consider the heat equation that describes the diffusion system. The heat equation defined
in Euclidean space is a PDE, ∂t T = ∇2 T ; however, in the graph spatial domain, it is replaced by a
coupled linear ODE as follows. Each node has a temperature Ti , and two nodes are connected by an
edge with a dissipation rate Dij exchanging heat.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      (a)                                                                            1.0            (b)                                                                                            π


                                                                                                                                    Error Prediction True
                                      Error Prediction True
                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                                                           −π
                                                                                                                     1.0                                                                                                           π


                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                                                           −π
                                                                                                                     0.002                                                                                                         π/20


                                                                                                                     0.000                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                      0.002                                                                                                        −π/20
                                                        0.0        0.5              1.0         1.5            2.0                                  0.0                2.5              5.0            7.5                  10.0
                                                                                   Time                                                                                            Time
        (c) 10                                                x          10          y                    z                         (d) 10                            x           10             y                                     z
    Error Prediction True


                                                                                                                                Error Prediction True
                             0                                            0                      5                                                           0                     0                               5

                            10                                           10                      0                                                          10                    10                               0
                            10                                           10                                                                                 10                    10
                             0                                            0                      5                                                           0                     0                               5

                             10                                           10                      0                                                          10                    10                               0
                            0.3                                          0.3                    0.3                                                         0.3                   0.3                             0.3
                            0.0                                          0.0                    0.0                                                         0.0                   0.0                             0.0
                            0.3                                          0.3                    0.3                                                         0.3                   0.3                             0.3
                                  0                           20   40          0     20    40         0   20               40                                     0   20     40         0        20          40         0              20   40
                                                                                   Time                                                                                                         Time

Figure 5: Results from the GNRK model for test samples in (a) heat, (b) Kuramoto, and (c),(d)
coupled Rössler systems. Colors indicate the temperature Ti ∈ [0, 1] in the heat system, and the
phase θi ∈ (−π, π] in the Kuramoto system. For the coupled Rössler system, 3D coordinate values
(xi , yi , zi ) are displayed, with nodes distinguished by line brightness. Only the 10 nodes (heat,
Kuramoto) or 3 nodes (coupled Rössler) with the largest errors from the test samples are shown. (c)
and (d) depict trajectories of the same coupled Rössler system, differing in numerical precision, with
m = 4 in (c) and m = 1 in (d).


Kuramoto equation.
                                                                                          dθi        X
                                                                                              = ωi +   Kij sin(θj − θi ).                                                                                                                        (7)
                                                                                          dt
                                                                                                               j∈N (i)

The Kuramoto equation is a coupled nonlinear ODE, which governs a dynamic system of coupled
oscillators. Their phase θi ∈ (−π, π] evolves as a result of its natural angular velocity ωi and
nonlinear interactions with neighbors j with the magnitude of the coupling constant Kij . It is well
known that a large Kij can lead the system to a synchronized state in which all the oscillators have
the same phase. Therefore, we take a relatively small value of Kij to ensure that the system has
diverse trajectories without synchronization.
Coupled Rössler equation.
                            dxi                                                    dyi              X                                                                                         dzi
                                = −yi − zi ,                                           = xi + ayi +   Kij (yj − yi ),                                                                             = b + zi (xi − c).                             (8)
                             dt                                                    dt                                                                                                         dt
                                                                                                                     j∈N (i)

Finally, we consider the dynamical system of Rössler attractors with pairwise attractive interactions.
The nodes are attractors in a three-dimensional space with coordinates (xi , yi , zi ) coupled on the
y-axis. Like the Kuramoto system, we choose small values of Kij to prevent synchronization, with
all nodes’ positions evolving in a similar fashion. Furthermore, we deliberately select the values of
a, b and c such that the system exhibits chaotic behavior. The choice of these coefficients makes the
prediction of a coupled Rössler system one of the most challenging tasks encountered by a PDE
solver.
The detailed configurations of the datasets for each system and the implementation of the GNRK
can be found in Appendix. C. We plot the results of the GNRK for test samples for the three systems
in Fig. 5. Because each system consists of dozens to hundereds of nodes, it is impossible to draw the
trajectories of all nodes; therefore, we select few nodes with the largest error. Across all systems,
despite this complex inference task, the errors from the true trajectories are so small that they could
only be visible on a zoomed-in scale.
Precision boosting. The capability of producing different precisions by tuning m is particularly
noticeable in the coupled Rössler system, which has chaotic properties. The first rows of Fig 5(c) and
(d) show the two trajectories from the same condition but with different numerical precisions: m = 4
and m = 1, respectively. Over time, errors from small discrepancies in numerical precision lead to


                                                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


different trajectories, which are evident in z-axis. Nevertheless, with the proper tuning of m, the
GNRK can predict both trajectories without significant errors. Similar precision-dependent results
are observed for the other two systems. The top row in Fig. 6 shows the MAE when the prediction
is made while maintaining training precision (m = 1). This shows 10x larger error compared with
the result after tuning the GNRK to m = 4 shown in the second row in Fig. 6.
Impact of graph topology. Recall that the con-
nectivity pattern or topology of the graph sig-     total-RK1
nificantly affects the trajectory. Therefore, we
                                                    total-RK4
investigate the effect of the topology of the
                                                           RR
underlying graph on the performance of the
GNRK. The bottom three rows in Fig. 6 show                 ER
the MAE obtained from samples with under-                  BA        (a)                            (b)                  (c)
                                                            10 4    10 3 10 3 2 × 103 × 104 × 106 × 10 10 210 2
                                                                                        3   3   3    3
                                                                                                                  10 1    100
lying graphs of random regular (RR), Erdős-
Rényi (ER), Barabási-Albert (BA) graph, re-
                                                                                MAE
spectively. The second row shows the MAE of
                                                    Figure 6: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of (a) heat,
the total number of samples, which is the aver-
                                                    (b) Kuramoto, and (c) coupled Rössler systems on
age of the bottom three rows. We did not ob-
                                                    a logarithmic scale. The error statistics are com-
serve any significant performance differences
                                                    puted for different underlying topology of random
based on the topology.
                                                    regular (RR), Erdős-Rényi (ER), Barabási-Albert
                                                    (BA) graph, respectively, and the average of them
                                                    is shown in the total row. RK1 and RK4 repre-
5   C ONCLUSION                                     sent the first and the 4-th order Runge-Kutta (RK)
                                                    methods, respectively.
In this study, we propose the Graph Neural
Runge-Kutta (GNRK), a novel approach for
solving differential equations that combines the
advantages of versatile classical solvers and ex-
pressive artificial neural networks. The GNRK
is a highly capable PDE solver because it can predict solutions under different initial conditions and
PDE coefficients. Furthermore, it is invariant to spatial and temporal discretization, allowing one
to obtain a solution at arbitrary spatial coordinates and times. Finally, the precision of the solution
generated by the GNRK can exceed that of the trained data without any additional training.
These advantages over other NN-based PDE solvers arise from the structure of GNRK. By repro-
ducing the m-th order RK as a recurrent structure of depth m with residual connections, the GNRK
can accommodate an arbitrary order m. The recurrent structure also makes the GNRK invariant to
arbitrary temporal discretization using ∆t as the coefficient of residual connections rather than the
input of the neural network. We choose a GNN as the recurrent module fθ , which approximates the
governing differential equation f . The implementation of GNN provides the robustness over other
criteria. By conceptualizing a grid, the discretization of the Euclidean space, as a graph, we can
encode the positions and states of all grid points and the coefficients of f as the input features of the
GNN. The concept of a grid as a graph allows us to extend the spatial domain of interest to the graph
and apply the GNRK method to the coupled ODE system. Since the GNN utilizes shared parameters
for both nodes and edges, the GNRK can efficiently train the state transitions from time t to t + ∆t
for all nodes, promoting data-efficient learning.
The GNRK represents a novel category of neural network-based PDE solvers, hitherto unexplored
in previous literature. Its versatility extends beyond the examples showcased in this study, allowing
it to be applied to a wide array of differential equations. Numerous avenues for further enhancement
exist, such as implementing adaptive spatiotemporal discretization using intermediate results and
addressing the challenge of solving equations based on noisy partial observations.


R EFERENCES
Anima Anandkumar, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi
  Li, Burigede Liu, and Andrew Stuart. Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differ-
  ential equations. In ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential
  Equations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fg2ZFmXFO3.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Albert-László Barabási and Réka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. science, 286
  (5439):509–512, 1999.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al. Re-
  lational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
  2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01261.pdf.
Johannes Brandstetter, Daniel E. Worrall, and Max Welling. Meassage passing neural pde solvers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03376, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03376.
John C Butcher. On runge-kutta processes of high order. Journal of the Australian Mathematical
  Society, 4(2):179–194, 1964. doi: 10.1017/S1446788700023387.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Tianping Chen and Hong Chen. Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks
  with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems. IEEE transactions
  on neural networks, 6.4:911–917, 1995.
Paul Erdős and Alfréd Rényi. On the evolution of random graphs. Publication of the Mathematical
  Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Science, 5(1):17–60, 1960. doi: 10.1515/9781400841356.
  38.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neu-
  ral message passing for quantum chemistry. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1263–1272. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/gilmer17a.html.
Shudong Huang, Wentao Feng, Chenwei Tang, Zhenan He, Caiyang Yu, and Jiancheng Lv. Partial
  differential equations meet deep neural networks: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05567,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05567.
Valerii Iakovlev, Markus Heinonen, and Harri Lähdesmäki. Learning continuous-time pdes from
  sparse data with graph neural networks. In 9th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=aUX5Plaq7Oy.
Matthias Karlbauer, Timothy Praditia, Sebastian Otte, Sergey Oladyshkin, Wolfgang Nowak, and
 Martin V.Butz. Composing partial differential euqations with physics-aware neural networks.
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 10773–10801, 2022.
Wilhelm Kutta. Beitrag zur näherungsweisen integration totaler differentialgleichungen. Zeitschrift
 für angewandte Mathematik und Physik, pp. 435–453, 1901.
Isaac E. Lagaris, Aristidis Likas, and Dimitrois I. Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving
   ordinary and partial differential equations. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 9.5:987–1000,
   1998.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadeneshdli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differen-
  tial equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2010.08895.
Zongyi Li, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Burigede Liu, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator
  with learning deformations for pdes on general geometries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05209,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05209.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Chris Choy, Boyi Li, Jean Kossaifi, Shourya Prakash Otta,
  Mohammad Amin Nabian, Maximilian Stadler, Christian Hundt, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and
  Anima Anandkumar. Geometry-informed neural operator for large scale 3d pdes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.00583, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00583.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for iden-
  tifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03193, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03193.
Yiping Lu, Aoxiao Zhong, Quanzheng Li, and Bin Dong. Beyond finite layer neural networks:
  Bridging deep architectures and numerical differential equations. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 3276–3285. PMLR, 2018.
Alejandro F Queiruga, N Benjamin Erichson, Dane Taylor, and Michael W Mahoney. Continuous-
  in-depth neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02389, 2020.
Raissi, Maziar, Paris Perdikarsis, and George E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks:
  A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
  differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Ramiro Rico-Martinez, K Krischer, IG Kevrekidis, MC Kube, and JL Hudson. Discrete-vs.
  continuous-time nonlinear signal processing of cu electrodissolution data. Chemical Engineering
  Communications, 118(1):25–48, 1992.
Carl Runge. Über die numerische auflösung von differentialgleichungen. Mathematische Annalen,
  46(2):167–178, 1895.
Jin Young Shin, Jae Young Lee, and Hyung Ju Hwang. Pseudo differential integral operator for
   learning solution operators of partial differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11967,
   2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11967.
Hilding Sundqvist and George Veronis. A simple finite-difference grid with non-constant intervals.
  Tellus, 22(1):26–31, 1970. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2153-3490.1970.tb01933.x.


A    D ERIVATIVES IN NONUNIFORM SQUARE GRID
Since we have discretized Euclidean space into a nonuniform square grid, the derivatives of the
governing equation f need to be computed with care. We used the numerical differentiation method
proposed in Sundqvist & Veronis (1970).
Consider a function f with a 1D Euclidean spatial domain discretized by a nonuniform grid. We first
compute the following half-derivatives at each grid point:
                            ′         fi − fi−1           ′         fi+1 − fi
                           fi−1/2 =             ,        fi+1/2 =             .                                (9)
                                        dxi−1                          dxi
Then, we use them to compute the first and second derivatives of the i-th node as follows:
                                                                                ′        ′
                       dxi              dxi−1                                  fi+1/2 − fi−1/2
           fi′ =              f′    +           f′     ,              fi′′ =                      .           (10)
                   dxi−1 + dxi i−1/2 dxi−1 + dxi i+1/2                         (dxi−1 + dxi )/2
For a function f defined in two or higher dimensions, the same calculation is performed indepen-
dently for each axis.

B    E XPERIMENT WITH THE 2D B URGERS ’ EQUATION
                                 ∂2u ∂2u                                                ∂2v   ∂2v

    ∂u      ∂u    ∂u                                ∂v      ∂v    ∂v
       = −u    −v    +ν              + 2       ,       = −u    −v    +ν                     +             .   (11)
    ∂t      ∂x    ∂y             ∂x2  ∂y            ∂t      ∂x    ∂y                    ∂x2   ∂y 2

We consider the 2D Burgers’ equation in spatial domin Ω ≡ [0, 1]2 with periodic BC, and the time
domain T ≡ [0, 1]. Initial conditions of both u and v are given as a 2D asymmetric sine function,
A sin(2πx − ϕx ) sin(2πy − ϕy ) exp(−(x − x0 )2 − (y − y0 )2 ). In this context, A serves as the
normalization constant, ensuring a peak value of 1. Additionally, ϕx and ϕy represent the initial
phases along each axis, and x0 and y0 denote the offsets accounting for any asymmetry. The constant
coefficient C corresponds to the viscosity parameter ν, which is regarded as a global feature as it
uniformly impacts the state of all nodes.


                                                    11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dataset. All datasets adhere to the default initial condition settings, which entail ϕx = ϕy = 0
and x0 = y0 = 0.5. The coefficient ν remains fixed at 0.01, the grid size is uniformly set to
Nx = Ny = 100, a uniform time step of M = 1000 is employed, and the simualation relies on a
4th-order Runge-Kutta method. Variability within each dataset is introduced through randomization
of the values associated with the target regime, as described below.

       • Dataset I evaluates the generalization performance with randomly selected initial condi-
         tions taken from ϕx , ϕy ∈ (−π, π] and x0 , y0 ∈ (0, 1).
       • Dataset II explores a range of values for ν, spanning from 0.005 to 0.02, to assess the
         model’s resilience to variations in the PDE coefficient C. When ν exceeds this specified
         range, the system experiences such significant dissipation that it rapidly reaches equilib-
         rium within a fraction of a second. Conversely, if ν falls below this range, it leads to the gen-
         eration of substantial shockwaves, which in turn can pose numerical stability challenges.
       • Dataset III is constructed to validate the model’s invariance to spatial discretization. It
         employs nonuniform square grids with dimensions Nx and Ny ranging from 50 to 150,
         resulting in varying total grid point counts within the range of 2,500 to 22,500. The spacing
         between these grid points deviates by approximately ±10% from that of the corresponding
         uniform grids of the same size.
       • Dataset IV comprises samples generated using nonuniform temporal discretization denoted
         as {∆tk }Mk=1 from k = 1 to M , with a total of M = 1000 time steps. The difference in ∆t,
         compared to the uniform case, fluctuates by approximately ±10%. Furthermore, there is a
         distinction in trajectory quality between the training and testing sets, with m = 1 employed
         for training and m = 4 for testing, respectively.

Grid-to-Graph transformation. Since the governing equation 11 does not directly depend on the
coordinate of each node, the position of each node is encoded as edge features representing its
relative distance and direction to neighbors. Specifically, each edge is assigned a two-dimensional
feature with the following rules. An edge of length dx parallel to the x-axis has feature [dx, 0], while
an edge of length dy parallel to the y-axis has feature [0, dy].
Implementation details for GNRK. The embedding dimension of the input node, edge, and global
features of fθ are all 8. These encoded features are processed through the concatenated operations
of the two GN modules shown in Fig. 2(b). In other words, equation 4 is repeated twice, which
allows fθ to compute the derivatives and Laplacians of equation 11. The four update functions are
all 2-layer MLP with hidden layer size of 32 using GeLU activations and sum aggregation is used
in both modules. This configuration results in the GNRK model having a total of 10,882 trainable
parameters. Training the GNRK model on all datasets is accomplished using the AdamW optimizer.
The learning rate is initially set at 0.004 for the first 20 epochs, reduced to 0.002 for the subsequent
30 epochs, and further decreased to 0.001 until reaching epoch 500. In each dataset, 20 random
trajectories are provided for training the GNRK model, and the results presented in the main text are
based on 50 different samples. It is important to note that GNRK is set to m = 1 only when training
on Dataset IV; for all other cases, m = 4 is used.
Implementation details for PINN. We train the PINN, which is comprised of 6 hidden layers
incorporating GeLU activations and batch normalization. The optimization objective is to minimize
the total loss, which encompasses the PDE, initial, and boundary losses. We employ the AdamW
optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001 and utilize a cosine annealing scheduler as described in
equation 12 to adjust the learning rate during training.
Implementation details for FNO. Implementation of FNO was performed with reference to
(https://github.com/neuraloperator/neuraloperator). We train a 4-layer FNO with GeLU activation,
12 Fourier modes, and a width of 32 units. For optimization, we employ the AdamW optimizer with
a learning rate set to 0.001, and we incorporate a cosine annealing scheduler, as detailed in equa-
tion 12. Our training approach for FNO is heuristic, where we extend the input channel by including
coupled fields and PDE coefficients.
Implementation details for GNO. Implementation of GNO was carried out with reference to
(https://github.com/neuraloperator/graph-pde). We train a 6-layer GNO with ReLU activation, with
64 width and 128 kernels. The AdamW optimizer with a learning rate 0.001 and a cosine annealing


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


scheduler in equation 12 are used. Edge attribution consists of the position values and two coupled
field values in the 2D Burgers’ equation at each node.
Implementation details for GraphPDE. Both the message network and aggregation network in the
MPNN employed by GraphPDE consist of MLPs with a depth of 4, a width of 64, and utilize tanh
activation functions. Like FNO, the GraphPDE is slightly modified from the original implementation
to accomodate PDE coefficients as inputs. For the NeuralODE, which trains the MPNN by adjoint
method, we utilize an adaptive Heun solver with an absolute tolerance set to 10−5 . The GraphPDE
model is trained using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0002 and a weight decay
coefficient of 0.01.

C     E XPERIMENT WITH COUPLED ODE S
Dataset. For each of the three coupled ODE systems, we adopt a single dataset that encompasses
four distinct criteria. Since each system exhibits unique demands in terms of initial conditions and
coefficients, the specific requirements will be elaborated upon separately. In the spatial domain G,
the number of nodes and mean degrees are randomly selected from the intervals [50, 150] and [2, 6],
respectively. As discussed in the main text, the topology of these domains is randomly chosen from
among RR, ER, and BA network types. The simulation time varies for each system; nevertheless, for
all scenarios, we employ nonuniform discretization with a time interval differing by approximately
±10% from the uniform case. Concerning the choice of the order m for the Runge-Kutta method,
similar to Dataset IV in Euclidean space, we employ low-quality m = 1 data for training and high-
quality m = 4 data for evaluation.
Implementation details for GNRK. In all three systems, fθ has the same structure, as shown in
Fig. 2(b). Specifically, the GNRK uses a single GN module with 2-layer MLP update functions with
GeLU activations and sum aggregation. As in the case of Dataset IV of the 2D Burgers’ equation, we
use a GNRK with m = 1 for training and modify it to m = 4 for testing. The model is trained using
the AdamW optimizer, but the learning rates are different for each system as described separately.
The learning rate η at epoch t follows a cosine annealing schedule as outlined below:

                                          1                        t
                             η(t) = ηmin + (ηmax − ηmin ) 1 + cos π .                         (12)
                                          2                        T
Whenever t reaches the period T , both the maximum learning rate ηmax and T are adjusted by a
predetermined factor.

C.1   H EAT EQUATION
                                    dTi   X
                                        =   Dij (Tj − Ti ).                                      (13)
                                     dt
                                           j∈N (i)

The initial conditions involve random assignment of each node to either a hot state (Ti = 1) or a cold
state (Ti = 0), with the ratio of these two states also being randomly determined. The coefficients
in this equation are represented by the edge feature Dij ∈ [0.1, 1.0]. The heat equation is simulated
for 2 seconds using M = 100 nonuniform time steps.
The node and edge embedding dimension is 16, and the hidden layer sizes at both per-edge and
per-node update functions are 64. This results in a total of 7,201 trainable parameters. Regarding the
learning rate, we use ηmin = 0.0001, ηmax = 0.01, and T = 10. At each occurrence of t reaching
the period T , the period T doubles, and ηmax decreases by a factor of 0.7, continuing until reaching
epoch 630.

C.2   K URAMOTO EQUATION
                                dθi        X
                                    = ωi +   Kij sin(θj − θi ).                                  (14)
                                dt
                                             j∈N (i)

Each node initializes the system with a random phase within the range of (−π, π]. One of the co-
efficients, denoted as C, represents the node feature ωi , which is randomly sampled from a normal


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distribution with an average of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The other C corresponds to the edge
feature Kij . It is well known that large values of Kij can lead to a synchronized state in which all the
oscillators have the same phase. Therefore, we limit the range of Kij to a relatively small interval of
[0.1, 0.5] to ensure that the system exhibits diverse trajectories without synchronization. We conduct
a simulation lasting 10 seconds, employing M = 500 nonuniform time steps.
Since the state θi is periodic, we preprocess it by computing both the cosine and sine values. The pre-
processed θi and node feature ωi are embedded into 16 dimensions using their respective encoders,
and Kij is also represented in 16 dimensions with the edge encoder. Both update functions ϕe and
ϕv have hidden dimensions with a size of 64, resulting in a total of 16,097 trainable parameters. The
learning rate varies according to equation 12, where ηmin = 0.00001, ηmax = 0.01, and T = 10 are
initially used. For every cycle of the cosine schedule, T is doubled and ηmax is halved, for a total of
310 epochs.

C.3    C OUPLED R ÖSSLER EQUATION
      dxi                 dyi              X                            dzi
          = −yi − zi ,        = xi + ayi +   Kij (yj − yi ),                = b + zi (xi − c).      (15)
       dt                 dt                                            dt
                                              j∈N (i)

The initial condition is established by randomly selecting xi , yi ∈ [−4, 4] and zi ∈ [0, 6] for each
node, although it is worth noting that the trajectory can travel outside this range. The coefficients
governing the equations include the global features a, b, c and the edge features Kij . It is widely
known that the system can exhibit chaos depending on the values of a, b, and c. To capture chaotic
trajectories, we restrict a, b ∈ [0.1, 0.3] and c ∈ [5, 7]. Similar to the Kuramoto system, we choose
Kij ∈ [0.02, 0.04] to prevent synchronization, ensuring that the positions of all nodes evolve indi-
vidually. We track the trajectory for 40 seconds with M = 2000 nonuniform time steps.
Three separate encoders are used for each set of coordinates (x, y, z) of the nodes, with each encoder
producing 32-dimensional node features. Similarly, each of the coefficients a, b, c and Kij is associ-
ated with a dedicated encoder generating 32-dimensional embeddings. Leaveraging these embedded
features, two update functions ϕe and ϕv with 128 hidden units complete the GN module. The total
number of trainable parameters for the GNRK model amounts to 79,267. The learning rate follows
equation 12 as before, initially set to ηmin = 0.00001, ηmax = 0.002, and T = 20. In each cycle, up
to a total of 2,000 epochs, T increases by a factor of 1.4, and ηmax decreases by a factor of 0.6.


                                                   14
