Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R E PL AN : ROBOTIC R EPLANNING WITH P ERCEPTION
AND L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Advancements in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their poten-
         tial in facilitating high-level reasoning, logical reasoning and robotics planning.
         Recently, LLMs have also been able to generate reward functions for low-level
         robot actions, effectively bridging the interface between high-level planning and
         low-level robot control. However, the challenge remains that even with syntac-
         tically correct plans, robots can still fail to achieve their intended goals. This
         failure can be attributed to imperfect plans proposed by LLMs or to unforeseeable
         environmental circumstances that hinder the execution of planned subtasks due
         to erroneous assumptions about the state of objects. One way to prevent these
         challenges is to rely on human-provided step-by-step instructions, limiting the
         autonomy of robotic systems. Vision Language Models (VLMs) have shown re-
         markable success in tasks such as visual question answering and image caption-
         ing. Leveraging the capabilities of VLMs, we present a novel framework called
         Robotic Replanning with Perception and Language Models that enables real-time
         replanning capabilities for long-horizon tasks. This framework utilizes the phys-
         ical grounding provided by a VLM’s understanding of the world’s state to adapt
         robot actions when the initial plan fails to achieve the desired goal. We test our
         approach within four environments containing seven long-horizion tasks. We find
         that R E PL AN enables a robot to successfully adapt to unforeseen obstacles while
         accomplishing open-ended, long-horizon goals, where baseline models cannot.
         Find more information at https://sites.google.com/view/replan-iclr/home


1   I NTRODUCTION

Designing embodied agents to execute multi-stage, long-horizon tasks is challenging. Firstly,
agents need manipulation skills for physical engagement with their environment. They also need
to be adept at perceiving their surrounding environment and reasoning on cause-and-effect rela-
tionships of their actions on the environment. Moreover, these agents should be able to plan and
carry out a series of actions that are in line with the main goals they are tasked to accomplish (Wu
et al., 2023), with minimal human intervention.
Methods based on rule-driven frameworks like Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) (Garrett et al.,
2021) and learning approaches, such as Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) and Imitation
Learning (IL), have advanced the field of long-horizon planning. Yet, these methods often require
extensive domain knowledge, intricate reward engineering, and time-consuming dataset creation
efforts (Hussein et al., 2017; Brohan et al., 2022). In contrast, the rise of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has shown considerable promise in robot planning (Driess et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023a).
However, applying LLMs in this area is complex, mainly because LLMs are used for generating
open-ended text while robots require constrained code (Singh et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a).
Long-horizon, multi-stage task planning requires reasoning over extended periods, which is a chal-
lenge for LLMs Wang et al. (2023c). In the context of LLMs, tackling large-scale problems often
leads to issues like hallucination or failing to consider important details, rendering their plans inef-
fective or error-ridden (Bang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). To address this, prompting schemes
like ReAct and Chain-of-Thoughts distil complex problems into intermediate reasoning steps with
the aid of exemplars, facilitating effective reasoning (Yao et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022). However,
these efforts are still constrained by the number of stages the robot can handle. Another strategy to


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


enhance LLM outputs involves verifying their results, employing techniques such as syntax check-
ing (Skreta et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) and semantics (Rana et al., 2023) verification, as well
as simulating task execution (Liu et al., 2022) to provide success/failure feedback to the LLM. In
those works, verification enables the ability to plan over multiple steps in complex domains.
Working with multi-step tasks in robotics also involves dealing with uncertainties and changes in
the environment. Effectively handling these tasks requires combining task instructions with sensory
data, which helps the robot adapt to the changing surroundings. Recent research has shown that
combining textual and visual information in RL or IL can improve task performance (Ha et al., 2023;
Brohan et al., 2022; 2023b). It allows for ongoing updates based on what the robot observes. Vision-
Language Models (VLMs) have been shown to guide robots in interpreting their environment more
accurately and generalizing to unseen scenarios. By integrating visual cues with linguistic context,
VLMs enable robots to better interpret their surrounding environment (Brohan et al., 2023a).
Furthermore, for achieving generalization and scaling in the deployment of robots across diverse en-
vironments, the acquisition of rich low-level skills is essential. Many works have utilized pre-trained
and encoded skills, supplying a skill list to LLMs for skill selection (Lin et al., 2023). Recently, there
has been a shift towards directly setting up rewards generated by LLMs (Yu et al., 2023; Kwon
et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023). This approach, employed in both RL for policy learning (Kwon et al.,
2023; Xie et al., 2023) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Garcia et al., 1989; Rawlings, 2000) to
enhance data efficiency (Miyaoka et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023), enabling users to more easily guide
robot behavior by creating and combining rewards.
This paper aims to address the challenge of multi-stage long-horizon tasks, inheriting key ideas from
recent progress in foundation models. We introduce R E PL AN, an innovative zero-shot approach that
harnesses LLMs at multiple levels by iterative re-prompting to serve as a reward generator for robot
MPC. Differently from (Yu et al., 2023), our approach is augmented by high-level replanning based
on contextual feedback from VLMs and motor control observations. Our approach can solve open-
ended problems, such as searching tasks. R E PL AN is hierarchical, composed of two planners, one
high-level and one low-level. The output of each level is passed through a verifier. Our system
operates by taking a natural language goal from the user, which is used to generate high-level plans,
followed by the creation of low-level plans to define reward functions for the controller. By utilizing
inputs from robot motor signals and raw visual scene feedback, a Perceiver model offers online
feedback to the LLM Planner, facilitating plan progress monitoring and replanning.
Our main contribution in handling long-term, multi-stage tasks involves four key aspects: using per-
ceiver models for high-level replanning, creating hierarchical plans with language models, verifying
outputs from these language models, and robot behavior through reward generation. By combining
these elements, our approach can create effective multi-step plans with significantly less need for
human involvement. To test these abilities, we develop new multi-stage planning domains. Across
seven long-horizon tasks requiring up to 11 steps on average, our method was able to succeed almost
4× as often as the current leading method.


2    R ELATED WORK

Long-horizon Robot Planning. Addressing long-horizon planning in robotics has been a persistent
challenge. Rule-based methods (Mehr et al., 2020; Baier et al., 2009), such as Planning Domain Def-
inition Language (PDDL) (Aeronautiques et al., 1998), attempted to solve task and motion planning
sequentially, however, the planned task may not feasible when the domain knowledge is incomplete.
The task and motion planning (TAMP) approach (Garrett et al., 2021), addresses this by simulta-
neously determining symbolic actions and low-level motions. For example, PDDLStream (Garrett
et al., 2020), introduces streams to streamline continuous robot planning into a finite PDDL problem
while ensuring action feasibility during planning. While these methods excel in verifying task and
motion plans during planning, their generalization to new environments is constrained, particularly
when tackling intricate tasks, and they necessitate substantial domain description engineering. In ad-
dressing multi-stage planning challenges, many works focus on learning task plans from input task
specifications, leveraging reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL) techniques. For
example, Behavior-1K (Li et al., 2023) employs RL to acquire semantics and physical manipulation
skills, often benefiting from classical motion planners and simplifying assumptions. However, it’s
important to note that these learning-based techniques demand significant domain expertise for re-


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ward engineering and rely on large datasets for task learning (Heo et al., 2023). While they adeptly
react to environmental uncertainties by iteratively updating policies based on observations, their
zero-shot generalization across multi-stage tasks remains a persistent challenge.
Robot Control with Physically Grounded Language Models. Recent advancements in LLMs
have resulted in their adoption in robot planning, leveraging their natural language capabilities and
common-sense reasoning for generating robot task and motion plans(Wang et al., 2023b; Xi et al.,
2023). Notably, LLMs have been applied to planning multi-stage tasks (Singh et al., 2022; Driess
et al., 2023), by utilizing LLMs to improve sample efficiency in reinforcement learning. The Prog-
Prompt and Code-As-Policies approaches use code-writing LLMs to generate code for robot poli-
cies (Singh et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022). Language models with a verifier have been used for
generating long-horizon tasks in an iterative prompting technique with lower error rates (Skreta
et al., 2023), however there is no guarantee that the output task plan can be executed. SayPlan
used LLMs to reason over scene graphs and generate plans across large environments, using iter-
ative replanning to ensure scene graph constraints were not violated (Rana et al., 2023). Toward
grounding the language belief with visual and motor control feedback, (Ha et al., 2023) employed
language guidance for skill learning, using LLMs alongside sampling-based planning and visuomo-
tor policy learning. (Brohan et al., 2023a) proposed a vision-language-action model, co-training it
on internet-scale data with other image-related tasks to enhance generalization. Additionally, (Stone
et al., 2023) interfaced robot policies with pre-trained vision-language models, enabling interaction
with unseen object categories based on language descriptions and localization data. SayCan uses
affordances based on surrounding observations to constrain LLM plans to be more feasible given
the environment Brohan et al. (2023b). Inner Monologue extends this line of work by incorporat-
ing feedback from other sensors while generating plans, including passive scene descriptions, active
human feedback to guide the robot, and success detection, enabling it to retry low-level policies
if actions failed Huang et al. (2022b) and therefore execute longer-horizon tasks than SayCan. It
has observed in other works that binary success indicators are usually not enough to long-horizon
correct plans Wang et al. (2023c); Skreta et al. (2023), although the tasks in Inner Monologue fo-
cused on retrying low-level policies instead of overcoming environment obstacles. Finally, LLMs
have been used to enable open-ended world exploration of embodied agents. In Voyager, an agent
is encouraged to explore the world of Minecraft and build a skill library Wang et al. (2023a). Voy-
ager demonstrates that receiving environment feedback from a chat bot as to why tasks cannot be
completed improves the likelihood of task completion.
Language to Reward Shaping. In contrast to approaches that map natural task descriptions to
robot actions and subsequently to rewards, an alternative approach seeks to directly infer rewards
from natural language inputs, addressing the challenge of reward engineering (Lin et al., 2022).
This language-driven reward-shaping approach has demonstrated utility in various domains, includ-
ing negotiation (Kwon et al., 2023) and gaming (Goyal et al., 2019), facilitating desired behavior
learning through RL. (Mahmoudieh et al., 2022) introduce a visuo-language model that generates
robot motion policy reward on goal text and raw pixel observations, in a manner similar to (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), enabling zero-shot prompting for unseen scenarios. (Yu et al., 2023) employs an
iterative prompting method using a LLM to link user task specifications and robot motion through
reward functions. While excelling in motion generation with minimal data, their approach falls short
in handling long-horizon multistage tasks and lacks real-time environment feedback, necessitating
user intervention for adaptation. (Xie et al., 2023) extended the previous work for robot reward
policy refinement by requiring substantial human involvement and Pythonic observation from the
environment. Both of these methods struggle with open-ended problems and multi-stage tasks. To
mitigate these limitations, our work autonomously performs long-horizon tasks and adapts to exe-
cution outcomes by leveraging motor control and raw visual feedback.


3   R E PL AN : M ODEL S TRUCTURE AND D ETAILS

We present an overview of our method in Figure 1. The input to our system is a goal described in
natural language. The goal can be specific (e.g. place kettle on stove) or open-ended (e.g. search
for the banana). R E PL AN has five modules, which are described below. All prompts used for the
modules can be found in Appendix B.

     1. a High-Level LLM Planner used for planning, replanning, and reasoning


                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                               Figure 1: R E PL AN overview. It con-
                                                                                                               sists of five modules: a High-Level
                                                                                                               LLM Planner, a VLM Perceiver, a
                    High-level plan            Robot                                             Cabinet
                                                                                                               Low-Level LLM Planner for low-
                        USER
                                                                                                               level reward generation, a motion
                        Find the green apple                                                                   controller with motor-control feed-
                                               Kettle                                           Microwave
                                                                                                               back, and an LLM Verifier. The
                 High-Level LLM                                                                                robot’s task is to locate a green ap-
             Planner + VLM Perceiver                              Low-level plan                               ple hidden in the microwave. Ini-
                                                                    LLM
                                                                    Open the microwave
                                                                                                               tially, the VLM provides a list of ver-
                     Open the microwave                                                                        ified objects to the high-level plan-
                                                                                                               ner. The LLM generates verified
  Verifier                                                         Low-Level LLM
                                                                      Planner                                  high-level plans for the robot’s ex-
                    Look for the green apple
                                                                                                               ecution. These high-level plans are
                    Did you find the apple?
                                                                                                               sequentially passed (e.g., “open the
                                                              minimize_l2_distance_reward(                     microwave”) to the low-level plan-
                      NO     YES   Task                             "palm", "cabinet_handle")
 Replan                                                                                                        ner to generate verified low-level
                                   complete                                                         Verifier
                                                              set_joint_fraction_reward(
                                                                   "cabinet", 1.0,
                                                                                                               plan descriptions and corresponding
                      Move kettle away
                                                                    primary_reward=True)                       rewards. These rewards are subse-
                      from microwave                                                                           quently conveyed to the MPC con-
                                                                                                               troller for robot execution. Upon
                                                        YES


                                                               Motion Controller                               successful completion of the low-
                           Replan
                                                                                                               level plan (determined by motor con-
                                                    NO          Did robot complete                             trol signals), it notifies the high-level
        Kettle is blocking microwave                            the action?                                    planner. If a failure occurs, we query
                          VLM     Why not?                                                                     the VLM to obtain textual informa-
         Verifier       Perceiver                                                                              tion about it, which helps R E PL AN
                                                                                                               effectively resolve the task.



        2. a VLM Perceiver used for physically-grounded reasoning
        3. a Low-Level LLM Planner used for converting high-level tasks to low-level rewards
        4. a Motion Controller to instruct the robot on low-level actions
        5. a LLM Verifier to check that the Planner/Perceiver is correct and fixes them if applicable

3.1      H IGH -L EVEL LLM P LANNER

Inspired the ability of LLMs to generate actionable steps from high-level tasks (Huang et al., 2022a),
we employ a High-Level Planner to take in as input a user-specified task and return a list of subtasks
on how a robot should accomplish the task. We use a prompting scheme similar to ReAct Yao
et al. (2023) for generating subtasks. The benefit of using a High-Level Planner is that there are
no restrictions on the abstraction level of the user input. The user input can be a specific task (e.g.
“Place my keys on the counter”), or an open-ended task where the procedure requires exploration
(e.g. “Find my keys”). This is because the Planner can propose a procedure, even if it doesn’t know
the exact answer a priori. If the robot completes the sequence of actions proposed by the Planner and
the overall goal is still not accomplished, the High-Level Planner can propose a new procedure. The
High-Level Planner can also utilize the past recommended procedures to prevent the redundancy of
having the agent perform the same tasks repetitively (Skreta et al., 2023). The High-Level Planner is
also used to incorporate feedback from perception models when generating high-level plans. This is
important because the Planner should not generate plans that are not aligned with the physical state
of the world, or should be able to replan if there are any obstacles.

3.2      VLM P ERCEIVER

While LLMs have demonstrated powerful reasoning skills over text, they lack grounding in the phys-
ical world (Liu et al., 2022). This means that while LLMs can generate plans that sound reasonable,
they may fail to account for any obstacles or uncertainties that are present because they cannot per-
ceive the environment. At the same time, while VLMs offer physical grounding to text queries, their
language generation capabilities are not as strong as those of LLMs. Considering this, we use the


                                                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


High-Level Planner to decide what it wants to query from the Perceiver, and then the Planner incor-
porates feedback from the Perceiver when it needs to know about the object states or replan because
the robot failed to do an action. The High-Level Planner decides on specific, simple questions to ask
the Perceiver (see Figures B.14-B.16) and samples multiple answers before consolidating them into
a summary observation that is consistent with the state of the environment (see Figures B.9-B.12).

3.3   L OW-L EVEL LLM P LANNER

Recently, it has been demonstrated that LLMs are capable of producing low-level plans that enable
robot motion control(Yu et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023). This is exciting because it bridges the gap
between high-level, human-specified goals and robot actions in a zero-shot manner (without the
need for extensive training datasets). However, while previous works are able to generate low-
level robot actions for a concrete task (e.g. “Open the drawer”), we find that they fail when asked
to generate plans for long-horizon, open-ended tasks. Thus, we utilize the High-Level Planner to
generate concrete subtasks from a high-level goal, which is then passed to the Low-Level Planner
to generate the corresponding low-level actions. Our Low-Level Planner uses the same Reward
Translator as in (Yu et al., 2023) which we have found works well. The Low-Level Planner works in
two stages. First, it generates a motion plan from a user-specified input. The motion plan is a natural
language description of the actions a robot should do to achieve the goal. Then, the motion plan
is then translated to reward functions, which serve as a representation of the desired robot motion.
These reward functions are then passed to the Motion Controller.

3.4   M OTION C ONTROLLER

The Motion Controller receives reward functions and instructs the robot on what actions to do in
order to satisfy those functions. For motion control, we use MuJoCo MPC (MJPC), an open-source
real-time predictive controller, implemented on MuJoCo physics (Howell et al., 2022). Given the
initial condition x0 , the control problem is defined as:
                                   T
                                   X
                     minimize            c(xt , ut ), subject to xt+1 = f (xt , ut ),
                      x1:T ,u1:T
                                   t=0

where xt and ut are the state and control signals at time step t, and the mapping f is the transition
dynamics. The goal is to minimize the cost function c(.) along the trajectory from the current
time step to the horizon T . We define the M output rewards provided by the low-level planner
                                                            M
                                                            P
as the negative of the cost function, i.e., c(xt , ut ) = −   wi ri (xt , ut , ϕi ), where ϕi and wi are
                                                             i=1
the i’th reward parameters and weight. To solve the optimization problem, the predictive sampling
implementation is used in our work (Howell et al., 2022).
A subtask can have more than one reward function, the Low-Level Planner also reasons about which
reward function actually determines the success state of the action. For example, for the subtask:
Move the kettle away from the microwave, the Planner generates:
minimize_l2_distance_reward("palm", "kettle")
maximize_l2_distance_reward("kettle", "microwave_handle")


The Planner is able to reason that once the function maximize l2 distance reward
("kettle", "microwave handle") has been satisfied, the kettle has been moved from the
microwave. Thus, the Planner correctly labels this as the primary reward function.

3.5   LLM V ERIFIER

LLM outputs can contain errors and are sometimes nondeterministic. One way to increase con-
sistency and reliable is to verify the outputs. We do that by taking plans produced by both the
High-Level and Low-Level Planners and asking the Verifier to verify that every step proposed is
necessary to achieve the goal. For the Low-Level Planner, the Verifier is used to determine whether
each step in the generated motion plan is useful for completing the subtask. This eliminates any
unrelated actions that the Low-Level Planner. Motion control is a hard problem, eliminating any
unnecessary actions increases the chances of the subtask being completed.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VLMs are prone to hallucination (Dai et al., 2023), and so they are used in a very constrained
manner, and so the Verifier is also used to correct any observations made by the Perceiver based
on objects that it knows exist in the environment. For example, VLMs can identify an object using
different synonyms, which is easy for humans to understand. However robots require instructions
that adhere to strict syntax rules. Thus, the Verifier is useful in making sure that plans generated
using perceived objects are in line with the object names that the robot can interact with.

Algorithm 1 R E PL AN                                                                                Algorithm 1 describes our
                                                                                                     model. A user inputs a goal,
Input: user goal prompt g, scene image observation oimg
Output: motion controller rewards and their weights r = {r1 , . . . , rM , w1 , . . . , wM }, suc-
                                                                                                     which is fed into the High-
    cess/failure of planner done                                                                     Level Planner along with the
 1: memory = ∅, done = False                                                                         scene state from the Perceiver.
 2: sscene = P ERCEIVER S CAN(oimg )                                   ▷ scene state, Prompt B.1     The Planner generates sub-
 3: while i < num retries do
 4:     subtasks = H IGH L EVEL P LANNER(g, sscene , memory)                         ▷ Prompt B.2
                                                                                                     tasks, which are then either
 5:     for all subtask, action type ∈ subtasks do                                                   fielded to the Low-Lever Plan-
 6:         if action type = MPC then                                                                ner to generate MPC reward
 7:             r = L OW L EVEL P LANNER(subtask)                            ▷ Prompts B.4-B.8       functions or the Perceiver to
 8:             e, oimg = M OTION C ONTROLLER(robot, r)                    ▷ motor control error
 9:             if e ̸= ∅ then
                                                                                                     get information about the state.
10:                  cause = P ERCEIVER D IAGNOSE(oimg , e, subtask) ▷ Prompts B.9-B.12              If MPC is required, the success
11:                  if cause ̸= ∅ then                                                              of the action is returned from
12:                      subtasksreplan = H IGH L EVEL P LANNER(subtask,                             the Motion Controller. If an er-
                                                      sscene , cause)              ▷ Prompt B.13
13:                      subtasks = subtasksreplan
                                                                                                     ror is returned, the Perceiver is
14:                      R ESTART(subtasks, line:6)                                                  asked if there was a cause. If
15:         else if action type = VLM then                                                           a cause is returned, the Planner
16:             q = H IGH L EVEL P LANNER(subtask)                        ▷ Prompts B.14 - B.15      is asked to replan to overcome
17:             sscene ← sscene ∪ P ERCEIVER ACT(oimg , q, subtask)                ▷ Prompt B.16     the obstacles. If the cause is
18:             R ESTART(subtask, line:6)                                          ▷ Prompt B.17
                                                                                                     unknown or the robot does not
19:         done = TASK C OMPLETION(g)
20:         if done then
                                                                                                     achieve the goal after having
21:             break                                                                                done the subtasks, the Planner
22:     memory ← memory ∪ subtasks                                                 ▷ Prompt B.18     generates a new procedure.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1     E NVIRONMENTS AND TASKS

In order to assess the long-term planning, as well as the logical and low-level planning capabilities
of our system, we devised four distinct environments with seven total tasks for testing. The readers
can refer to Figure A.1 or our website for visualizations.

4.1.1      W OODEN CABINET SCENE

A room where there is a yellow cube placed on the floor beside a wooden cabinet. There is a red
bar holding the handles of the wooden cabinet closed. The doors of the cabinet cannot be opened
without removing the bar. We implemented three tasks in this scene:

Task 1: Place the yellow cube in the wooden cabinet (easy mode). The robot must pick up the
yellow cube and place it in the cabinet, which is open. This is a simple 1-step task that evaluates the
Low-Level Planner for single motion planning.

Task 2: Place the yellow cube in the wooden cabinet (hard mode). This task is the same as
the previous task, but now the wooden cabinet doors are closed. This task requires two steps: 1)
opening the door and 2) placing the cube inside the cabinet. The High-Level Planner is assessed to
plan a sequence of actions and pass them to the Low-Level Planner for motion generation.

Task 3: Place the yellow cube inside the wooden cabinet (expert mode). The challenge with
this task is that the robot must identify that it cannot open the wooden cabinet because there is a
bar across the handles of the door. After removing the bar, the robot can open the cabinet door and
finish the task. This task is challenging because it requires vision to identify that the door cannot be
opened, followed by replanning to remove the item blocking the door.


                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1.2      K ITCHEN ENVIRONMENT SCENE
A kitchen that contains a cabinet with two doors, a microwave, a kettle, and a green apple.

Task 4: Find the green apple. A green apple was hidden in the microwave is not visible to the
robot at the start of the scene. The robot must search for the apple in the kitchen. There is an
additional challenge where the kettle is blocking the microwave door from being opened, and so to
open the door, the robot must first remove the kettle. Same as Task 3, Task 4 also requires both
vision and replanning to solve the task, but it has an additional challenge because the goal requires
open-ended exploration (it is unclear where the apple is), which requires replanning at a high level.

4.1.3      W OODEN CABINET AND LEVER SCENE
A room containing a wooden cabinet, a blue block, and a lever that controls whether the cabinet
door is locked or unlocked.

Task 5: Remove the blue cube from the cabinet. Just as with tasks 1-3, this task requires the
robot to open a cabinet. There is no physical obstruction preventing the cabinet from being opened;
however, the cabinet is locked. The cabinet becomes unlocked once a lever close to the cabinet is
pulled. Thus, after (unsuccessfully) trying to open the cabinet door, the robot must reason that it
should pull the lever first and then open the door.

4.1.4      C OLOURED CUBES SCENE
A room containing a small red crate and two cubes (one is yellow and the other is red).

Task 6: Place the cube with the same colour as the crate on the crate. In this task, the robot
has to identify the cube with the same colour as the crate and place it on the crate.

Task 7: Blocking cube. The robot is given the colour of a cube it must put on the crate. However,
there is already a cube on the crate with a different colour and the crate can only hold one cube at a
time. The robot must remove the cube that is already on the crate before placing the target one.
These environments were implemented in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). We used furniture sim 1
for the assets. We used the MuJoCo MPC (Howell et al., 2022) to generate the motion control.

4.2      E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We evaluate our framework using a dexterous robot manipulator simulated using MuJoCo MPC
(MJPC) (Howell et al., 2022). As in (Yu et al., 2023), we use a 7 DoF Franka Emika arm.
For the LLM modules in R E PL AN, we use OpenAI GPT gpt-42 . For the VLM Perceiver, we
used Qwen-VL-Chat-7B (Bai et al., 2023) (except for Task 7, where we used GPT-4V due to
hardware constraints). We show the performance of state-of-the-art VLMs on Perceiver tasks in
Appendix C.2. We found that from the open-source models we tested, Qwen has the best object
reasoning skills; however, its object recognition capabilities improve when we first segment the
scene using a segmentation model (we use Segment Anything Kirillov et al. (2023)). GPT-4V had
the best performance overall across object recognition and object reasoning, but there is a strict rate
limit on its API.

4.3      BASELINES AND A BLATIONS

We compare our method to the Language to Rewards (Yu et al., 2023) framework, a one-shot, in-
context learning agent. Language to Rewards uses a Reward Translator to translate a high-level goal
(such as“open the drawer”) to low-level reward functions that are used by a Motion Controller to
instruct a robot on what to do. While Language to Rewards does not utilize a VLM to perceive the
scene, we give it access to the same objects as our model identifies at the start of the scene. We also
   1
       https://github.com/vikashplus/furniture sim/
   2
       https://openai.com/research/gpt-4


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Number of times that the models completed Tasks 1-7 out of 10 runs. Average completion rates across
7 tasks are listed in the last column.

                 Model                    Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6 Task 7 Average
              R E PL AN [full]            100%   100%    60%     80%    100%      90%    90%     88.6%
          R E PL AN [no Verifier]          80%    80%    20%     60%    100%     100%    80%     74.3%
         R E PL AN [no Perceiver]          90%    90%    30%     20%     50%      20%     0%     42.9%
          R E PL AN [no Replan]            80%    70%     0%      0%      0%      80%    10%     34.3%
  Language to Rewards (Yu et al., 2023)   90%    20%      0%      0%      0%     50%     10%     24.3%



show sample plans using PDDL and PDDLStream in Appendix E for Tasks 1-3 and GPT-4V for
Tasks 3 and 6 in Appendix D.
Finally, to demonstrate the importance of all the modules in our pipeline, we do an ablation study
on how well the robot can perform each task without each module. We systematically remove the
following modules: VLM Perceiver, LLM Verifier, and replanning of High-Level Planner.

4.4   R ESULTS

We report the success rates of all models on their ability to complete Tasks 1-7 in Table 1. We
report the percentage of successful runs (ten runs were done for each task). The number of actions
performed by the robot in each task is shown in Figure C.1. On average, most tasks require 7 to 11
steps, with some runs using up to 17 (all without human intervention). We point out that across the
seven tasks with ten trials, we run a total of 401 MPC actions and 101 VLM actions, exceeding the
evaluations in previous methods such as Language to Rewards, which has 170 MPC actions.
Overall, R E PL AN achieves a 3.6× improvement over Language to Rewards. From the seven tasks,
Language to Rewards only shows non-negligible success rates in Task 1, which is a single-motion
task, and Task 6, where the algorithm can guess the correct cube to move, resulting in a 50% success
rate. Meanwhile, R E PL AN achieves at least 60% completion rate in all tested tasks, with a close
to 90% average completion rate. R E PL AN performs the worst in Task 3, which we conjecture to
be a result of both the difficulty of removing the bar from the handles and that in certain situations
the target block can get stuck in irrecoverable positions. We include some additional error cases in
Appendix C.3. Furthermore, we find that PDDL and naive GPT-4V are unable to solve these tasks
out-of-the-box. PDDL requires human-provided ground truth information (for example, that the
door is blocked) E. PDDLStream is able to solve the problem eventually, but in general, it requires
much longer to solve the problem. When we prompt GPT-4V naively to create a plan for solving
some tasks, it is unable to naturally identify obstacles or object states in the scene D. This indicates
that constrained prompting is required for VLMs to provide useful feedback.
To evaluate the significance of the Verifier, Perceiver, and Replan modules, we notice that R E PL AN
achieves +14.3%, +45.7%, and +54.3% improvement compared with removing the three modules
respectively. We also notice that removing each of the modules impact the performance more in
more complex tasks.
Noticeably, even in simpler tasks such as Task 1 and 2, R E PL AN still demonstrates superior per-
formances compared to other tested variants even though replanning is not necessary in the ideal
scenario. This shows R E PL AN’s ability to act as a safe-net mechanism in case of unexpected errors
through using a Verifier, improving the overall consistency.
We show a roll-out of the robot completing Tasks 3 and 4 in Figure 2. For Task 4, the High-Level
Planner first instructs the robot to look inside the cabinet. The Perceiver informs the Planner that
the apple is not in the cabinet. The Planner then instructs the robots to look inside the microwave.
However, the motion control fails. The Perceiver is again called and informs the Planner that there is
a kettle in front of the microwave. The Planner replans the task, instructing the robot to first move the
kettle out of the way. The robot then resumes with the remaining subtasks. It opens the microwave
and the Perceiver informs the Planner that the green apple is there and the task is complete.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Plan                                                                        Replan #1
               [start plan]
        (a)      >Pick up the yellow_cube
                                                                         [start plan]
                                                                           >Move the red_block out of the way
                 >Open the wooden_cabinet
                                                                           >Open the wooden_cabinet
                 >Place the yellow_cube inside
                                                                           >Put the yellow_cube inside the wooden_cabinet
                  the wooden_cabinet
                                                                         [end plan]                                                                           Task
               [end plan]                                                                                                                                     complete

                                                                         >Move block out
              >Pick up the cube        >Open the cabinet                                                     >Open the cabinet                    >Put yellow cube in
                                                                         of the way

                                                                     min_l2_dist("palm",                  min_l2_dist("palm",                        min_l2_dist("palm",
               min_l2_dist("palm",     min_l2_dist("palm",
                                                                         "block_r_side")                    "cabinet")                                 "yellow_cube")
                 "yellow_cube")           "mv")
                                                                     max_l2_dist(                         joint_fraction("cabinet",                  min_l2_dist(
                                       joint_fraction("mv,
                                                                         "block_r_side",                    1.0)                                       "cabinet",
                                          1.0)
                                                                         "cabinet_handle"                                                              "yellow_cube")
                                             FAILED
                                                                     )
                                          VLM Perceiver:
                                         Block in the way


                                Plan                        Replan #1                                                     Replan #2
                                                                                     [start plan]
               [start plan]                             [start plan]
                                                                                         >Move the kettle out of the way of the microwave
        (b)      >Open the cabinet
                 >Look inside the cabinet
                                                        >Open the m.v
                                                        >Look in m.v
                                                                                         >Open the microwave
                                                                                         >Look inside the microwave
                 >Grab the green_apple                  >Grab grn_apl
                                                                                         >Grab the green_apple                                                Task
               [end plan]                               [end plan]
                                                                                     [end plan]                                                               complete

              >Open the cabinet     >Look in cabinet        >Open the m.v.          >Move the kettle        >Open the m.v.       >Look in the m.v.    >Grab the grn_apple
                                         FAILED
              min_l2_dist("palm",   VLM Perceiver:      min_l2_dist("palm",         min_l2_dist("palm",    min_l2_dist("palm",
                                                                                                                                 VLM Perceiver:       min_l2_dist("palm",
                "cabinet")                                   "mv")                    "kettle")              "mv")                                      "green_apple")
              joint_fraction(       Green apple is      joint_fraction(             max_l2_dist(           join_fraction(        Green_apple
                "cabinet", 1.0)     not there!               "mv", 1.0)               "kettle",              "mv", 1.0)          found!
                                                                                      "microwave")
                                                                FAILED
                                                              VLM Perceiver:
                                                            Kettle in the way


Figure 2: Roll-out of robot solving (a) Task 3 and (b) Task 4. The high-level plan is shown in the top row. The
second row shows each subtask and the corresponding reward functions generated by the Low-Level Planner,
as well as Perceiver feedback. If the subtask fails, its box is colored in red. If the plan is completed and the
goal is achieved, its box is green.


5    D ISCUSSION , L IMITATIONS , AND C ONCLUSIONS
One limitation of our method is its reliance on VLM’s understanding and interpretation of spatial
states. If the VLM cannot accurately recognize an object or interpret the reason why a task is incom-
plete, it may lead to the inaccurate processing of the robotic task. However, we find that by using an
LLM to probe specific questions, sampling multiple answers, and generating a summary consistent
with the LLM’s knowledge of the scene, R E PL AN is able to utilize the VLM to accurately reason
about the scene state. Moreover, there sometimes exists a communication disconnect between LLM
and MPC. Currently, the LLM receives task failure feedback as a floating point number, without the
ability to discern the specific reasons behind the failure (e.g. the cube was pushed to irretrievable
places). Consequently, a failure attributed to the controller could be incorrectly interpreted as the
task being undoable. This misinterpretation can lead to unnecessary task abandonment or repeated
attempts, resulting in a waste of time and resources. However, we also find that we were able to
make MPC reward generation more robust by using a Verifier to eliminate any reward functions that
were not essential to completing the task. In essence, we found that using a Verifier at multiple
stages in our workflow was essential in improving the success rate of long-horizon task exection.
In summary, our paper introduces R E PL AN, a robust solution for multi-stage planning, utilizing
the power of LLMs for plan generation and VLMs for insightful feedback. Our multi-level plan-
ning approach, coupled with step-wise verification and replanning demonstrates promising results
in addressing multi-stage tasks.


                                                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Constructions Aeronautiques, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, ISI Drew McDermott, Ashwin Ram,
  Manuela Veloso, Daniel Weld, David Wilkins SRI, Anthony Barrett, Dave Christianson, et al.
  PDDL - the planning domain definition language. Tech. Rep., 1998.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Jorge A Baier, Fahiem Bacchus, and Sheila A McIlraith. A heuristic search approach to planning
  with temporally extended preferences. Artif. Intell., 2009.
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia,
  Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, et al. A multitask, multilingual, multimodal evaluation of
  chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023a.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023b.
Wenliang Dai, Zihan Liu, Ziwei Ji, Dan Su, and Pascale Fung. Plausible may not be faithful:
 Probing object hallucination in vision-language pre-training. In Proceedings of the 17th Confer-
 ence of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2136–2148,
 Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 2023.eacl-main.156. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.156.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Carlos E Garcia, David M Prett, and Manfred Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and prac-
  tice—a survey. Automatica, 25(3):335–348, 1989.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. PDDLStream: Integrating
  symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of the
  30th Int. Conf. on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), pp. 440–448. AAAI Press, 2020.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack
  Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of
  control, robotics, and autonomous systems, 4:265–293, 2021.
Alfonso Gerevini, Alessandro Saetti, and Ivan Serina. An approach to temporal planning and
  scheduling in domains with predictable exogenous events. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
  search, 25:187–231, 2006.
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond J Mooney. Using natural language for reward shaping
  in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02020, 2019.
Huy Ha, Pete Florence, and Shuran Song. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot
  skill acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14535, 2023.
Minho Heo, Youngwoon Lee, Doohyun Lee, and Joseph J Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible
 real-world benchmark for long-horizon complex manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12821,
 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taylor Howell, Nimrod Gileadi, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Kevin Zakka, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa.
  Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo. dec 2022. doi: 10.48550/
  arXiv.2212.00541. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00541.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
 zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2201.07207, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
Mohamed Khodeir, Ben Agro, and Florian Shkurti. Learning to search in task and motion planning
 with streams. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(4):1983–1990, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001, 2023.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 80–93. PMLR, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint,
  2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.07753.
Jessy Lin, Daniel Fried, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan. Inferring rewards from language in context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02515, 2022.
Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion:
  From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning, 2023.
Ruibo Liu, Jason Wei, Shixiang Shane Gu, Te-Yen Wu, Soroush Vosoughi, Claire Cui, Denny Zhou,
  and Andrew M Dai. Mind’s eye: Grounded language model reasoning through simulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.05359, 2022.
Parsa Mahmoudieh, Deepak Pathak, and Trevor Darrell. Zero-shot reward specification via
  grounded natural language. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14743–14752.
  PMLR, 2022.
Drew McDermott, Malik Ghallab, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, Ashwin Ram, Manuela Veloso,
  Daniel Weld, and David Wilkins. Pddl-the planning domain definition language. 1998.
S Hessam M Mehr, Matthew Craven, Artem I Leonov, Graham Keenan, and Leroy Cronin. A
  universal system for digitization and automatic execution of the chemical synthesis literature.
  Science, 370(6512):101–108, 2020.
Yuya Miyaoka, Masaki Inoue, and Tomotaka Nii. Chatmpc: Natural language based mpc personal-
  ization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf.
  Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable task planning.
  In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=wMpOMO0Ss7a.
James B Rawlings. Tutorial overview of model predictive control. IEEE control systems magazine,
  20(3):38–52, 2000.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11302, 2022.
Marta Skreta, Naruki Yoshikawa, Sebastian Arellano-Rubach, Zhi Ji, Lasse Bjørn Kristensen,
 Kourosh Darvish, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Florian Shkurti, and Animesh Garg. Errors are useful
 prompts: Instruction guided task programming with verifier-assisted iterative prompting. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.14100, 2023.
Austin Stone, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kuang-Huei Lee, Quan Vuong, Paul
  Wohlhart, Brianna Zitkovich, Fei Xia, Chelsea Finn, et al. Open-world object manipulation using
  pre-trained vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00905, 2023.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023c.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Bohan Wu, Roberto Martin-Martin, and Li Fei-Fei. M-ember: Tackling long-horizon mobile ma-
  nipulation via factorized domain transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13567, 2023.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang, and
  Tao Yu. Text2reward: Automated dense reward function generation for reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11489, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=WE_vluYUL-X.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Are-
 nas, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to
 rewards for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS


                         (a) Task 1 - initial             (b) Task 1 - complete


                         (c) Task 2 - initial             (d) Task 2 - complete


                         (e) Task 3 - initial             (f) Task 3 - complete


                         (g) Task 4 - initial             (h) Task 4 - complete


                         (i) Task 5 - initial             (j) Task 5 - complete

                    Figure A.1: Initial and final scenes of the tested environments.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            (k) Task 6 - initial             (l) Task 6 - complete


                            (m) Task 7 - initial             (n) Task 7 - complete


                            (o) Task 8 - initial             (p) Task 8 - complete

                       Figure A.1: Initial and final scenes of the tested environments.


The instructions we use for each task are listed below:

    Environment           Instruction
    Cabinet (Task 1-3)    move the yellow cube to target position inside
                          the wooden cabinet
    Kitchen (Task 4)      find the green cube
    Lever (Task 5)        find the blue cube
    Color (Task 6)        place the cube with the same color as the crate
                          on the crate
    Block (Task 7)        place the red cube on the crate
    Sensor (Task 8)       open the stone cabinet. The weight sensor lock
                          can be unlocked by putting the red cube on it.

B    P ROMPTS
Below we show all the prompts we use for the Planners, Perceiver, and Verifier. We show the
prompts as the robot would receive them while excuting a task. The prompts are coloured according
to the module it comes from – LLM Planners: blue, VLM Perceiver: pink, Verifier: gray.

Do you see a(n) {0}?


Figure B.1: VLM prompt for perceiving objects in the environment. {0} is an object that the robot knows how
to interact with. The VLM is prompted with the list of objects the robot knows how to interact with. If the
VLM replies with ”yes”, that object is added to a list of observed objects.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A stationary robot arm is in a location where it sees the following list of objects:

{0}

The robot has the following goal: {1}

Propose high-level, abstract subtasks of what the robot needs to do to {1}. The plan can
 only use one object.

For example, if the goal is to find a fork, one plan might be:

<thought>To find the fork, I will start by looking inside the drawer.</thought>
[start plan]
    >Open the drawer
    >Look inside the drawer
    >Grab the fork
[end plan]

Rules:
1. You have access to the following objects: {0}. Do not create new objects.
2. Generate a plan that interacts with only one object from the list at a time. Keep it
as short as possible. Most plans should be under 5 steps.
3. Assume that every action is completed successfully.
4. Assume the first thing you try works.
5. Your plan should only propose one way of accomplishing the task.
6. The robot only has one arm and it cannot hold two things at a time. Remember that
when you are deciding on the order of actions.
7. Enclose your thought process with a single pair of tag <thought> and </thought>
8. Enclose your plan with the a single pair of tag [start plan] and [end plan]

{2}


Figure B.2: LLM prompt for generating high-level task plans. {0} is the list of objects the robot can see (for
example: [cabinet, blue kettle, microwave], {1} is the overall task goal (for example: find the green apple), {2}
are previous plans that were attempted but failed (see B.18).


A robot was asked to do this action:
    > {0}
If the central verb is related to vision, answer yes.


Figure B.3: LLM prompt to determine whether the action that the Planner asked the robot to do involves vision
or not. If no, then the Planner is called to generate MPC reward functions (see B.4-B.13). If yes, the Perceiver
is called (see B.14-B.17). Examples for {0}: “Compare the color of the left cube with the crate”, “Open the
microwave”.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We have a stationary robot arm and we want you to help plan how it should move to
perform tasks using the following template:
[start of description]
The manipulator’s palm should move close to {{CHOICE: {0}}}.{1}{2}
[end of description]
Rules:
0. You cannot use one line twice!!!!
1. If you see phrases like [NUM: default_value], replace the entire phrase with a
numerical value.
2. If you see phrases like {{CHOICE: choice1, choice2, ...}}, it means you should
replace the entire phrase with one of the choices listed.
3. If you see [optional], it means you only add that line if necessary for the task,
otherwise remove that line.
4. The environment contains {0}. Do not invent new objects not listed here.
5. I will tell you a behavior/skill/task that I want the manipulator to perform and you
will provide the full plan, even if you may only need to change a few lines. Always
start the description with [start of description] and end it with [end of description].
6. You can assume that the robot is capable of doing anything, even for the most
challenging task.
7. Your plan should be as close to the provided template as possible. Do not include
additional details.
8. Your plan should be as concise as possible. Do not include or make up unncessary
tasks.
9. Each object can only be close to or far from one thing.

This is the entire procedure:
{4}

These are the observations we have made so far:
{5}

Create a plan for the following action:
    > {6}


Figure B.4: LLM prompt to determine the low-level motion plan for the robot. {0} is the list of objects the
robot can interact with. {1} and {2} are modifiers, depending on what type of motion is involved. The Planner
is asked to determine whether motion is involved (see B.5. If yes, then {1} becomes: object1={{CHOICE:
{0}}} should be {{CHOICE: close to, far from}} object2={{CHOICE: {0}}}.
If no, then {1} becomes [optional] object1={{CHOICE: {0}}} should be close to
object2={{CHOICE: {0}}}. [optional] object1={{CHOICE: {0}}} should be far
from object2={{CHOICE: {0}}}. The modifier {2} is added if there are any joints in the scene that
are involved with objects the robot can interact with: [optional] joint={{CHOICE: {3}}} needs
to be {{CHOICE: open, closed}}. (where {3} is the list of joints) (adapted from (Yu et al., 2023))
{4} is the entire plan the robot was given to execute the goal. {5} includes any observations made by the
Perceiver (see B.16) using the following format: Q: <question to Perceiver>, A: <answer
from Perceiver>. {6} is the action the motion plan should be made for.


A robot arm has to do this action:
    > {0}
Does this action necessarily involve relocating an object to a different location that
does not involve the robot arm? Answer with yes or no.


Figure B.5: LLM prompt to determine if relocation is needed in order to determine the motion plan modifier
(see B.4.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We have a plan of a robot arm with palm to manipulate objects and we want you to turn
that into the corresponding program with following functions:

     def minimize_l2_distance_reward(name_obj_A, name_obj_B)

where name_obj_A and name_obj_B are selected from {0}. This term sets a reward for
minimizing l2 distance between name_obj_A and name_obj_B so they get closer to each
other. rest_position is the default position for the palm when it’s holding in the air.

     def maximize_l2_distance_reward(name_obj_A, name_obj_B, distance=0.5)

This term encourages the orientation of name_obj to be close to the target (specified by
 x_axis_rotation_radians).

     def execute_plan(duration=2)

This function sends the parameters to the robot and execute the plan for "duration"
seconds, default to be 2.

     def set_joint_fraction_reward(name_joint, fraction)

This function sets the joint to a certain value between 0 and 1. 0 means close and 1
means open. name_joint needs to be select from {1}.

     def reset_reward()

This function resets the reward to default values.
Example plan: To perform this task, the manipulator’s palm should move close to object1=
faucet_handle. object1 needs to be lifted to a height of 1.0.
This is the first plan for a new task.
Example answer code:

     import numpy as np

     reset_reward()
         # This is a new task so reset reward; otherwise we don’t need it
     minimize_l2_distance_reward("palm", "faucet_handle")
     set_joint_fraction_reward("faucet", 1.0)

     execute_plan(4)

Remember:
1. Always format the code in code blocks. In your response execute_plan should be called
 exactly once at the end.
2. Do not invent new functions or classes. The only allowed functions you can call are
the ones listed above. Do not leave unimplemented code blocks in your response.
3. The only allowed library is numpy. Do not import or use any other library.
4. If you are not sure what value to use, just use your best judge. Do not use None for
anything.
5. Do not calculate the position or direction of any object (except for the ones
provided above). Just use a number directly based on your best guess.
6. You do not need to make the robot do extra things not mentioned in the plan such as
stopping the robot.

The action to perform is {2} and the plan is:
{3}


Figure B.6: LLM prompt to generate MPC reward functions. {0} is the list of objects the robot can interact
with, to which we also append the word “palm” to represent the robot hand. {1} is the list of object joints. {2}
is the high-level action the robot needs to perform and {3} is the motion plan generated from B.4. Adapted
from (Yu et al., 2023).


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This is a motion plan generated for a robot:

{0}

This is a reward function generated to complete one step in the motion plan:

{1}

The function minimize_l2_distance_reward() refers to bringing two objects close together
.
The function maximize_l2_distance_reward() refers to moving two objects further apart.
The function set_joint_fraction_reward() refers to opening or closing an object (0 for
closed, 1 for open)
The function set_obj_z_position_reward() specifies the target height of an object.
The function set_obj_orientation_reward() specifies the target rotation of an object.

Which step in the motion plan is the function referring to? Return the step using <step
></step> tags. If it does not refer to any of them, return <step>-1</step>


Figure B.7: The Verifier checks that every reward function generated corresponds to a step in the motion plan.
If it does not, the function is removed. {0} is the motion plan generated from Figure B.4 and {1} is one of the
generated reward functions (they are looped over individually).


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A stationary robot arm was asked to do the following motion plan to complete the task
’{0}’:

{1}

After which step in the motion plan will the task ’{0}’ be satisfied? First, explain
your thought then answer the step number enclosed with the tag <step> and </step>.
Opening a joint can also mean activating it depending on the context. You must select
one. If you think none of the steps does, select the closest one.


Figure B.8: The verifier selects which step in the motion plan is considered to be the most important. The
reward function generated for that step in the motion plan becomes labelled as the primary reward function.
{0} is the action the robot is currently doing and {1} is the motion plan.


A robot is in a simulation environment where it can interact with any object like in the
 real world. The robot would like to {0} but it cannot. Is there something in this scene
 preventing that, other than the robot? Assume the robot can interact with anything.
These are the names of the objects in our scene: {1}
In a simulation, a robot wants to {0} but can’t. Is anything else, besides the robot,
blocking it? Check the objects in the scene: {1}.
Robot in a simulation wants to {0}, can’t. Something else stopping it? Objects in scene:
 {1}.
A robot can engage with any item. It wants to {0} but can’t. Is an object in this scene,
 apart from the robot, hindering it? Objects present: {1}
I would like to {0} but I cannot. Is there something in this scene preventing that,
other than the robot? These are the objects in the scene: {1}
I would like to {0} but I am unable to. Is there something in this scene preventing me
from doing that? Ignore the robot. These are the names of the objects: {1}


Figure B.9: If the robot is unable to satisfy the primary reward function, the Perceiver is queried on whether
there are any obstacles in the scene. The Perceiver is called once for each question (total of 6). Questions 2-4
and 6 were variations generated for Q1 and Q5, respectively, using ChatGPT.


We have access to the following objects in our scene: {0}

You are given a sentence describing an image of the scene, but it may have gotten the
names of the objects wrong. Does this sentence contain objects that are not in our scene
 or get the names of the objects wrong? Start your answer with yes or no.

{1}


Figure B.10: For every explanation from the Perceiver, the Verifier is called to determine whether the explana-
tion lists objects that do not exist in the scene. {0} is the list of objects in the scene and {1} is the explanation
from the Perceiver. If the Verifier answers with ’yes’, the explanation is passed to B.11 for object remapping.


We have access to the following objects in our scene: {0}

You are given a sentence describing an image of the scene, but got the names of the
objects wrong. Rewrite this sentence using the closest object(s) in our environment:

{1}

Rules:
You can only use objects in the scene. Use your best judgement.


Figure B.11: If the Verifier identifies that the Perceiver explanation contains objects that are not listed in the
scene, the Verifier rewrites the explanation ({1}) using the closest objects in our scene ({0}).


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The stationary robot arm would like to {0} but it cannot. Here are possible reasons why
based on images of the scene:

      {1}

Based on the above explanations, what are the top reason(s) why the robot cannot {0}?
List each reason on a separate line, enclosed with the tag <reason> </reason>. Provide
up to two reasons. Be as succinct as possible. You must not include any reasons related
to the robot, only reasons related to objects in the scene.


Figure B.12: The Planner receives all explanations from the Perceiver ({1}, see B.9 -B.11) and summarizes
them into key reasons explaining why the robot could not do the action {0}.



<Prompt from B.2>

One or more previous attempts failed. Below are the details.
---------------------------------- attempt #1 ----------------------------------
This attempt failed when executing ’\{0\}’.The plan failed because the robot was not
able to execute this action: ’\{1\}’. This was identified as a possible reason the
action failed: ’{2}’.
...
---------------------------------- attempt #R ----------------------------------
...
---------------------------- end of failed attempts ----------------------------
Reminder to propose a different plan than the above failed attempts.


Figure B.13: If the robot does not succeed in performing an action, the Planner is able to replan how the robot
does the action by providing the failure reason(s) from the Perceiver from the R failures reasons. Example for
{0}: ’Place the red cube on the crate’. Example for {1}: ’Place the red cube on the crate (incidentally the
action is the same as the overall goal, but it doesn’t have to be)’. Example for {2}: ’The most probable reason
why the robot cannot place the red cube on top of the crate is that the yellow cube is currently on top of the
crate, which would prevent the robot from doing so.’


You are a robot in the process of executing this plan, with the overall goal to ’{0}’:

{1}

You are currently performing this action: ’{2}’. You have access to a perception model
that can answer your questions related to vision.

{3}

What question do you want to ask the perception model in order to get the answer to
’{2}’? You can ask up to two questions. You don’t have to ask if the information is
already sufficient. Avoid asking the vision model to compare things. Enclose each of
your questions with the tag <question> </question>.


Figure B.14: If the action requires calling the Perceiver, this prompt is used to determine what questions the
Planner wants to ask the Perceiver. {0} is the overall goal, {1} is the high-level plan, {2} is the action the robot
is currecntly performing, {3} are the observed objects in the scene.


What type of question is this asking perception model: ’{0}’? Choose your answer from [
OBJECT_PRESENCE, OBJECT_ATTRIBUTE, NEITHER]


Figure B.15: Prompt to field what category of question the Planner wants to ask the Perceiver model. {0} is
the output from B.14.


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


<Output from B.14. The names of the objects in our scene are: {0}. {1}


Figure B.16: Perceiver query on information about the state of objects in the scene from B.14. States are related
to object presence or object attributes. Examples of queries: ‘Look for the apple in the cabinet’, ‘Check the
color of the crate’.



A robot was tasked to do this plan:

{0}

The robot is currently doing this action: ’{1}’.

To do the action, the robot asked a perception model the following questions (Q) and got
 the answers (A):

{2}

After receiving this answer, has the robot completed the action ’{1}’? Begin your
answer with yes or no. If your answer begins with no, write the remaining action that
needs to be completed using <Action></Action> tags.


Figure B.17: After the Perceiver has provided information, the Planner is asked to determine whether the action
is completed. If not, it generates MPC reward functions to finish the action (see B.4-B.18).


<Prompt from B.2>

One or more previous attempts failed. Below are the details.
---------------------------------- attempt #1 ----------------------------------
The proposed plan was:
<thought>{0}</thought>
[start plan]
{1}
[end plan]
The plan failed because {2}.
...
---------------------------------- attempt #P ----------------------------------
...
---------------------------- end of failed attempts ----------------------------
Reminder to propose a different plan than the above failed attempts.


Figure B.18: If by executing the plan or the replan and the goal is still not accomplished, the Planner is prompted
to generate a new plan using the prompt in Figure B.2. The Planner is allowed to generate a new plan P times.
before the task is considered undoable.



C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

C.1    M OTION C ONTROLLER

We run additional experiments to test the consistency of our motion controller. Specifically, we pick
4 important motions in our main experiments and run the motion controller 20 times each. The
picked motions are:

       • Opening door. A common motion that opens the cabinet door. This specific tested one is
         picked from Task 2.
       • Removing bar. Picked from Task 3, where the robot needs to remove the bar between the
         door handles.
       • Removing kettle. Picked from Task 4, where the robot needs to remove the kettle that is
         obstructing the microwave door.
       • Pulling lever. Picked from Task 5, where the robot needs to pull the lever switch to unlock
         the cabinet door.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure C.1: Number of actions the robot executed in each task averaged over ten runs. Actions requiring the
Perceiver are shown in pink while those executed using MPC are shown in purple. Standard deviations are
shown using gray bars while the minimum and maximum number of actions are shown using gray dots.


                                        Motion           Success rate %
                                      Opening door           100%
                                      Removing bar           100%
                                     Removing kettle         80%
                                      Pulling lever          100%

We would like to comment that these tests are carried out in an ideal setting. During actual planning,
multiple facts can affect the motion success rate. For example, the motion planner could generate
unnecessary reward functions; and previous steps could change the locations or poses of the objects
to interact.

C.2      VLM A BLATION

We conduct a VLM ablation study for Tasks 3-4 using two open-source models (Qwen-VL-
Chat7B (Bai et al., 2023) and Llava-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2023)) and GPT-4V3 . The results are shown
in Table 2. We measure (a) their ability to recognize objects, reported as a percentage of the number
of object successfully detected in the scene (column 2), (b) their ability to reason about obstacles in
the scene, reported as a percentage of times the correct reason was identified out of all the prompts it
was given in Figure B.9, and (c) the ability for the LLM to consilidate the outputs in (b) into a single
summary reason of why the robot cannot perform an action given its knowledge about the scene. We
found that Qwen somtimes struggled with object detection of smaller objects, and so we coupled
it with Segment Anything Model (SAM) Kirillov et al. (2023) to first segment the objects in the
scene. We found that all models did well with object recognition (except for Qwen when not used
with SAM). For object reasoning, Qwen + SAM was able to get the correct scene error in 50-67%
of the prompts it was given, and then the LLM was able to summarize the prompts to generate the
correct error reason overall. The reason the LLM was able to do this despite the VLM not giving
perfect answers was that the remaining VLM answers pertained where the robot was located or a
general comment about the objects in the scene. Llava tended to reply that it was unable to reason
because the scene was a simulation and not real life. GPT-4V had the best overall performance in
all categories, but API calls to it are still restricted. All ablations were repeated over 5 runs.

C.3      E RROR C ASES

Here we provide three error cases of R E PL AN and their analyses.

Case 1 (from Task 3, Figure C.2a) The robot tried to open the cabinet door but failed and the
Perceiver gave a correct diagnosis to remove the bar from the handle. However, when generating
the reward functions to remove the bar, the LLM selected the wrong primary reward function, as
demonstrated below:
   3
       https://openai.com/research/gpt-4


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Models
                     Scenarios                    Qwen + SAM       Qwen     Llava   GPT-4V
            VLM object detection                         100%      66%      100%    100%
              VLM Reasoning                               67%       0%       23%    100%
     LLM summarization and consistency step              100%       0%      100%    100%
                                            (a) Task 3

                                                                   Models
                     Scenarios                    Qwen + SAM       Qwen     Llava   GPT-4V
            VLM object detection                         100%      100%     100%    100%
              VLM Reasoning                               50%       66%      40%     83%
     LLM summarization and consistency step              100%      100%      20%    100%
                                            (b) Task 4

                                   Table 2: VLM ablation study.


                 (a) Case 1                                           (b) Case 2


                 (c) Case 3                                           (d) Case 4

                                  Figure C.2: Error case images.



reset_reward()
minimize_l2_distance_reward("palm", "red_block_right_side", primary_reward=True)
maximize_l2_distance_reward("red_block_right_side", "target_position_in_cabinet")
execute_plan()



The correct primary function should be the second one. As a result, MPC ended prematurely before
the robot could remove the bar. The robot was not able to remove the bar in the following steps.


                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Case 2 (from Task 4, Figure C.2b) The robot tried to open the microwave door but failed due to a
kettle obstructing the path. The Perceiver gave five diagnoses, of which three claimed that the kettle
was blocking the way, one claimed the cabinet door was blocking the way, and one did not give any
conclusive diagnosis. The summary LLM concluded that it was the cabinet door that blocked the
action. The robot went on to interact with the cabinet and never removed the kettle.

Case 3 (from Task 6, Figure C.2c) The high-level planner proposed a plan where the first step
was “Identify the cube with the same colour as the crate”. This was a VLM action. However,
the LLM proposed to ask the VLM “Which cube has the same colour?”, which was a bit vague,
resulting in the VLM answering “The same color cube is the yellow cube and the yellow cube in the
middle of the blue cube group.”. This answer did not provide the necessary information to solve the
task. Eventually, the robot put the wrong cube on the crate.

Case 4 (from Task 7) After the robot was not able to execute the task “Place the red cube on the
crate”, the Perceiver was called to help identify any issues. The Perceiver’s diagnoses all mentioned
that the robot was holding the red cube but did not identify the yellow cube as blocking the crate,
and so the Planner’s summary of the VLMs diagnoses was: “Based on the given information, the
most probable reason why the robot cannot place the red cube on the crate is because it is currently
holding the red cube.” However, it’s also important to note that Task 7 used GPT-4V which severly
limits the number of ouput tokens from the model, and so a lot of explanations were cut off (for
example: “In the image provided, the robot is holding the red cube, which is currently”).

C.4       LLM D IAGNOSIS WITH G ROUND - TRUTH DATA

An alternative way to diagnose errors is to input the simulator ground-truth state of the objects to an
LLM and ask the LLM to infer a possible reason. We show a scenario here where the cabinet door
is locked by a red bar (from Task 3) and test the capability of LLM in this regard. The prompt we
use is:
A robot is in a simulation environment where it can interact with any object like in the
 real world. The robot would like to open the wooden cabinet but it cannot. Is there
something in this scene preventing that, other than the robot? Assume the robot can
interact with anything. These are the names of the objects in our scene: wooden cabinet,
 red block, yellow cube.

The data of the objects are:
{
    "joints": {
        "wooden_cabinet": 0.16235716765387215
    },
    "objects": {
        "wooden_cabinet_handle": [0.08292539, 0.50163332, 0.21],
        "target_position_in_wooden_cabinet": [0.2,    0.85,   0.0775],
        "red_block_right_side": [0.2158331, 0.55110136, 0.15143364],
        "yellow_cube": [-0.24545329, 0.01631876, 0.03599184],
        "palm": [0.2231031, -0.00875834, 0.76900653]
    }
}

And the response from GPT-4 is:
The data does not indicate any object that would prevent the robot from opening the
cabinet. There’s no information about any object blocking the cabinet or its handle. The
 problem could be due to the robot itself as it might not possess the necessary
functionality to interact with the objects as intended. The cabinet’s joint also has a
non-zero value, which might mean it’s not locked or stuck. Hence, there is likely a
mechanical limitation with the robot or an issue with its programming.

This example demonstrates that LLM is not capable of directly inferring spatial relations of objects
through ground-truth data.

D        GPT-4V E XPERIMENTS
We run the initial High-Level Planner prompt (Prompt B.2) using GPT-4V4 on initial task scenes to
investigate the ability of GPT-4V to find the correct solution in a single step.
    4
        https://openai.com/research/gpt-4v-system-card


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (a) Prompt B.2 to GPT-4V.


                                           (b) GPT-4V output.

Figure D.1: GPT-4V high-level plan for moving the yellow cube inside the wooden cabinet (Task 3 in Section
4.1.1).



                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         (a) Prompt B.2 to GPT-4V.


                                            (b) GPT-4V output.

Figure D.2: GPT-4V high-level plan for placing the cube with the same color as the crate on the crate (Task 6
in Section 4.1.4).


                                                     26
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     E       TAMP E XPERIMENTS

     To compare the R E PL AN with a TAMP framework, we use Planning Domain Definition Language
     (PDDL) (McDermott et al., 1998) to define the domain of Cabinet Tasks 1-3 in Table A in Section A
     as follows:
 1   (define (domain pick-place-domain)
 2     (:requirements :strips :typing :negative-preconditions :conditional-effects)
 3
 4       ;; Define the object and its possible locations
 5       (:types
 6           object
 7           location
 8           conf
 9           robot
10           door cabinet cube block - object
11           area
12           remove_area cabinet_area - area
13
14   )
15   ;; define constants
16   (:constants
17       cube_loc cabinet_loc block_loc remove_loc init_loc door_loc open_door_loc -
   location
18       init_conf robot_conf_cube robot_conf_block robot_conf_cabinet robot_conf_remove
   robot_conf_door open_door_conf - conf
19       robot - robot
20       door - door
21       cabinet - cabinet
22       cube - cube
23       block - block
24       remove_area - remove_area
25       cabinet_area - cabinet_area
26   )
27
28   ;; Define predicates
29   (:predicates
30     (at ?obj - object ?loc - location) ; the Object at location loc
31     (grasped ?obj -object)      ; the object is grasped
32     (at_conf ?conf -conf)                ; the robot is at conf configuration
33     (rob_at_loc ?loc -location)     ; the robot is location loc
34     (is_free ?rob - robot)       ; the robot hand is free
35     (in ?loc -location ?area -area)    ; sampling and certifying the loc location is
   inside an area type
36     (is closed ?door - door)         ; the door is closed
37     (is blocked ?door)              ; the door is blocked
38     (is moveable ?init conf -conf ?final loc -location ?final conf - conf)
39     ; certifying the robot can move from the initial condition to the goal location/pose
    with the sampled final configuration
40
41       )
42
43     ;; Define actions
44   (:action remove
45       :parameters (?block - block ?door - door ?rob - robot ?init_conf ?final_conf -
   conf ?init_loc ?final_loc -location)
46       :precondition (and
47           (is_blocked ?door)
48           (grasped ?block)
49           (not (is_free ?rob))
50           (at_conf ?init_conf )
51           (at ?block ?init_loc)
52           (rob_at_loc ?init_loc)
53           (in ?final_loc remove_area)
54           (is_moveable ?init_conf ?final_loc ?final_conf )
55       )
56       :effect (and
57           (rob_at_loc ?final_loc )
58           (not (rob_at_loc ?init_loc))
59           (at ?block ?final_loc)
60           (at_conf ?final_conf )
61           (is_free ?rob)
62           (not (grasped ?block))
63           (not (is_blocked ?door))
64           (not (at_conf ?init_conf ))
65       )
66   )
67
68            (:action place



                                                    27
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 69       :parameters (?cube - cube ?door - door ?rob - robot ?init_conf ?final_conf - conf
    ?init_loc ?final_loc -location)
 70       :precondition (and
 71           (not (is_closed ?door))
 72           (not (is_blocked ?door))
 73           (grasped ?cube)
 74           (not (is_free ?rob))
 75           (at_conf ?init_conf )
 76           (at ?cube ?init_loc)
 77           (rob_at_loc ?init_loc)
 78           (in ?final_loc cabinet_area)
 79           (is_moveable ?init_conf ?final_loc ?final_conf )
 80       )
 81       :effect (and
 82           (rob_at_loc ?final_loc )
 83           (at ?cube ?final_loc)
 84           (at_conf ?final_conf )
 85           (not (at_conf ?init_conf ))
 86           (is_free ?rob)
 87           (not (grasped ?cube))
 88       )
 89   )
 90
 91
 92       (:action pick
 93         :parameters (?init_conf ?final_conf -conf ?obj - object ?loc - location ?rob -robot)
 94         :precondition (and
 95           (at_conf ?init_conf )
 96           (at ?obj ?loc)
 97           (is_free ?rob )
 98           (is_moveable ?init_conf ?loc ?final_conf )
 99           )
100         :effect (and
101           (at_conf ?final_conf)
102           (not (at_conf ?init_conf))
103           (rob_at_loc ?loc)
104           (not (is_free ?rob))
105           (grasped ?obj)
106         )
107       )
108
109       (:action open
110           :parameters (?init_conf -conf ?door -door ?rob -robot )
111           :precondition (and
112             (is_closed ?door)
113             (not (is_blocked ?door))
114             (grasped ?door)
115             (not (is_free ?rob))
116             (at_conf ?init_conf )
117             (is_moveable ?init_conf open_door_loc open_door_conf )
118           )
119           :effect (and
120             (not (is_closed ?door))
121             (not (grasped ?door))
122             (is_free ?rob)
123             (not (at_conf ?init_conf ))
124             (at_conf open_door_conf)
125             (rob_at_loc open_door_loc)
126             (at door open_door_loc)
127             )
128           )
129
130          (:action is moveable cube
131              :parameters ()
132              :precondition (and
133                (not (is closed door))
134                (not (is blocked door))
135              )
136              :effect (is moveable robot conf cube cabinet loc robot conf cabinet)
137          )
138
139   )
                                 Snippet 1: PDDL domain definition for Tasks 1-3.


      Tasks 1-3 problem definition are written as follows:
  1
  2   (define (problem pick-place-problem)
  3     (:domain pick-place-domain)



                                                       28
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 4
 5       ;; Define objects
 6       (:objects
 7
 8       )
 9
10       ;; Define initial state
11       (:init
12         (at cube cube_loc)
13         (at door door_loc)
14         (at block block_loc)
15         (at_conf init_conf)
16         (rob_at_loc init_loc)
17         (in remove_loc remove_area)
18         (in cabinet_loc cabinet_area)
19         (is_free robot)
20         (is moveable init conf cube loc robot conf cube)
21         (is moveable open door conf cube loc robot conf cube)
22         (is moveable robot conf block remove loc robot conf remove)
23         (is moveable robot conf remove door loc robot conf door)
24         (is moveable init conf block loc robot conf block)
25         (is moveable init conf door loc robot conf door)
26         (is moveable robot conf door open door loc open door conf)
27
28     ;=====================================================================
29     ;; commenting the following two initial conditions can change the robot behavior
   greatly in terms of task plan
30     ;; easy mode (Task 1): comment both of the following lines [comment (is_closed door)
    and (is_blocked door)]
31     ;; hard mode (Task 2): comment the second condition [(is_blocked door)]
32     ;; expert mode (Task 3): keep both of the following conditions uncommented.
33     ;=====================================================================
34
35           ; door is closed at the begining
36           (is closed door)
37           ; door is blocked at the begining
38           (is blocked door)
39
40
41           )
42
43       ;; Define goal
44       (:goal
45         (and
46              ;; only picking the cube
47              ; (grasped block)
48
49               ;; picking and placing the cube inside the cabinet
50               (at cube cabinet_loc)
51                 ; (at block remove_loc)
52                 ; (grasped door)
53
54
55           )
56       )
57   )

                             Snippet 2: PDDL problem definition for Cabinet Tasks 1-3.


     The cabinet task problem is solved using the lpg-td (Gerevini et al., 2006) solver from the planutils
     library5 .
     As seen in Snippets 1 and 2, even for three cabinet tasks 1-3, domain and problem definitions require
     careful and laborious attention. Task-solving details are outlined in Snippets with blue and olive
     colours. While our method discovers information through interaction and reasoning over perceiver’s
     feedback, the PDDL solver relies on ground truth (highlighted in blue) and rules (example in olive)
     provided by the user for problem resolution.
     For the same task, PDDLStream (Garrett et al., 2020) offers an alternative using a Task and Motion
     Planning (TAMP) framework. Rather than human-grounded truth information, a motion planning
     framework certifies predicates through streams. However, this requires user-defined rules for success
     or failure and a motion planner. Solving long-horizon problems with PDDLStream may become
     computationally expensive (Khodeir et al., 2023).
         5
             https://github.com/AI-Planning/planutils


                                                        29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R E PL AN can robustly solve long-horizon multi-stage problems through interaction with the en-
vironment and reasoning based on the perceiver’s feedback. This capability enables R E PL AN to
uncover underlying rules without the need for an additional domain description and ground truth
information.


                                              30
