Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DY VAL : DYNAMIC E VALUATION OF L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR R EASONING TASKS
    Kaijie Zhu1∗, Jiaao Chen2∗ , Jindong Wang1†, Neil Zhenqiang Gong3 , Diyi Yang4 , Xing Xie1
 1
    Microsoft Research, 2 Georgia Tech, 3 Duke University, 4 Stanford University



                                                 A BSTRACT
              Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance in vari-
              ous evaluation benchmarks. However, concerns are raised about potential data
              contamination in their considerable volume of training corpus. Moreover, the
              static nature and fixed complexity of current benchmarks may inadequately gauge
              the advancing capabilities of LLMs. In this paper, we introduce DY VAL, a gen-
              eral and flexible protocol for dynamic evaluation of LLMs. Based on our frame-
              work, we build graph-informed DY VAL by leveraging the structural advantage
              of directed acyclic graphs to dynamically generate evaluation samples with con-
              trollable complexities. DY VAL generates challenging evaluation sets on reasoning
              tasks including mathematics, logical reasoning, and algorithm problems. We eval-
              uate various LLMs ranging from Flan-T5-large to GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4. Ex-
              periments show that LLMs perform worse in DY VAL-generated evaluation sam-
              ples with different complexities, highlighting the significance of dynamic evalua-
              tion. We also analyze the failure cases and results of different prompting methods.
              Moreover, DY VAL-generated samples are not only evaluation sets, but also helpful
              data for fine-tuning to improve the performance of LLMs on existing benchmarks.
              We hope that DY VAL can shed light on future evaluation research of LLMs. Code
              is available at: https://github.com/microsoft/promptbench.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently achieved unprecedented performance across diverse
tasks (OpenAI, 2023b; Bubeck et al., 2023). The great endeavor have led to positive speculation on
the possibility of LLMs being precursors of artificial general intelligence, necessitating the creation
of nuanced evaluations. By pinpointing gaps for improvements, evaluation becomes the bedrock
that enhances the understanding of current models and ensures AI’s continued progression.
Efforts to evaluate LLMs have become intensified significantly. Liang et al. (2023) introduced
HELM, which offers a holistic assessment of LLM in various scenarios. Similarly, Chatbot Arena
(Zheng et al., 2023) evaluates LLMs by contrasting their generated output. Other benchmarks that
have set the standard in the realm of LLM evaluations include AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023c), C-Eval
(Huang et al., 2023), ARB (Sawada et al., 2023), API-Bank (Li et al., 2023a), Socket (Choi et al.,
2023), and Big-Bench (bench authors, 2023). Moreover, manual experiments have emerged as a
complementary approach to these benchmarks, with works such as Bubeck et al. (2023) and Bang
et al. (2023). Complementing these, human evaluators have also been instrumental in gauging the
prowess of LLMs, as discussed by Ziems et al. (2023) and Zečević et al. (2023).
Current evaluation benchmarks face two fundamental challenges. First, data contamination. Many
benchmarks source their data from the Internet, causing potential overlap with the vast corpus on
which LLMs are trained, leading to the debate of “Generalization vs. Memorization” (Bender et al.,
2021; Magar & Schwartz, 2022; Carlini et al., 2023; Biderman et al., 2023): Are the model’s re-
sults stemming from genuine ability or just memorization of the training data? A recent example is
provided by Zečević et al. (2023): LLMs can ambiguously deduce the conclusion that altitude in-
fluences temperature based on seen data. Similarly, Berglund et al. (2023) found that LLMs trained
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Contact: kaijiezhu11@gmail.com, jiaaochen@gatech.edu.
     †
         Correspondence to: Jindong Wang <jindong.wang@microsoft.com>.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on “A is B” fail to infer “B is A”, which doubts the abilities of LLMs might come from memoriza-
tion. Second, static dataset and fixed complexity. As LLMs progress at a rapid pace, existing
datasets usually fail to match the models’ ever-evolving capabilities, because the complexity level of
existing benchmarks is usually static and fixed. As Dziri et al. (2023) demonstrated, while handling
simple problems pretty well, LLMs fail to solve complex problems. The inability to automatically
and dynamically increase complexity levels based on existing data prevents static benchmarks from
being adapted to accurately select, compare, and advance LLMs. Although there are a few existing
dynamic benchmarks like DynaBench (Kiela et al., 2021) and DynaBoard (Ma et al., 2021), they
rely on crowd-sourcing efforts for data collection, which might be expensive and tedious.
In this paper, we introduce DY VAL—a novel, general, and flexible evaluation protocol for the dy-
namic evaluation of LLMs (Sec. 3.1). The core of DY VAL is to dynamically generate evaluation
samples on the fly instead of collecting a fixed set of data. DY VAL consists of three components:
1) the generation algorithm G to generate test samples with diversities; 2) the constraint C to mod-
ulate sample complexity and validity; and 3) the description function F to translate the generated
samples into natural languages. Based on this framework, we propose a graph-informed DY VAL
(Sec. 3.2, Figure 1) to generate data using graphs. Specifically, inspired by techniques such as the
compiler principle (Alfred V et al., 2007) and parsing trees which decompose complexities (Klein
& Manning, 2003; Vinyals et al., 2015), we employ directed acyclic graphs (DAG) (Thulasiraman
& Swamy, 2011) to compose fundamental elements into more intricate problems, with each unit
symbolized as a graph node. The extendable and stochastic nature of graph generation effectively
regulates the complexity levels. Additionally, the hierarchical attributes of graphs suit them for
multi-step inferential tasks like logics. Problems generated by DY VAL not only require profound
understanding of problem solving rather than simple memorization but also echo the human ap-
proach to incremental problem-solving and solution derivation. Being general and flexible, DY VAL
co-exists and co-evolves with existing benchmarks for better LLMs evaluation and evolution.
We leverage DY VAL to synthesize 7 reasoning tasks1 , encompassing: (1) Mathematics: arithmetic
and linear equations; (2) Logical reasoning: boolean, deductive, and abductive logic; (3) Algorithm:
reachability and maximum sum path problems. We then re-examine the state-of-the-art LLMs rang-
ing from Flan-T5-large (Chung et al., 2022), phi-1.5 (Li et al., 2023d), Xwin-13B (Team, 2023),
Llama2-13B-chat (Touvron et al., 2023), Vicuna-13B-v1.3 (Chiang et al., 2023), WizardMath-
13B (Luo et al., 2023), to GPT-3.5-Turbo (OpenAI, 2023a) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b) with DY-
VAL. We also test with recent prompting techniques including Few-shot (Brown et al., 2020), CoT
(Wei et al., 2022), Least to Most prompting (Zhou et al., 2023b), Automatic Prompt Engineering
(Zhou et al., 2023d), and Skills-in-Context prompting (Chen et al., 2023). Finally, we perform
human study involving 82 human evaluators for comparison and fine-tuning experiments using DY-
VAL-generated evaluation samples. Furthermore, experiments on existing benchmarks also show
that fine-tuning LLMs with data generated by DY VAL could directly improve models’ abilities with-
out extra careful collection of training data (Zhou et al., 2023a). We further show the flexibility of
DY VAL by extending it to natural language tasks in Appendix H. Our key findings are:

• Results on DY VAL evaluation are not always consistent with those on existing benchmarks,
  indicating possible low training data quality and/or data contamination of existing LLMs
  (Sec. 4.2). For instance, phi-1.5, WizardMath-13B, and Xwin-13B perform poorly on DY VAL
  while claiming huge improvements on existing benchmarks.
• As difficulty increases, LLMs tend to perform worse and their performance gap becomes
  larger, emphasizing the lack of compositionality of current LLMs and the importance of
  evolving complexity evaluations (Sec. 4.2).
• Our error analysis based on DY VAL evaluation exhibits various failure patterns which shed
  light on how to further improve LLMs. (Sec. 4.3).
• No prompt engineering methods can perform best in all of our evaluation sets; and larger
  model sizes tend to achieve better performances (Sec. 4.4).
• DY VAL can further be utilized to generate training data to improve the abilities of LLMs.
  (Sec. 5). For instance, fine-tuning the Llama2 models with our DY VAL generated data demon-
  strates enhanced results on 6 existing benchmarks.
    1
      We choose reasoning tasks mainly due to (1) the intrinsic connection between reasoning proficiency and
intelligence; (2) the notable progress LLMs have achieved in reasoning-centric tasks (Sawada et al., 2023).
Note that DY VAL could also be applied to existing benchmarks to create new and harder evaluation data.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To sum up, this paper makes the following contributions:

    • A dynamic evaluation protocol. DY VAL is a dynamic evaluation protocol designed to gener-
      ate test samples dynamically, mitigating the issues of data contamination and static complexity.
    • A graph-informed DY VAL algorithm for evaluation of the reasoning abilities of LLMs. We
      use DAGs to compose 7 reasoning problems from mathematics, logical reasoning to algorithms.
    • Extensive experiments and analysis. We conduct extensive experiments to provide insights
      for evaluating and improving LLMs.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Evaluating LLMs. While neural networks are recognized as the universal function approximators
(Cybenko, 1989) with remarkable data fitting capabilities (Zhang et al., 2021; Arpit et al., 2017), de-
bates (Bender et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Tänzer et al., 2022; Magar & Schwartz, 2022; Carlini
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Zečević et al., 2023; Kocoń et al., 2023; Schaeffer,
2023; Biderman et al., 2023; Zhu & Li, 2023) persist regarding the true nature of LLMs’ general-
ization abilities. The growing prominence of LLMs necessitates rigorous benchmarks (Hendrycks
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b; Zhong et al., 2023; HuggingFace, 2023). Recent trends include: (1)
human-centric evaluations (Gao et al., 2022; Ribeiro & Lundberg, 2022), (2) crowd-sourced testing
(Kiela et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021), and (3) specialized task challenges (Liang et al., 2023; Tian
et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2020; bench authors, 2023). Complementing with these, our DY VAL
introduces a dynamic evaluation system, consistently relevant in the swiftly evolving landscape of
AI. Although Krause et al. (2018) introduced the term “dynamic evaluation”, our DY VAL differs
considerably in its approach and goals. Specifically, reasoning is widely recognized as the core of
both human and AI. Our focus on constructing reasoning tasks mirrors the intricate and multi-step
nature of human reasoning (Brody, 1999; Lohman & Lakin, 2011; Sawada et al., 2023), building
reasoning benchmarks is a critical step to help LLMs towards intelligence.

Data Contamination. Researchers start to realize the potential data contamination problem in
LLMs (Lovin, 2023; Chowdhuri et al., 2023; Bender et al., 2021; Kocoń et al., 2023). The GPT-4 and
LLama reports clearly stated the phenomenon of data contamination. Recently, Zhou et al. (2023c)
discussed the risks and impacts of data contamination of evaluation benchmarks in assessing LLMs.
Li (2023) examined the data contamination problem of LLama models. The Skywork LLM Wei et al.
(2023) again demonstrated the data contamination issue in several. Golchin & Surdeanu (2023a;b);
Oren et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023b) designed novel methods to detect the data contamination of
LLMs. DY VAL is not a detection approach but a new protocol to mitigate the contamination issue.

Complex-to-simple problem decomposition and evaluation set construction. Employing
graphs to deconstruct complex tasks has been an enduring and effective strategy across domains.
Compilers, as seen in computational theory (Alfred V et al., 2007), effectively break down high-
level constructs, while in NLP, parsing trees bring clarity to intricate syntactic and semantic struc-
tures (Klein & Manning, 2003; Vinyals et al., 2015). Roy & Roth (2015) displayed the potency of
this method in arithmetic, using trees for solving multi-step problems. Additionally, several contem-
porary techniques have implored LLMs to decompose complex problems (Wei et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2023b; Khot et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Several studies have leveraged graph-based ap-
proaches for constructing compositional tasks, particularly in the domains of first-order logic (Sinha
et al., 2019; Clark et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2021) and causal reasoning (Jin et al., 2023). DY VAL
presents notable distinctions in both objective and methodology. Additionally, GraphWorld (Palow-
itch et al., 2022) primarily benchmarks Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), whereas DY VAL focuses
on LLMs using the graph structure. They are different in nature.

3    DY VAL
In this section, we first elucidate our general dynamic evaluation protocol to address the challenges
of data contamination with dynamic data generation and controllable complexity in Sec. 3.1. We
then adapt this general protocol for reasoning tasks by leveraging the Directed Acyclic Graphs
(DAGs) in Sec. 3.2. More analysis of the flexibility of DY VAL is in Sec. 3.3.

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


General Protocol
                                       Constraint                            Generation Algorithm                                   Description Function
                         Task                   Complexity                                                                 Task Description          DAG Description
                      constraint               constraint                                               F                    Function                  Function
                         Arithmetic                                       Tree-based                D         E               Arithmetic
                                              Tree-based DAG                 DAG                                          What is the value of
                                                                                                                                                      Tree-based DAG
                     Nonzero dividend ,
                        Overflow,                  Depth,                                   A           B     C                 [root]?             A is [Value]. D get its
                            …                      Width,                                                                                           value by [Operation]
                                               Add extra links,                                                               Linear Eq.                   A and B.
                          Linear Eq.                 …                                              F       G                                                 …
                                                                                                                         What is the value of x,
                       Unique solution,
                                                                           General                                                 y?
                             …                                                                  E             D
                             …                  General DAG                 DAG                                                   …                    General DAG
                                                 Num nodes,
                                                                                            A           B         C          Reachability             A points to None.
                        Reachability             Num links,
                                                                                                                            Can [Node A] be             B points to A.
                          Connected,                 …                       Node: Name, Operation, Value, Children          reached from                     …
                              …
                                                                             Links: relationship between two nodes             [Node B]?
Arithmetic example


                     Step 1: Specify the constraint for DAG                 Step 2: Generate DAG with
                                                                                                                              Step 3: Describe DAG and task.
                                    and task.                                       constraint.
                       Arithmetic 𝓒𝑻          Tree-based DAG                                        + I                              A’s value is 3, B’s value is 1,
                                                                                                                                                   …
                                               Depth=3, Width=3,                            𝟐
                       Nonzero dividend ,      Add extra links=0,        Tree-based    F∗               ∗ G       − H        F’ value is derived by squaring value of A,
                      Nonzero square root ,     Operation set:                                                                                      …
                        Avoid overflow,             +, −,×,÷,    ∗, ∗𝟐      DAG
                               …                     Value set:                           3         1       4 7 2       I’s value is derived by summing the value of F,G,H
                                                      𝟎, 𝟏, 𝟐, … , 𝟏𝟎
                                                                                          A         B       C D E                       What is the value of I?


Figure 1: The pipeline of the graph-informed DY VAL. Up: the general evaluation framework; down:
an arithmetic example. More details can be found at Sec. 3.2 and Appendix B.
3.1                    G ENERAL DYNAMIC E VALUATION D ESCRIPTION L ANGUAGE
First, we introduce the general description language of the dynamic evaluation protocol. Given
a task T , a dynamic evaluation algorithm is formulated as AT = F(G(C)), where (1) G is the
sample generation algorithm, incorporating randomness to guarantee uniqueness of each sample.
Randomness may vary in different tasks, such as the numbers in math problems and the logic chains
in a logic reasoning task. (2) C = {CT , CG } denotes constraints on G, where CT is the task constraint
for task T such as the legality guarantee of the generated samples in the context of the task. CG is the
complexity constraint for the generation process, such as the sampling strategy for the value at each
node and the number of perturbations added to the evaluation samples. (3) F = {FT , FG } is the
description function to translate the raw evaluation samples generated by G into natural language
descriptions. FG elucidates the characteristics and properties of the samples generated by G. FT is
the description for task T such as task objective and expected outcomes.
In general, an evaluation sample can be represented as deval = FT (FG (G(CG , CT ))) using the above
description language. G first produces a sample that adheres to the complexity constraint CG and
the task constraint CT . Then it undergoes transformation by description function FG into a natural
language format and finally goes through the task description function FT . The description language
above naturally (1) avoids data contamination by dynamic generation through G, and (2) promises
dynamic datasets and controllable complexity through C. Specifically, by varying the constraints in
C, we can generate evaluation samples of different difficulties, allowing “co-evolution” of both the
LLMs and the evaluation process. The description language is flexible since it allows for different
generation algorithms and complexity control by changing G and C accordingly.

3.2                    G RAPH - INFORMED DYNAMIC E VALUATION FOR R EASONING TASKS
In this section, following the general evaluation description language, we implement DY VAL for
reasoning tasks by taking inspiration from the graph structure. Given the intrinsic multistep infer-
ential nature of reasoning tasks, they inherently exhibit structural characteristics, making directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs) a natural choice for modeling these tasks. DAGs also facilitate dynamic sam-
ple generation by modulating the internal structure and fine-grained control over problem difficulty
by adjusting the structural complexity. More background of DAGs can be found in Appendix A.

3.2.1                      G ENERATION A LGORITHM G: DAG C ONSTRUCTION
The generation algorithm is established on the graph construction process. We categorize DAGs
as Tree-based DAGs (T-DAGs) and General DAGs (G-DAGs), illustrated in Figure 1. T-DAGs are
inherently hierarchical, making them suitable for tasks that proceed from a set of initial premises to


                                                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 1: Three types of reasoning tasks generated by DY VAL.
                              Generation                          Constraint C
    Field         Task                                                                                 # Classes                 Description F
                              algorithm G              CT                            CG
                                             V : {1, 2, . . . √
                                                              , 10}           Depth, Width,                                     What is the
                Arithmetic     Tree-based                                                                  -
                                            O : {+, −, ×, ·, ·2 }       Extra links, Random desc                              value of [Root]?
 Mathematics
                  Linear                      V : {1, 2, ...,√
                                                             10}              Depth, Width,                                      What is the
                               Tree-based                                                                  -
                 equation                   O : {+, −, ×, ·, ·2 }       Extra links, Random desc                              value of x and y?
                                              V : {True, False}               Depth, Width,               2                     What is the
                  Bool         Tree-based
                                            O : {AND, OR, NOT}          Extra links, Random desc     {True, False}            value of [Root]?
   Logical                                    V : {True, False}               Depth, Width,                 3                   What is the
  Reasoning     Deductive      Tree-based
                                            O : {AND, OR, NOT}          Extra links, Random desc   {True, False, N/A}         value of [Root]?
                                              V : {True, False}               Depth, Width,                 3              Given [Root] is [Value],
                Abductive      Tree-based
                                            O : {AND, OR, NOT}          Extra links, Random desc   {True, False, N/A}   what is the value of [Leaf i]?
                                                     V:−                  # Nodes, # max links,           2                    Can [Node i] be
               Reachability     General
                                                     O:−                      random desc            {True, False}         reached from [Node j]?
  Algorithm
                Max sum                       V : {1, 2, . . . , 10}      # Nodes, # max links,                              What is the maximum
                                General                                                                    -
                 path                               O:−                       random desc                                 path [Node i] to [Node j]?


a final inference, such as arithmetic problems and logical reasoning tasks. Each node in T-DAGs
represents a foundational subproblem. These subproblems are chained by the links between nodes
and finally form a complex problem. Conversely, G-DAGs excel in mapping intricate relationships,
especially in tasks demanding understanding of non-linear interactions. They are ideal for algorith-
mic challenges involving complex dependencies. For instance, imagine modeling a system where
a change in one entity might impact multiple others in a cascading fashion, or tasks require finding
different potential pathways between entities. The generation process for these two types of DAGs
are presented in Appendix B.1.
Randomness in DAGs generation process. T-DAG randomness arises from operations assigned to
the nodes and the initial values of the leaf nodes. For instance, in arithmetic, the operation can be
“+”, with the leaf nodes receiving random numbers. On the other hand, for G-DAGs, each node
is endowed with a random value (if needed for a certain problem). For every node, the number of
children is determined randomly, and the maximum number of children depends on the input. We
then establish the links by selecting the target child nodes at random.
Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 formally guarantee the dynamic generation process by exploring the prob-
ability that two samples generated by T-DAG and G-DAG are identical. We focus exclusively on
the base case, setting aside additional complexities like the integration of random links or the em-
bedding of random descriptions, which would further diminish the likelihood of two DAGs being
identical.
Theorem 3.1. Given a tree-based DAG with depth d and width w, if the operation set for non-
leaf nodes has k distinct operations and the value set for leaf nodes contains n distinct values, the
                                                                             d−1                −1
                                                                               w   −1
                                                                                          wd−1
probability that two independently generated DAGs are identical is: P = k        w−1  ×n            .
Theorem 3.2. Given a general DAG with n nodes where each node has a minimum of l ≥ 1 links,
                                                                                 1
the probability that two randomly selected DAGs are identical is bounded by (n−1)!  .
Proofs can be found in Appendix C. These theorems guarantee that the odds of producing identical
evaluation samples are considerably low. For instance, in the arithmetic task (where k = 6, n = 10)
with d = 4 and w = 2, the chances that two DAGs are identical hover around 1e−15 .

3.2.2         C ONSTRAINTS C FOR G RAPH G ENERATION
Task constraint CT . Task constraints vary for tasks. Take the node creation for instance: 1) What
distribution should the node value adhere to? 2) What set of operations is permissible? 3) How
should a node’s value be computed from its children’s values? In arithmetic tasks, CT includes
ensuring that a dividend is nonzero, avoiding overflow, etc. Here, we concentrate on two general
task constraints: (1) Value distribution V: Specifies the permissible range or distribution from which
leaf node values can be assigned. For example, in logic reasoning tasks, the premises (leaf nodes) are
assigned either as True or False. (2) Operation set O: Lists the operations allowed within the DAG.
The operation set constraint is usually used for tree-based DAGs. For example, in an arithmetic task,
the set of allowed operations can be defined as the basic arithmetic operations {+, −, ×, /}.
Complexity constraint CG . We investigate 4 techniques to inject complexity into DAGs (Figure 5):
(1) Change width and depth for T-DAGs: The natural way to control tree complexity. (2) Change
number of nodes and links for G-DAGs: We control the total number of nodes in G-DAGs. The


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


number of links in each node is randomly selected from a predefined range, e.g., [1, 5]. (3) Add
extra random links: For each node, we may introduce an additional link to another random node.
(4) Embed random descriptions: Add random descriptions to the primary DAG’s descriptions. More
details of complexity can be found in Appendix B.2 with Figure 7 as illustrations.

3.2.3    D ESCRIPTION F UNCTION F

After constructing DAGs with certain constraints, we then need to convert them into comprehensible
natural language descriptions using the description function F.
DAG description function FG . We describe the DAG node by node and then form the de-
scription of the nodes into sequences. The interpretation of each node in natural language de-
pends on its position and the task. For leaf nodes that represent primary input or premises, they
can be described as: “The value of [Name] is [Value].” For instance, a node denoting
number 5 could be expressed as: “The value of node A is 5.” For T-DAGs, the interme-
diate nodes that typically denote operations performed on their child nodes, the description can
be formulated as: “The value of [Name] is derived by [Operation] the values of
[Children’s Names].” For G-DAG, the intermediate nodes are usually described as the con-
nections between nodes: “The [Name] points to [Children’s Names]”. Note that natural
language descriptions can be replaced according to custom needs and can be further incorporated
with textual adversarial attacks (Li et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020).
Moreover, complexity is also influenced by the order that nodes are described. We design three
orders: topological, reversed topological, and random orders, each offering a unique challenge in
understanding the DAGs. The details of these orders are presented in Appendix B.4.
Task description function FT . The construction of F highly depends on the context of tasks. Note-
bly, this construction is also highly flexible. For instance, incorporating adversarial prompts (Zhu
et al., 2023) to the task description can make problems more difficult. Here we present the task de-
scription function for arithmetic and reachability tasks that are representative of T-DAG and G-DAG,
respectively. Appendix B.3 presents details and examples of the remaining 5 tasks.
Arithmetic: Given a T-DAG, the DAG description function has already demonstrated the premise:
the leaf nodes and the intermediate steps of inference: non-leaf nodes. Next, we select the root node
as the variable required to solve, we append the question “What is the value of [Root]?” to
the description where [Root] is filled with the name of the root variable (Figure 8).
Reachability: The reachability task aims to model if two nodes are connected in a graph. For a G-
DAG, the DAG description function has demonstrated the connections between nodes. The task
description for reachability task is: “Can the [Node i] be reached by [Node j]” where
Node i and Node j are randomly selected from the nodes in G-DAG (Figure 9).
Finally, while it is feasible to directly adopt GPT-4 to generate a contextualized description rather
than the plain one (see Appendix B.5), it is challenging to verify the rationale of the problems
generated by GPT-4. Thus, we leave it for future work.

3.3     DY VAL COEXISTS AND CO - EVOLVES WITH EXISTING BENCHMARKS
DY VAL is complementary to existing benchmarks. First, tasks with an intrinsic structure benefit
significantly from DY VAL since they can modulate complexity and randomness by adjusting the
generation process. Efforts such as CheckList (Ribeiro et al., 2020), data augmentation (Andreas,
2020; Zhang et al., 2022), and reasoning dataset synthesis (Sinha et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019; Clark
et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2023) can be easily integrated into DY VAL. On the contrary,
tasks without a well-defined structure may present challenges for DY VAL’s implementation. Second,
DY VAL can be enhanced by existing benchmarks to formulate more challenging scenarios. For
instance, the description function F is all about natural language texts, so it can be easily combined
with adversarial attacks (Li et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2023) or out-of-distribution
prompts (Yang et al., 2023a) to assess the robustness of LLMs.
Note that while this papers focuses on evaluating reasoning tasks, DY VAL is flexible to evaluate
natural language tasks. We show an initial study using DY VAL to evaluate sentiment analysis in
Appendix H and more work can be done in the future. Finally, DY VAL guarantees an unbiased and


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         GPT4                             ChatGPT                   Llama2-13b-chat                       Vicuna-13b-v1.3
                    Boolean Logic                                         Arithmetic                                 Linear Equation                                Boolean Logic
                            Linear Equation                100                                                                                         100
             Deductive Logic


                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                                                                           40
                                   Arithmetic
                                                              50                                                                                          50
             Abductive Logic                                                                               20
                            Max Sum Path
                     Reachability                              0                                            0                                              0
                                                                   D1      D2   D3     D4                       D1      D2   D3      D4                        D1     D2   D3       D4
                                                                           Datasets                                     Datasets                                      Datasets
                      Deductive Logic                                   Abductive Logic                               Reachability                                  Max Sum Path
           100
Accuracy


                                                   Accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                               Accuracy
                                                                                                           50                                             20
            50                                                50


             0                                                 0                                            0                                              0
                 D1      D2   D3       D4                          D1      D2   D3     D4                       D1      D2   D3      D4                        D1     D2   D3       D4
                         Datasets                                          Datasets                                     Datasets                                      Datasets

Figure 2: Results on 7 tasks with complexity from D1 to D4 (averaged on 3 description orders and
3 seeds). Xwin-13B, phi-1.5, and WizardMath-13B are not shown as their results are all 0.
balanced construction of evaluation samples by nature, since one can easily control the generation
process, as shown in Appendix F.

4                E XPERIMENT
4.1 S ETUP
Tasks and complexity level. We mainly discuss the constraint used in each task. Test set accuracy
might differ as it is generated dynamically. To balance test time and discrepancy, we produce 500
samples for each dataset. To mitigate the impact of randomness on evaluation results, we assess
each dataset three times. We define 4 complexity levels (D1∼D4) for each task. For tasks that
use general DAGs, the number of nodes is set to {7, 10, 15, 20} with each node having {3, 4, 6, 8}
maximum links and 1 minimum link. For tasks that use tree-based DAGs, tree depths and widths
are (2, 2), (3, 2), (3, 3), (4, 2), respectively. More details of D1∼D4 are presented in Appendix D.
Evaluation metric. Our primary evaluation metric is accuracy. For tasks where answers are
numerical, we employ relative precision (Burden et al., 2015) to determine the correctness of a
prediction, i.e., an answer is deemed correct if its relative precision is within a specified thresh-
old, σ (e.g., 0.01%), in relation to the ground truth value. Relative precision is calculated as
|pred − gt|/(gt + ϵ) ≤ σ where gt represents the ground truth value, pred is the model’s pre-
diction, | · | is the absolute value function, σ is the desired relative precision threshold, and ϵ is a
small value introduced to prevent division by zero.
LLMs. Our evaluated LLMs include Flan-T5-large (Chung et al., 2022), phi-1.5 (Li et al., 2023d),
WizardMath-13B (Luo et al., 2023), Xwin-13B (Team, 2023), Llama2-13B-chat (Touvron et al.,
2023), Vicuna-13B-v1.3 (Chiang et al., 2023), GPT-3.5-Turbo (OpenAI, 2023a), and GPT-4 (Ope-
nAI, 2023b). Temperature is set to 0 to avoid randomness. We set the generation length to be directly
proportional to the input length. Specifically, for GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4, the generate length is
set to be twice the input length; for the remaining models, it is set to be five times the input length.
We designed prompts for each task, incorporating demonstrations of rules, particularly for reason-
ing and algorithm tasks. To ensure formatted output, we further ask LLMs to explicitly output their
predictions between “⟨⟨⟨” and “⟩⟩⟩”. All implementations are based on Huggingface.
4.2 R ESULTS FOR M ATH , L OGICAL REASONING , AND A LGORITHM TASKS
Before presenting the main results, note that the results of Flan-T5-large, phi-1.5, WizardMath-
13B, and Xwin-13B in all tasks are 0, so we no longer report them. We carried out experiments
using three random seeds. Figure 2 shows the results of all tasks averaged in three generation orders
and three random seeds (full results in Appendix D.4). GPT-4 performs best, followed closely
by GPT-3.5-Turbo. Llama2-13B-chat’s performance is subpar, with Vicuna-13B-v1.3 occasionally
outperforming Llama2-13b-chat. More findings are as follows.
Inconsistent performance between existing static benchmarks and DY VAL: Despite the excel-
lent results of phi-1.5, Xwin-13B and WizardMath-13B on existing benchmarks, their poor perfor-
mance in our evaluations highlights the potential problems when evaluating LLMs solely on static
benchmarks and possible low training data quality or data contamination issue.


                                                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Difficulty with complex datasets: Performance mostly decreases sharply from D1 to D4, high-
lighting LLMs’ struggles with increasing complexity. For example, GPT-3.5-Turbo’s performance
drops by 23% for arithmetic task as complexity increases. Notably, performance in abductive logic
(inferring premises from conclusions) is much lower than in deductive logic (deriving conclusions
from premises), as supported by Berglund et al. (2023), which shows LLMs excel more in “A is B”
than “B is A”. In addition, the performance difference between GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-Turbo, while
subtle in simpler tasks like D1, becomes prominent in complex tasks. These observations indicate
the value of intricate and evolving tasks to effectively differentiate and evaluate models. We also
present more interesting observations in Appendix D.4.
Human study: We recruited 82 human evaluators                                       Human                  ChatGPT                     Vicuna-13b-v1.3
                                                                                    GPT4                   Llama2-13b-chat
with at least a bachelor’s degree2 , to gauge their skills
                                                                            100
against LLMs on the most complex dataset (D4) for
mathematical and logical reasoning tasks. Each partici-                      80
pant tackled 5 problems from each dataset. As depicted


                                                                 Accuracy
                                                                             60
in Figure 3, both GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-Turbo consis-
tently showed high competence in most tasks, surpass-                        40
ing average human results. The reason could be that the
generated problems are generally harder for humans but                       20

easier for LLMs. Nevertheless, GPT-4 struggled in ar-                         0
eas like linear equations and abductive logic. This indi-                          Arithm
                                                                                         etic           quation Bool Logic eductive Logicbductive Logic
                                                                                                Linear E                  D           A
                                                                                                                   Task
cates that future development could involve more data
from specific domains.                                                       Figure 3: Human vs. LLMs results.
4.3 C ASE S TUDY
In an endeavor to comprehensively understand the behav-                                                    Error Types
ior of LLMs, we meticulously examined the failure modes.                          Partial
                                                                                  Calculation Error
Our focus is especially on the most challenging datasets for                                                                        Unsubstantiated
                                                                                                            23.1                    Response
arithmetic, deductive logic, abductive logic, and reachability                                                              33.8

tasks based on the performance of GPT-4. We randomly se-                          Instructional            9.2
                                                                                  Oversight
lected 20 failure samples for each task and summarized the                                                       21.5     12.3
failure modes in Figure 4. The detailed failure cases are pre-                                   Incorrect
                                                                                                                                 Self
                                                                                                                                 Contradiction
sented in Appendix D.5. The error types vary, indicating that                                    Reasoning
there is much room for improvement.
                                                                Figure 4: Failure modes distribution.
Partial calculation error: GPT-4 occasionally errs in inter-
mediate steps, while keeping the remaining steps correct. We emphasize that the errors may be as
simple as 20/7 = 37.28. This aligns with (Dziri et al., 2023) noting LLMs sometimes give partially
correct multi-digit multiplication results. Incorrect reasoning and self contradiction: In reason-
ing tasks, GPT-4 may misinterpret rules. Given an abductive logic A ∨ B → C with C is False,
the premise A, B must be False. However, GPT-4 inaccurately abduced that either A or B might
be False. Further, GPT-4 occasionally contradicts itself in its assumptions for the same inference
in abductive logic task. Unsubstantiated response: In reasoning tasks and algorithm tasks, GPT-4
often answers without any inferences or justifications. Its answer-only responses suggest possible
memorization or shallow understanding. Instructional oversight: Occasionally, GPT-4 adeptly ar-
rives at the correct computation but stumbles when it comes to adhering to the output instructions
laid out in prompts, for example, the required relative precision of mathematic calculation.
4.4 A BLATION S TUDY
Impact of complexity constraints CG : In Figure 5, we vary complexity in GPT-3.5-Turbo by ad-
justing constraints as described in Sec. 3.2.2 and observe how LLMs performance shifts across
arithmetic, boolean logic, and deductive logic tasks. Notably, as task intricacy rises due to aug-
mented complexity parameters, LLMs’ performance diminishes. Depth emerges as the predominant
challenge in tree-based DAGs, emphasizing the LLMs’ difficulty with extended inference steps.
Prompt engineering: We evaluate five prompting techniques (PE) on our most challenging datasets,
as outlined in Table 5 and Appendix D.7. No PE methods can perform best in all tasks. While APE
notably boosts the Linear Equation task by 10%, it negatively impacts deductive and abductive logic.
These varied outcomes highlight the importance of task-specific PE selection and development.
   2
       The results may not represent the highest level of human performance. Demographics are in Appendix D.8.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Depth            Width                       Add Extra Links                                Embed Random Descs
                           Arithmetic                                    Boolean Logic                                           Deductive Logic
           100                                               100

                                                              90                                                       80
Accuracy


                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                            Accuracy
            50
                                                              80
                                                                                                                       60
             0                                                70

                                                              60                                                       40
                 D1   D2      D3        D4   D5                    D1   D2       D3    D4              D5                   D1   D2     D3      D4   D5
                      Difficulty Levels                                 Difficulty Levels                                        Difficulty Levels

                           Figure 5: Comparison results across different complexity constraints.

Influence of model size: We further evaluate the performance of Llama2 with different model sizes
of arithmetic, boolean logic and reachability tasks on their simplest dataset D1. Table 6 shows that
larger sizes produce better results, but mostly still not surpass GPT-4 and human.

5                DY VAL H ELPS F INE - TUNING
In this section, we show that DY VAL-generated data can                    Vanilla        Fine-Tuned
further be utilized to fine-tune LLMs to improve their ca-      40

pabilities of solving complex tasks. Specifically, we gen-
                                                                30



                                                                                            Accuracy
erate training data for 7 tasks to fine-tune Llama2-13B-
chat. The details of fine-tuning and training sample gener-     20
ation are in Appendix E. We then test the model with dif-
                                                                10
ferent settings: (1) in-distribution samples with the same
difficulty as the training data; (2) out-of-distribution sam-    0
ples, whose difficulty levels are higher than the training         GSM
                                                                       8K VAMP FOLIO RACO
                                                                         S
                                                                                            DP    LCS
data. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our gen-                         Task
erated data, we test the models with few-shot examples on Figure 6: Results on existing bench-
existing benchmarks including GSM8K (Cobbe et al., marks using Llama2-13B-chat model
2021) and SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) to evaluate math fine-tuned on DY VAL-generated data.
abilities, FOLIO (Han et al., 2022) and RACO (bench au-
thors, 2023) to evaluate the logical reasoning abilities, and DP (Dziri et al., 2023) and LCS (bench
authors, 2023) to evaluate the algorithm abilities. Results in Figure 6 and 10 show that the perfor-
mance of the fine-tuned model increases in all tasks. It shows that DY VAL is effective not only as a
benchmark but also in enhancing the performance of LLMs on existing benchmarks via fine-tuning
on its generated samples. The improvement might stem from the similarities between various bench-
marks and DY VAL-generated samples. For instance, GSM8K samples can be interpreted as trees of
depth 2 or 3. Interestingly, even no dynamic programming tasks in our fine-tuning, the fine-tuned
model also showed improved performance on the DP and LCS datasets. This underscores the po-
tential learning capability of LLMs and the efficacy of training samples generated by DY VAL. We
further fine-tuned GPT-3.5-Turbo and examined its ability on general natural language understand-
ing. The results indicated that fine-tuning on our generated datasets does not necessarily hurt the
natural language understanding ability, as comprehensively discussed in Appendix G.

6                C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
We proposed DY VAL, a dynamic LLMs evaluation protocol to mitigate the data contamination and
static complexity of existing benchmarks. We designed the graph-informed DY VAL for reasoning
tasks. The strength of DY VAL lies in its dynamic generation of samples, with inherent flexibility for
difficulty adjustment. We observed several interesting findings in experiments using our benchmark.
More importantly, DY VAL-generated samples can not only be used as evaluation samples, but also
act as fine-tuning data for LLMs to enhance their performance in existing benchmarks.
Our work has several limitations. (1) Tasks: We currently focused on reasoning tasks. While DY VAL
supports other tasks (see Sec. H), it requires design of the generation algorithm G. (2) Samples: Our
experiments utilized a limited set of test samples due to resource constraints. Evaluations on larger
sets may help to observe more findings. (3) Fine-tuning: Fine-tuning can be done on more diverse
models and datasets to gain deeper insights.


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND D ISCLAIMER

The purpose of this research is to present a dynamic and evolving evaluation protocol in response to
the rapid development of LLMs. We have the following claims. First, the generation mechanism of
DY VAL does not contain any potentially harmful words or expressions but only mathematical, logi-
cal, and algorithmic descriptions. In the future, the usage of DY VAL on other natural language tasks
should be dealt with cautions to not include any harmful or irresponsible languages. Second, human
subjects are involved in this study to act as LLMs’ competitors for performance comparison and
analysis. All human studies are conducted obeying laws and regulations in certain countries. Third,
the experiments on GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4 conducted in this paper are based on their latest ver-
sion in June, 2023. Authors recommend using the same version of these services for reproducibility.
As we tried our best to tune the best prompts for our experiments, it is, however, well-known that
LLMs are highly sensitive to prompts. Therefore, the experiments in this paper are only based on
our prompt design and codebase. Finally, we may have concluded that some LLMs in this paper
achieved poor performance in our benchmark, but this does not mean these models are not good or
cannot be used in practice. Authors remain positive and optimistic to all evaluated LLMs that they
will further be stronger.

R EFERENCES
Aho Alfred V, Lam Monica S, Sethi Ravi, Ullman Jeffrey D, et al. Compilers-principles, techniques,
  and tools. pearson Education, 2007.

Jacob Andreas. Good-enough compositional data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7556–7566, Online, July 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics.

Devansh Arpit, Stanislaw Jastrzkebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S. Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Simon
  Lacoste-Julien. A closer look at memorization in deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 233–242, 06–11 Aug 2017.

Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia,
  Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, et al. A multitask, multilingual, multimodal evaluation of
  chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023.

BIG bench authors. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of
  language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.

Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
  dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? FAccT 2021, pp. 610–623, New
  York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383097.

Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Max Kaufmann, Mikita Balesni, Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Kor-
  bak, and Owain Evans. The reversal curse: Llms trained on “a is b” fail to learn “b is a”. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.12288, 2023.

Stella Biderman, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony,
  Shivanshu Purohit, and Edward Raf. Emergent and predictable memorization in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11158, 2023.

Nathan Brody. What is intelligence? International Review of Psychiatry, 11(1):19–25, 1999.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard L Burden, J Douglas Faires, and Annette M Burden. Numerical analysis. Cengage learning,
  2015.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jiaao Chen, Xiaoman Pan, Dian Yu, Kaiqiang Song, Xiaoyang Wang, Dong Yu, and Jianshu
   Chen. Skills-in-context prompting: Unlocking compositionality in large language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2308.00304, 2023.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
 impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April
 2023), 2023.
Minje Choi, Jiaxin Pei, Sagar Kumar, Chang Shu, and David Jurgens. Do llms understand social
 knowledge? evaluating the sociability of large language models with socket benchmark. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2305.14938, 2023.
Raunak Chowdhuri,   Neil Deshmukh,  and David Koplow.       No,  gpt4
  can’t  ace   mit.           https://flower-nutria-41d.notion.site/
  No-GPT4-can-t-ace-MIT-b27e6796ab5a48368127a98216c76864, 2023.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson. Transformers as soft reasoners over language.
  In Christian Bessiere (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-20, pp. 3882–3890. International Joint Conferences on Artificial
  Intelligence Organization, 7 2020.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jian, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers
  on compositionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18654, 2023.
Irena Gao, Gabriel Ilharco, Scott Lundberg, and Marco Tulio Ribeiro. Adaptive testing of computer
   vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02774, 2022.
J. Gao, J. Lanchantin, M. L. Soffa, and Y. Qi. Black-box generation of adversarial text sequences to
   evade deep learning classifiers. In 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), pp. 50–56,
   May 2018. doi: 10.1109/SPW.2018.00016.
Shahriar Golchin and Mihai Surdeanu. Data contamination quiz: A tool to detect and estimate
  contamination in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06233, 2023a.
Shahriar Golchin and Mihai Surdeanu. Time travel in llms: Tracing data contamination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08493, 2023b.
Simeng Han, Hailey Schoelkopf, Yilun Zhao, Zhenting Qi, Martin Riddell, Luke Benson, Lucy
  Sun, Ekaterina Zubova, Yujie Qiao, Matthew Burtell, et al. Folio: Natural language reasoning
  with first-order logic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00840, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yuzhen Huang, Yuzhuo Bai, Zhihao Zhu, Junlei Zhang, Jinghan Zhang, Tangjun Su, Junteng Liu,
  Chuancheng Lv, Yikai Zhang, Jiayi Lei, et al. C-eval: A multi-level multi-discipline chinese
  evaluation suite for foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08322, 2023.
HuggingFace. Open-source large language models leaderboard. https://huggingface.co/
  spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard, 2023.
Di Jin, Zhijing Jin, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Peter Szolovits. Is bert really robust? a strong baseline
  for natural language attack on text classification and entailment. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 8018–8025, 2020.
Zhijing Jin, Jiarui Liu, Zhiheng Lyu, Spencer Poff, Mrinmaya Sachan, Rada Mihalcea, Mona Diab,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Can large language models infer causation from correlation? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.05836, 2023.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie
  Vidgen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ringshia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian
  Riedel, Zeerak Waseem, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mohit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina
  Williams. Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in NLP. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, pp. 4110–4124, June 2021.
Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st
  annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pp. 423–430, 2003.
Jan Kocoń, Igor Cichecki, Oliwier Kaszyca, Mateusz Kochanek, Dominika Szydło, Joanna Baran,
  Julita Bielaniewicz, Marcin Gruza, Arkadiusz Janz, Kamil Kanclerz, et al. Chatgpt: Jack of all
  trades, master of none. Information Fusion, pp. 101861, 2023.
Ben Krause, Emmanuel Kahembwe, Iain Murray, and Steve Renals. Dynamic evaluation of neural
  sequence models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2766–2775. PMLR,
  2018.
Jinfeng Li, Shouling Ji, Tianyu Du, Bo Li, and Ting Wang. TextBugger: Generating adversarial text
   against real-world applications. In Proceedings 2019 Network and Distributed System Security
   Symposium. Internet Society, 2019. doi: 10.14722/ndss.2019.23138.
Linyang Li, Ruotian Ma, Qipeng Guo, Xiangyang Xue, and Xipeng Qiu. BERT-ATTACK: Adver-
  sarial attack against BERT using BERT. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6193–6202, November 2020.
Minghao Li, Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Api-
 bank: A benchmark for tool-augmented llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08244, 2023a.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023b.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models, 2023c.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023d.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yucheng Li. An open source data contamination report for llama series models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.17589, 2023.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan,
  Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Alexander Cosgrove, Christopher D Manning, Christopher Re,
  Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew Arad Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda
  Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue WANG, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng,
  Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar Khattab,
  Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Andrew Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya
  Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang,
  Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
David F Lohman and Joni M Lakin. Intelligence and reasoning. The Cambridge handbook of
  intelligence, pp. 419–441, 2011.
Brian Lovin. Gpt-4 performs significantly worse on coding problems not in its training data.
  https://brianlovin.com/hn/35297067, 2023.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qing-
  wei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning
  for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09583, 2023.
Zhiyi Ma, Kawin Ethayarajh, Tristan Thrush, Somya Jain, Ledell Wu, Robin Jia, Christopher Potts,
  Adina Williams, and Douwe Kiela. Dynaboard: An evaluation-as-a-service platform for holistic
  next-generation benchmarking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:10351–
  10367, 2021.
Inbal Magar and Roy Schwartz. Data contamination: From memorization to exploitation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.08242, 2022.
OpenAI. https://chat.openai.com.chat, 2023a.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023b.
Yonatan Oren, Nicole Meister, Niladri Chatterji, Faisal Ladhak, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Proving
  test set contamination in black box language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17623, 2023.
John Palowitch, Anton Tsitsulin, Brandon Mayer, and Bryan Perozzi. Graphworld: Fake graphs
  bring real insights for gnns. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 3691–3701, 2022.
Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP models really able to solve simple
  math word problems? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2080–2094,
  June 2021.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Scott Lundberg. Adaptive testing and debugging of nlp models. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
 Long Papers), pp. 3253–3267, 2022.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy: Be-
 havioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4902–4912, Online, July 2020. Association
 for Computational Linguistics.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. Solving general arithmetic word problems. In Proceedings of the 2015
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1743–1752, September
  2015.
Tomohiro Sawada, Daniel Paleka, Alexander Havrilla, Pranav Tadepalli, Paula Vidas, Alexander
  Kranias, John J Nay, Kshitij Gupta, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Arb: Advanced reasoning benchmark
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13692, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rylan Schaeffer. Pretraining on the test set is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08632, 2023.
Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle Pineau, and William L. Hamilton. CLUTRR: A
  diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4506–4515, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiaojuan Tang, Zilong Zheng, Jiaqi Li, Fanxu Meng, Song-Chun Zhu, Yitao Liang, and Muhan
  Zhang. Large language models are in-context semantic reasoners rather than symbolic reasoners.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14825, 2023.
Michael Tänzer, Sebastian Ruder, and Marek Rei. Memorisation versus generalisation in pre-trained
 language models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
 tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7564–7578, May 2022.
Xwin-LM Team. Xwin-lm, 9 2023. URL https://github.com/Xwin-LM/Xwin-LM.
Krishnaiyan Thulasiraman and Madisetti NS Swamy. Graphs: theory and algorithms. John Wiley
  & Sons, 2011.
Jidong Tian, Yitian Li, Wenqing Chen, Liqiang Xiao, Hao He, and Yaohui Jin. Diagnosing the
   first-order logical reasoning ability through LogicNLI. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
   Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3738–3747, November 2021.
Yuchi Tian, Kexin Pei, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. Deeptest: Automated testing of deep-
  neural-network-driven autonomous cars. In Proceedings of the 40th international conference on
  software engineering, pp. 303–314, 2018.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Oriol Vinyals, Łukasz Kaiser, Terry Koo, Slav Petrov, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey Hinton. Gram-
  mar as a foreign language. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Tianwen Wei, Liang Zhao, Lichang Zhang, Bo Zhu, Lijie Wang, Haihua Yang, Biye Li, Cheng
  Cheng, Weiwei Lü, Rui Hu, et al. Skywork: A more open bilingual foundation model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.19341, 2023.
Zhaofeng Wu, Linlu Qiu, Alexis Ross, Ekin Akyürek, Boyuan Chen, Bailin Wang, Najoung Kim,
  Jacob Andreas, and Yoon Kim. Reasoning or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations
  of language models through counterfactual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02477, 2023.
Linyi Yang, Shuibai Zhang, Libo Qin, Yafu Li, Yidong Wang, Hanmeng Liu, Jindong Wang, Xing
  Xie, and Yue Zhang. Glue-x: Evaluating natural language understanding models from an out-of-
  distribution generalization perspective. In Findings of ACL, 2023a.
Shuo Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Rethinking
  benchmark and contamination for language models with rephrased samples. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.04850, 2023b.
Matej Zečević, Moritz Willig, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Causal parrots: Large
 language models may talk causality but are not causal. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
 search, 2023.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Le Zhang, Zichao Yang, and Diyi Yang. TreeMix: Compositional constituency-based data aug-
  mentation for natural language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pp. 5243–5258, July 2022.
Yifan Zhang, Jingqin Yang, Yang Yuan, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Cumulative reasoning with
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04371, 2023.
Jie Zhao, Xiang Deng, and Huan Sun. Easy-to-hard: Leveraging simple questions for complex
   question generation, 2019.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.
Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang, Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied,
 Weizhu Chen, and Nan Duan. Agieval: A human-centric benchmark for evaluating foundation
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06364, 2023.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy.
  Lima: Less is more for alignment, 2023a.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In ICLR, 2023b.
Kun Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Zhipeng Chen, Wentong Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin,
  Ji-Rong Wen, and Jiawei Han. Don’t make your llm an evaluation benchmark cheater. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.01964, 2023c.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In ICLR, 2023d.
Kaijie Zhu, Jindong Wang, Jiaheng Zhou, Zichen Wang, Hao Chen, Yidong Wang, Linyi Yang, Wei
  Ye, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Yue Zhang, et al. Promptbench: Towards evaluating the robustness of
  large language models on adversarial prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04528, 2023.
Zeyuan Allen Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and
  extraction, 2023.
Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen, Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. Can large
  language models transform computational social science? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03514,
  2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

A Preliminary on Directed Acyclic Graph                                                            16

B Details of DY VAL                                                                                17
    B.1 Generation Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    B.2 Complexity control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    B.3 Description function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    B.4 Description order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
    B.5 Potentials in Using GPT-4 to Generate Description Functions . . . . . . . . . . . .        22

C Proof                                                                                            23

D Details of Experiments                                                                           23
    D.1 Experiment Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    D.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
    D.3 Evaluation Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    D.4 Details of Experiment Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
    D.5 Details of Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
    D.6 Details of Varing Complexity Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
    D.7 Details of Prompt Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
    D.8 Human Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31

E Details of Fine-tuning                                                                           32
    E.1 Constructing training data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    E.2 Training data and testing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
    E.3 Results of Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36

F Imbalanced Generated Dataset                                                                     36

G General Language Understanding Ability after Fine-tuning                                         37

H Flexibility to Natural Language Tasks                                                            37

A    P RELIMINARY ON D IRECTED ACYCLIC G RAPH

Directed Acyclic Graphs, commonly referred to as DAGs, are a category of graphs that encapsulate
a unique structure: they are directed and contain no cycles. In a DAG, vertices are connected by
directed links, and there exists no sequence of links that loops back to an original node. Every link
in a DAG has an initial node and a terminal node, giving it a direction. This is often symbolized
as a → b, where a is the starting node and b is the ending node. A key property that differentiates
DAGs from other directed graphs is their lack of cycles. In other words, starting from any node in
the graph, one cannot traverse a series of links and return to the same node.
In our implementation, each node comprises three attributes: 1) Children (Links): These are the
direct dependents or subsequent nodes that a given node connects to. They highlight the immediate


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


relations or following a particular node. 2) Value: Every node possesses a value, which can either be
explicitly assigned or derived based on its operation and its children. This value captures the essence
or result of the represented subproblem. 3) Operation: Especially relevant in tree-based DAGs, the
operation dictates how a node interprets or processes the values of its children to compute its own
value. Operations might include mathematical functions, logical evaluations.


B     D ETAILS OF DY VAL

B.1     G ENERATION A LGORITHM

We distinguish DAGs into two primary categories: Tree-based DAGs (T-DAGs) and General DAGs
(G-DAGs), as shown in Figure 1.

B.1.1    T-DAG S

Tree-based DAGs possess an innate hierarchical structure that frequently encapsulate tasks that en-
tail a sequence of conditions culminating in a definitive conclusion or result. This hierarchy natu-
rally aligns with the structure of many mathematical and logical problems. For instance, in solving
a multi-step algebraic problem, one often starts with the provided equations (leaf nodes) and pro-
ceeds step-by-step, combining and reducing these equations until arriving at the final solution (root
node). Such a natural progression of deduction makes tree-based DAGs particularly feasible for
these problems.
We employ a top-down approach to construct a Tree-based DAG. This algorithm is tailored to pro-
duce a tree with a designated depth and width. The inherent randomness stems from two main
factors: the operations assigned to intermediate nodes and the initialization values of the leaf nodes.
For the intermediate nodes, we commence by randomly selecting an operation that defines the re-
lationship between the node and its children. Take an arithmetic task as an example: selecting
‘addition (+)’ implies that the node’s value is the sum of its children’s values. Once all child nodes
are established, we compute the parent node’s value accordingly. In the case of leaf nodes, values
are assigned randomly, such as picking an integer from the range [1, 10] for arithmetic tasks.

B.1.2    G-DAG S

General DAGs, diverging from tree-based ones, lack a strict hierarchy. Instead, they present a more
intricate web of node relationships. Their strength lies in simulating complex, intertwined relations
in real-world situations. A classic use-case is the representation of transportation systems where
nodes symbolize cities and edges represent connecting roads. Challenges such as determining if one
city is accessible from another encapsulate the real-world problems general DAGs adeptly model.
Their flexibility extends to representing a plethora of situations, from mapping supply-chain logistics
to analyzing social networks.
To create a general DAG, we initiate by generating isolated nodes without any connecting links.
Subsequently, each node is endowed with a random value. For every node, the number of children is
determined randomly, the maximum number of children is depended on the input. We then establish
the links by selecting target child nodes at random.

B.2     C OMPLEXITY CONTROL

Figure 7 demonstrated 4 types of complexity constraints for T-DAGs. Compared to original case,
adding width and additional links augments the computational intricacy of each subproblem. In-
creasing the depth escalates the complexity by necessitating more inference steps. Embedding ran-
dom descriptions aims to distract LLMs.

B.3     D ESCRIPTION FUNCTION

Figure 9 presented an illustration of our generated 7 tasks in 3 subjects: (1) Mathematics (DY VAL-
M), which includes arithmetic task and linera equation task; (2) Logical Reasoning (DY VAL-L),


                                                  17
     Adding difficulty
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Origin                Add width                  Add depth                  Add random links             Embed random descriptions
           A                      A                             A                            A                            A

     B             C       B       C          H            B            C               B            C                B           C

     D         E       F   D   E F G       I J K           D        E        F          D        E       F            D       E       F       L

                                                         G H I          J    K        G H I          J   K          G H I         J   K    M N

A’s value is calculated    A’s value is calculated by   A’s value is calculated by   A’s value is calculated by      A’s value is calculated by
by the sum of B and C.     the sum of B and C and E.    the sum of B and C.          the sum of B and C and E.       the sum of B and C.
B’s value is …             B’s value is …               B’s value is …               B’s value is …                  M’s value is…
…                          …                            …                            …                               B’s value is …
                                                        G’s value is …                                               …
                                                        …                                                            L’s value is…


                           Figure 7: The complexity constraints for Tree-based DAGs.


which includes boolean logic task, deductive logic task, and abductive logic task; (3) Algorithm
Tasks (DY VAL-A), which includes reachability task and max sum path task.

B.3.1          DY VAL -M

For DY VAL-M, we design mathematical problems that can be categorized into two main types:

Arithmetic: Given a T-DAG, the DAG description function has already demonstrated the premise:
the leaf nodes and the intermediate steps of inference: non-leaf nodes. Next, we select the root node
as the the variable required to solve, we append the question “What is the value of [Root]?”
to the final of the description where [Root] is filled with the name of the root variable.

    Here is a description of an arithmetic problem:
    The value of aaa is 9.
    The value of aad is 4.
    aae gets its value by taking the square root of the value that aad
    has.
    The value of aab is 3.
    aac gets its value by adding together the value of aaa and aab.
    aaf gets its value by subtracting the value of aae from the value of
    aac.
    Compute the result of aaf. If the solution cannot be calculated,
    answer ’N/A’. Ensure your result is within a relative precision of
    0.0001 (or 0.01%) compared to the ground truth value. Ensure your
    final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if
    the answer is 1, your final result should be <<<1>>>.



Linear Equations: Linear equations with multiple variables present a higher degree of complexity
compared to arithmetic. We use two-variable linear equations described as a1 x + b1 y = c1 , a2 x +
b2 y = c2 . The coefficients are assigned a random value. We ask LLMs to solve the value of x, y for
this linear system. Note that constructing such linear equations does not need T-DAGs or G-DAGs.
To introduce additional challenges, some coefficients can be substituted with values derived from
the T-DAG’s roots, forcing a two-step problem-solving approach: first calculating the coefficients
from the DAG and subsequently resolving the linear equations. Note that in our experiment, the tree
depth and width for linear equation task are (1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 2), (4, 2) respectively. (1, 1) represent
that the value of the replaced coefficient is directly given.


                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Given the following linear equation system with two variables:
  -7 x + aac0 y = 1
  8 x + -1 y = 10
  The calculation of aac0 is defined as:
  The value of aab0 is 4.
  The value of aaa0 is 9.
  aac0 gets its value by adding together the value of aaa0 and aab0.
  Determine the values of x and y. Ensure your results are within a
  relative precision of 0.001 (or 0.1%) compared to the ground truth
  values. Your response should be formatted as: <<<x’s value y’s
  value>>>, e.g., if x=1 and y=2, then it should be <<<1 2>>>


B.3.2   DY VAL -L
DY VAL-L also shares a natural compatibility with the structured representation of T-DAGs due to
the innate progression and dependencies inherent in logical constructs. The tasks are:

Boolean Logic: Similar to arithmetic task, it primarily revolves around the manipulation and com-
bination of True and False values using operators: AND, OR, NOT. The problems are presented
as: What is the truth value of [Root]?.

  Here is a description of a boolean logic problem:
  aaa is True.
  The value of aab equals to (NOT aaa).
  The value of aac equals to (NOT aab).
  Compute the result of aac. If the solution can not be calculated,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with
  ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result should be
  <<<True>>>.


Deductive Logic: The process of deductive logic is similar to boolean logic, but deduction intro-
duces a bit complexity compared to boolean logic inference. For instance, given premises A (True)
and B (False), and the relationship (A ∧ B) → C, the value of conclusion C remains undeter-
mined because the conjunction (A ∧ B) is false. Given the description of T-DAGs, the problem is
formulated as By the rule of deduction, what is the value of [Root]?

  Here is a description of a deductive logic problem:
  aab is True.
  aaa is True.
  (aaa and aab) -> aac.
  aad is False.
  (NOT aad) -> aae.
  (aac or aae) -> aaf.
  The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
  implies that if A is true, then B is true. If A is false, B’s truth
  value remains undetermined (N/A). Deduct the result of aaf. If the



                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  solution can not be abducted, answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result
  begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is
  True, your final result should be <<<True>>>.


Abductive Logic: It aims to hypothesize the most likely cause or explanation based on observed
outcomes. When working with a T-DAG, we assign a random value to the root node. Then, we
randomly select a leaf node, the problem is to determine the leaf node’ value based on the given
the DAG structure and root’s value. The task description is Given the value of [Root] is
[value], what is the value of [Node]?

  Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
  (aaa or aab) -> aac.
  (NOT aac) -> aad.
  Given aad is False, what is the value of aab?
  The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
  implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s truth
  value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be deducted,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with
  ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result should be
  <<<True>>>.


B.3.3   DY VAL -A
DY VAL-A tasks is suitable for D-DAG since they aim to model the real-world applications. Among
many problems that can be abstracted and modeled as a G-DAG, here we select two representative
tasks.

Reachability: A classic example of where G-DAGs shine is in modeling problems like the reach-
ability of two nodes in the DAG. Given various nodes representing cities and links indicating roads
between them, the question models can help deduce the if there exists a route from one city to an-
other. Thus, the description for this task is: “Can the [Node1] be reached by [Node2]” where Node1
and Node2 are randomly selected from the nodes in G-DAG.

  Given a directed graph:
  aai points to:       (None).
  aac points to:       (aai).
  aaj points to:       (aai).
  aah points to:       (aai, aac, aaj).
  aag points to:       (aac).
  aaf points to:       (aag, aah, aaj).
  aab points to:       (aaf, aah).
  aaa points to:       (aag, aah, aaf, aaj).
  aae points to:       (aai, aac, aaa).
  aad points to:       (aab, aaf, aae).
  Can aaf be reached starting from aag?
  Respond with either ’<<<True>>>’ if reachable, or ’<<<False>>>’
  otherwise.



                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max sum path: Compared to reachiability problem, max sum path is more complex. This problem
assign a value for each city, and then requires to find a path from two cities that the sum of the values
the path go through is maximum. It requires the LLMs to find all the path between two nodes, and
then determine the path with maximum value. The description for this task is What is the max
sum path from [Node 1] to [Node 2]?


  Given a directed graph with values assigned to each node:
  aaj points to:         (None).
  aah points to:         (None).
  aai points to:         (aah).
  aag points to:         (aai).
  aac points to:         (aag).
  aab points to:         (aac, aag).
  aaf points to:         (aai).
  aae points to:         (aac, aah).
  aad points to:         (aag, aae, aaj).
  aaa points to:         (aae, aai, aaj, aad).
  The value of aaj is 9
  The value of aab is 8
  The value of aah is 3
  The value of aaf is 3
  The value of aai is 3
  The value of aae is 3
  The value of aad is 6
  The value of aac is 4
  The value of aag is 8
  The value of aaa is 4
  What’s the maximum sum path from aaa to aae? For exmaple, the value
  of the path A->B->C is obtained by summing the values of nodes A, B,
  and C. Please format your response as <<<Answer>>>. For example, if
  the answer is 1, it should be presented as <<<1>>>.


B.4   D ESCRIPTION ORDER

   • Topological Order: This approach sequences the description of nodes in a manner where every
     node is introduced after all its descendent nodes. Such a sequence ensures that leaf nodes are
     laid out prior to any operation that utilizes them (e.g., an addition or a logical AND).
   • Reversed Topological Order: Taking an almost counter-intuitive approach, this order starts by
     spotlighting the culminating nodes or outcomes. Once these results are laid bare, the narrative
     retraces its steps, navigating backwards to the root nodes or primary inputs.
   • Random Order: This unstructured method presents nodes in a random sequence, irrespec-
     tive of their dependencies within the DAG. Such a disordered narrative challenges LLMs to
     independently connect the dots and derive patterns.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                              Linear Equation
             𝓕𝓖                             𝓕𝑻                         Arithmetic
                                                                    What is the value of F?                           Here is the linear eq with two variable,
                                                                                                                      where G is calculated by…
                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                                       X


                                                                         D                       E
                                                                                                                              E                    F               2x+3y=5
                                                                                                                              +                    -
      F gets its value by                                                                                                                                          4x+4y=G
                                     Topological Order
      dividing D from E                                                  A               B               C                A       B        C               D

                            A is ..., B is …, C is …                     2               3               7                3       2        8               4


                            D is ..., E is …,
                F           F is ...                           Boolean Logic                                 Deductive Logic                           Abductive Logic
                                                               What is the value of G?                       What is the value of F?                   What is the value of F?
                ÷
                              Reversed Topological Order                     G                                           F                                         F


                            F is ...
        D           E       D is ..., E is …,
        +           √       A is ..., B is …, C is …

                                                                       Reachability                                           Max Sum Path
   A        B       C                   Random Order                  Can G be reached by A?                             What is the maximum sum path

   1                        A is ..., E is …, F is ...,                                                                  from A to F?
            4       7
                            D is ..., B is …,                                    A           B                                             A
                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                       B

                            C is …
                                                                             C                       D                                C
      B’s value is 4.                                                                                                                                      D



                                                                          E          F           G           H                    E            F               G


  Figure 8: Description function of arithmetic task.               Figure 9: Descriptions of 7 tasks.

B.5     P OTENTIALS IN U SING GPT-4 TO G ENERATE D ESCRIPTION F UNCTIONS

In this section, we explore the potentials in using GPT-4 to generate more natural and contextualized
problem descriptions rather than the plain ones in Section B.3.
We simply feed the following instruction to GPT-4:
“Here is a description of an arithmetic problem, please generate an
application math test using the following information. Do not change
the exact numbers. Note that the test should be contextualized, real
applications test, instead of the plain description.” followed by the DY VAL-
generated problems such as the one in DY VAL-M.
Then, GPT-4 will generate the following application problem which is more vivid:

  Problem:
  Imagine you are managing a small warehouse. The warehouse has a total
  storage capacity of 9 large crates (represented by ’aaa’). You also
  have an additional area that can store 3 more crates (represented by
  ’aab’).
  Recently, you purchased a set of 4 special crates (represented by
  ’aad’) that are stackable. When stacked, these crates take up the
  space of 2 regular crates.
  Your task is to calculate the new total storage capacity of your
  warehouse after adding the stackable crates and utilizing the
  additional storage area.
  Steps:
  Identify the total initial capacity (aaa). Identify the additional
  capacity (aab). Calculate the effective space taken by the stackable
  crates (aae) - consider them as a single unit after stacking.
  Calculate the new total capacity by adding the initial and additional
  capacities (aac). Finally, adjust the total capacity by considering
  the space taken by the stackable crates (aaf). Question:
  What is the new total storage capacity of the warehouse after these
  adjustments?
  (Use the given values and operations to solve the problem)



                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While the above application problem looks more vivid than the plain one, it is in fact challenging
to verify its rationale and correctness. For instance, is the problem natural? Is the context correct?
Note that GPT-4 tends to first compute the answers to the original problem before generating a
new one, which may accumulate errors including problem understanding, application generation,
and computation. Therefore, while we point the feasibility of such practice, this in current stage is
difficult to verify and should be left for future work.

C     P ROOF
Theorem C.1. Given a tree-based DAG with depth d and width w, if the operation set for non-
leaf nodes has k distinct operations and the value set for leaf nodes contains n distinct values, the
                                                                            d−1                  −1
                                                                              w   −1        d−1
probability that two independently generated DAGs are identical is: P = k w−1 × nw                  .


Proof. To determine the overall probability, we analyze the likelihood at each depth and then multi-
ply these probabilities. For depth i, the number of nodes is wi−1 .
For depth i, 1 ≤ i ≤ d − 1. Since these nodes are non-leaf nodes, the probability they are identical
in two independently generated DAGs is the likelihood all of them have the same operations: pi =
   1
kwi−1
      .

For the leaf nodes at depth d, the probability that they are the same across two DAGs is: pd = w1d−1 .
                                                                                               n
                                                                         Qd−1
Thus, the overall probability P that two DAGs are identical is: P = i=1 pi × pd .
                                                                                d−1               −1
                                                                                 w  −1       d−1
Substituting the above expressions and simplifying gives the result: P = k w−1 × nw                  .

Note: We consider two trees to be distinct even if they only differ in the order of operations. For
instance, the tree representing 3×5 is considered different from the tree representing 5×3. Excluding
such cases may be non-trivial and is unlikely to significantly affect the odds.


Theorem C.2. Given a general DAG with n nodes where each node has a minimum of l ≥ 1
links, the lower bound of the probability that two randomly selected DAGs of this configuration are
                       −1
identical is ((n − 1)!) .

Proof. Consider a DAG where each node has exactly one outgoing link. The first node can be
connected to any of the remaining n − 1 nodes. Subsequently, the second node can connect to any
of the remaining n − 2 nodes, excluding the one already connected to the first node. Following this
logic, the third node can connect to any of the n − 3 unconnected nodes, and so on.
Thus, the total number of distinct DAGs that can be constructed under these constraints is given by:
(n − 1) × (n − 2) × . . . × 2 × 1 = (n − 1)!
Given two randomly chosen DAGs of this kind, the likelihood they are identical is the inverse of the
                          1
number of unique DAGs: (n−1)!
This probability serves as the lower bound when considering the general case of DAGs with nodes
having a minimum of l ≥ 1 links, hence proving the theorem.



D     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTS
D.1   E XPERIMENT E NVIRONMENT

All experiments are conducted on a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA V100 GPU with 16GB
memory and A100 GPU with 80GB memory. For GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4, we use OpenAI’s


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


API for inference, the versions are gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 and gpt-4-0613. For the Llama2 models, we
downloaded from the Llama2 github repository3 and follow the instruction4 to convert them into
huggingface models. For Vicuna-13B-v1.3, we downloaded it from its github repository5 . The
remaining models can be downloaded directly via huggingface.

D.2     P ROMPTS
• Arithmetic:

       Here is a description of an arithmetic problem:
       {}
       Compute the result of {}. If the solution cannot be calculated,
       answer ’N/A’. Ensure your result is within a relative precision of
       0.0001 (or 0.01%) compared to the ground truth value. Ensure your
       final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if
       the answer is 1, your final result should be <<<1>>>.


• Linear Equation:

       Given the following linear equation system with two variables:
       {}
       Determine the values of x and y. Ensure your results are within a
       relative precision of 0.001 (or 0.1%) compared to the ground truth
       values. Your response should be formatted as: <<<x’s value y’s
       value>>>, e.g., if x=1 and y=2, then it should be <<<1 2>>>


• Boolean Logic:

       Here is a description of a boolean logic problem:
       {}
       Compute the result of {}. If the solution can not be calculated,
       answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends
       with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result
       should be <<<True>>>.

• Deductive Logic:

       Here is a description of a deductive logic problem:
       {}
       The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
       implies that if A is true, then B is true. If A is false, B’s truth
       value remains undetermined (N/A). Deduce the result of {}. If the
       solution can not be deduced, answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result
       begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is
       True, your final result should be <<<True>>>.


• Abductive Logic:

       Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
       {}
       The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
       implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s

   3
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama
   4
     https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/models/llama/convert llama weights to hf.py
   5
     https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      truth value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be
      abduced, answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’
      and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final
      result should be <<<True>>>.

• Reachability:

      Given a directed graph:
      {}
      Respond with either ’<<<True>>>’ if reachable, or ’<<<False>>>’
      otherwise.

• Max Sum Path:

      Given a directed graph with values assigned to each node:
      {}
      For exmaple, the value of the path A->B->C is obtained by summing
      the values of nodes A, B, and C. Please format your response
      as <<<Answer>>>. For example, if the answer is 1, it should be
      presented as <<<1>>>.


D.3    E VALUATION S ET

We categorize tasks into four complexity levels, denoted as D1 to D4. For tasks reliant on general
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), the node count is set to 7, 10, 15, 20. Each of these nodes pos-
sesses a maximum link range of 3, 4, 6, 8 and a minimum link count of 1. Conversely, for tasks
that utilize tree-based DAGs, the tree depths and widths are defined as (2, 2), (3, 2), (3, 3), (4, 2), in
order of increasing complexity.
The range of these datasets progresses from simple to intricate. To illustrate, an arithmetic problem
with a tree depth of 2 represents a basic two-variable arithmetic computation. In contrast, a task
with a tree depth of 4 exhibits heightened complexity, necessitating multiple inferential steps for
resolution.

D.4    D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

We do not report the results of Flan-T5-large, phi-1.5, WizardMath-13B, and Xwin-13B since their
performance is almost 0 even on simplest evaluation sets generated by our DY VAL. Therefore, we
extensively run the results of four remaining models: Vicuna-13B-v1.3, Llama2-13B-chat, GPT-3.5-
Turbo, and GPT-4. Table 2, 3, and 4 report the detailed results (average±standard error) of these
models in different complexity (D1∼D4) and different description generation orders (topological,
reversed topological, and random orders).
In the reachability task, as task difficulty escalated, Llama2-13B-chat’s performance paradoxically
improved. Upon investigation, Llama2-13B-chat essentially resorted to random guessing across
datasets. The proportion of ’True’ answers increased (from 40% in D1 to 60% in D3), with
’False’ responses being nearly absent. The remainder were non-responses, thus elevating the overall
accuracy. The observation is similar to those made in Sec.4.4 where we investigated the influence
of different model size.
Further, generation description order affects outcomes: in the reachability task, GPT-4’s accuracy
drops by 13.67% when given reversed order compared to topological order. See Appendix D.4 for
details of experiment results.

D.5    D ETAILS OF C ASE S TUDY

We select 20 failure cases of the most challenging datasets of arithmetic, deductive logic, abductive
logic, and reachability of GPT-4.

                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           Table 2: Results for Mathematic Tasks
                                              GPT4                                   ChatGPT                                  Llama2-13b-chat                             Vicuna-13b-v1.3
    Task        Dataset
                               Topo         Reversed        Rand          Topo       Reversed         Rand          Topo          Reversed        Rand           Topo        Reversed        Rand
                   D1        98.00±0.00    100.00±0.00   99.00±1.00    95.00±0.40    99.53±0.23    97.27±0.90    12.33±0.90      38.67±1.86     24.20±1.93     2.73±0.64     0.53±0.58     2.40±0.69
                   D2        94.17±1.15     95.67±1.04   95.50±1.00    90.47±1.17    92.27±0.12    92.07±0.31     5.73±1.01       3.00±0.87      4.60±0.35     1.53±0.46     0.07±0.12     0.60±0.20
 Arithmetic
                   D3        85.83±1.89     87.67±1.61   84.35±2.26    76.20±2.80    78.20±3.41    78.47±3.83     1.07±0.12       2.47±0.23      3.07±0.76     1.13±0.31     0.07±0.12     0.20±0.00
                   D4        79.33±1.61     81.33±1.89   77.67±2.57    72.40±1.51    72.73±1.68    69.40±2.25     2.80±0.53       0.80±0.35      1.20±0.69     0.20±0.20     0.07±0.12     0.00±0.00
                   D1        56.33±1.15     58.50±0.00   56.33±3.01    36.20±1.04    36.20±2.42    36.27±2.66     0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00
  Linear           D2        42.67±2.36     42.17±1.89   43.00±2.65    27.67±1.75    30.87±1.72    29.60±2.55     0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00
 Equation          D3        44.33±2.52     43.17±6.60   43.83±2.93    19.40±1.06    29.67±1.29    23.87±2.10     0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00
                   D4        38.83±4.25     37.17±3.82   34.00±1.73    13.80±1.06    21.07±0.50    14.93±2.05     0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00


                                                       Table 3: Results for Logical Reasoning Tasks
                                             GPT4                                    ChatGPT                                 Llama2-13b-chat                             Vicuna-13b-v1.3
   Task         Dataset
                               Topo         Reversed       Rand           Topo       Reversed        Rand          Topo         Reversed        Rand           Topo         Reversed        Rand
                  D1        100.00±0.00    100.00±0.00   100.00±0.00   99.80±0.20   99.87±0.23    97.60±0.53    25.33±1.17      12.73±0.23    19.53±1.33     77.93±1.47     84.93±0.12   81.13±0.12
 Boolean          D2        100.00±0.00     99.33±0.58   100.00±0.00   98.80±0.20   99.40±0.20    96.80±0.40     7.87±0.61      17.00±1.40    18.67±0.70     43.00±1.00     68.40±2.12   53.93±1.55
  Logic           D3         97.00±1.00    100.00±0.00   100.00±0.00   99.60±0.35   98.00±0.69    92.93±1.10    13.53±1.55      20.07±1.51    17.93±0.50     28.93±2.19     42.47±2.10   39.67±2.58
                  D4         96.00±2.00    100.00±0.00    99.67±0.58   99.40±0.20   95.47±0.23    90.47±0.64    10.87±0.42      13.93±1.30    16.33±0.99     29.20±1.59     29.73±2.12   29.80±1.25
                  D1        100.00±0.00    88.17±1.26    95.17±1.53    81.87±0.76   82.47±1.42    81.53±2.72    45.40±1.25      56.27±1.03    49.13±0.42     11.87±0.31     44.60±1.11   20.73±0.99
 Deductive        D2         98.50±1.50    92.50±0.87    97.17±1.61    64.60±1.60   65.93±1.14    63.73±3.42    43.60±2.60      34.47±2.05    43.07±3.14     48.00±2.31     38.73±2.05   44.87±0.61
  Logic           D3         98.17±1.53    87.83±2.52    98.33±1.04    63.47±2.48   61.60±2.80    63.33±1.86    26.60±1.91      33.47±1.68    26.27±1.21     46.67±1.75     45.47±2.72   34.67±2.21
                  D4         96.17±1.04    84.33±1.44    90.67±5.03    56.40±1.78   57.33±1.30    56.47±3.00    20.60±1.56      29.20±1.59    20.60±2.69     38.07±1.15     37.40±1.22   33.40±3.17
                  D1        93.50±0.50     83.33±3.33    91.00±1.00    37.93±2.14   49.33±3.59    38.07±2.61    3.73±0.23       0.00±0.00     1.73±0.76      56.40±2.25     31.60±1.22   45.53±2.10
 Abductive        D2        78.83±6.37     48.50±5.57    63.50±4.09    53.47±2.50   59.80±3.41    56.60±3.36    21.47±1.17      10.53±1.42    17.67±1.86     19.80±0.20     25.47±1.72   22.00±1.39
  Logic           D3        64.67±5.51     49.83±3.18    58.50±3.28    56.13±3.06   60.80±1.06    57.87±2.81    12.60±1.51       7.60±2.25     8.07±0.95     20.40±1.31     14.80±0.92   17.20±0.87


Here we present one failure case for each error type.

Partial calculation error It has been observed that GPT-4, in certain situations, commits errors
in intermediate computational steps, while it maintains correctness in the remaining steps. This
characteristic anomaly is not isolated to complex calculations. In fact, not only complex calculation,
seemingly straightforward calculations such as can be incorrectly computed. This observed behavior
is consistent with the findings presented by (Dziri et al., 2023), where they highlighted that low-level
learning models (LLMs) occasionally produce results that are only partially accurate, particularly in
the realm of multi-digit multiplication.

   Input:
   Here is a description of an arithmetic problem:
   The value of aaj is 7.
   aak gets its value by squaring the value that aaj has.
   The value of aah is 6.
   The value of aag is 2.
   aai gets its value by dividing the value of aag by those of aah.
   aan gets its value by multiplying together the value of aai and aak.
   The value of aaa is 6.
   aab gets its value by squaring the value that aaa has.
   The value of aac is 8.
   The value of aad is 1.


                                                            Table 4: Results for Algorithm Tasks
                                              GPT4                                  ChatGPT                                 Llama2-13b-chat                              Vicuna-13b-v1.3
    Task          Dataset
                                Topo        Reversed       Rand          Topo       Reversed        Rand          Topo          Reversed        Rand           Topo         Reversed        Rand
                    D1        83.67±1.15    92.67±1.15   85.33±3.06    59.53±0.76   63.87±1.51    63.40±2.42    21.60±1.20     23.20±0.80     26.87±1.47     11.47±1.29    29.80±2.03    23.53±2.20
                    D2        85.00±0.00    91.00±3.00   83.00±2.00    53.53±3.97   56.73±2.81    54.27±1.79    34.60±1.40     26.87±1.27     26.27±1.17     12.07±0.58    31.73±0.64    21.73±0.50
 Reachability
                    D3        68.17±2.93    77.67±0.58   67.67±2.31    49.67±2.55   57.53±1.90    53.73±3.13    39.33±2.08     39.33±1.80     37.47±1.01     13.60±1.00    29.67±3.75    21.80±2.88
                    D4        63.00±1.00    76.67±0.58   74.33±2.52    49.40±2.71   59.13±3.49    52.33±2.89    33.67±2.97     41.53±1.22     38.60±0.92     10.80±0.72    30.73±1.53    22.00±1.64
                    D1        37.33±5.86    30.67±6.11   26.67±6.03    29.47±2.08   29.67±2.77    25.27±0.83    0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00
  Max Sum           D2        38.67±8.14    27.00±8.54   25.67±5.69    14.20±1.25   13.33±2.37    11.33±0.76    0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00
   Path             D3        21.33±4.04    17.00±5.00   16.67±4.16     6.40±1.64    8.40±1.51     7.60±0.72    0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00
                    D4        16.67±2.52    12.00±2.00   10.67±0.58     5.07±0.76    6.20±1.11     6.67±1.33    0.00±0.00       0.00±0.00     0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00      0.00±0.00


                                                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  aae gets its value by dividing the value of aac by those of aad.
  aaf gets its value by dividing the value of aab by those of aae.
  aao gets its value by adding together the value of aaf and aan.
  Compute the result of aao. If the solution cannot be calculated,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your result is within a relative precision of
  0.0001 (or 0.01%) compared to the ground truth value. Ensure your
  final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if
  the answer is 1, your final result should be <<<1>>>.
  GPT-4’s response:
  First, let’s calculate the values step by step:
  aaj = 7
  aak = aaj2 = 72 = 49
  aah = 6
  aag = 2
  aai = aag / aah = 2 / 6 = 0.3333
  aan = aai * aak = 0.3333 * 49 = 16.3167 (should be 16.3317)
  aaa = 6
  aab = aaa2 = 62 = 36
  aac = 8
  aad = 1
  aae = aac / aad = 8 / 1 = 8
  aaf = aab / aae = 36 / 8 = 4.5
  aao = aaf + aan = 4.5 + 16.3167 = 20.8167
  So, the result of aao is 20.8167.
  Therefore, the final result is <<<20.8167>>>.
  Ground truth: 20.8333


Incorrect reasoning When tasked with reasoning, GPT-4 can occasionally falter in rule interpre-
tation, especially in abductive logic task.

  Input:
  Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
  (aaa and aab) -> aac.
  (aae or aaf) -> aag.
  (aah or aai) -> aaj.
  (aag or aaj) -> aak.
  (NOT aac) -> aad.
  (aad or aak) -> aan.
  Given aan is False, what is the value of aab?
  The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
  implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s truth
  value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be abduced,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with



                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result should be
  <<<True>>>.
  GPT-4’s response:
  Given aan is False, it means either aad or aak must be False (both aad
  and aak should be False) (since aad or aak -> aan).
  If aak is False, then either aag or aaj must be False (since aag or
  aaj -> aak).
  If aag is False, then either aae or aaf must be False (since aae or
  aaf -> aag).
  If aaj is False, then either aah or aai must be False (since aah or
  aai -> aaj).
  However, none of these conditions provide any information about aab.
  Therefore, the value of aab cannot be abduced from the given
  information.
  So, the answer is <<<N/A>>>.
  Ground truth: N/A


Self Contradiction GPT-4, on occasion, presents self-contradictory assumptions during the same
inference in an abductive logic task.

  Input:
  Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
  (aah or aai) -> aaj.
  (NOT aaj) -> aak.
  (aad or aae) -> aaf.
  (aaa or aab) -> aac.
  (aac or aaf) -> aag.
  (aag or aak) -> aan.
  Given aan is False, what is the value of aah?
  The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
  implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s truth
  value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be abduced,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with
  ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result should be
  <<<True>>>.
  GPT-4’s response:
  Since aan is False, at least one of aag or aak must be False.
  However, we don’t know which one is False, so we can’t determine the
  value of aah. (This inference step contradicts to the former example,
  where GPT-4 assumes aah is False.) Therefore, the answer is ’N/A’.
  <<<N/A>>>
  Ground truth: N/A


Unsubstaintiated response A recurring observation in both reasoning and algorithmic tasks
is GPT-4’s propensity to provide answers without accompanying justifications. These succinct,
answer-only responses raise concerns about the depth of GPT-4’s understanding and whether its ap-
proach is grounded in actual comprehension or simply a result of memorization. This error mostly
happens in algorithm tasks and occasionally happens in logical reasoning tasks.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Input:
  Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
  (aaa or aab) -> aac.
  (aad or aae) -> aaf.
  (aac or aaf) -> aag.
  (NOT aah) -> aai.
  (NOT aaj) -> aak.
  (aai or aak) -> aan.
  (aag or aan) -> aao.
  Given aao is False, what is the value of aaa?
  The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
  implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s truth
  value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be abduced,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with
  ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result should be
  <<<True>>>.
  GPT-4’s response:
  <<<N/A>>>
  Ground truth: N/A



Instructional oversight Interestingly, while GPT-4 often computes accurately, it sometimes fal-
ters when it comes to precisely following the output instructions as described in given prompts.
This discrepancy points to a potential gap in the model’s ability to parse and adhere to intricate
instructional details, even when the underlying computational capability is sound.

  Input:
  Here is a description of an arithmetic problem:
  The value of aac is 6.
  The value of aai is 6.
  The value of aag is 8.
  aan gets its value by subtracting the sum of the values of aak and aae
  from the value of aah.
  aao gets its value by multiplying together the value of aae and aan
  and aae.
  aah gets its value by multiplying together the value of aaf and aag
  and aae.
  The value of aap is 1.
  The value of aaa is 6.
  aad gets its value by taking the square root of the value that aac
  has.
  The value of aaj is 4.
  aak gets its value by subtracting the sum of the values of aaj and aae
  from the value of aai.
  The value of aaq is 7.
  aar gets its value by dividing the value of aap by those of aaq.



                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  aab gets its value by squaring the value that aaa has.
  The value of aaf is 10.
  aae gets its value by multiplying together the value of aab and aad
  and aai.
  Compute the result of aao. If the solution cannot be calculated,
  answer ’N/A’. Ensure your result is within a relative precision of
  0.0001 (or 0.01%) compared to the ground truth value. Ensure your
  final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if
  the answer is 1, your final result should be <<<1>>>.
  GPT-4’s response:
  Let’s solve this step by step:
  1.    aac = 6
  2.    aai = 6
  3.    aag = 8
  4.    aaa = 6
  5.    aad = sqrt(aac) = sqrt(6)
  6.    aaj = 4
  7.    aaq = 7
  8.    aap = 1
  9.    aaf = 10
  10.     aab = aaa2 = 62 = 36
  11.     aae = aab * aad * aai = 36 * sqrt(6) * 6
  12.     aak = aai - (aaj + aae) = 6 - (4 + 36 * sqrt(6) * 6)
  13.     aah = aaf * aag * aae = 10 * 8 * 36 * sqrt(6) * 6
  14. aan = aah - (aak + aae) = 10 * 8 * 36 * sqrt(6) * 6 - (6 - (4 +
  36 * sqrt(6) * 6) + 36 * sqrt(6) * 6)
  15. aao = aae * aan * aae = (36 * sqrt(6) * 6) * (10 * 8 * 36 *
  sqrt(6) * 6 - (6 - (4 + 36 * sqrt(6) * 6) + 36 * sqrt(6) * 6)) * (36 *
  sqrt(6) * 6)
  This is a complex calculation and it’s not possible to simplify it
  further. However, it’s clear that the result will be a very large
  number. Since the problem doesn’t provide any constraints on the
  values of the variables, we can’t say that the solution is ’N/A’.
  (The equation is correct however GPT-4 did not simplify it. In our
  experiment, we found that GPT-4 can handle large numbers, so the error
  does not originate from them.)
  So, the result of aao is a very large number that can’t be simplified
  further.
  Ground truth: 11848342359.78579



D.6     D ETAILS OF VARING C OMPLEXITY C ONSTRAINTS

As shown in Figure 5, we systematically vary the levels of complexity in GPT-3.5-Turbo by adjusting
individual constraints while keeping others constant. Specifically, we explore how performance
metrics evolve as we incrementally adjust depth, width, #nodes, #max links, the number of extra
links, and the quantity of random descriptions across arithmetic, boolean logic, and deductive logic
tasks. To comprehensively evaluate the impact of complexity constraints, various parameters were
meticulously adjusted. The following elucidates the configurations employed:


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Results of GPT-3.5-Turbo with prompt engineering
                                                                                 Table 6: Results of Llama
techniques on the toughest evaluation sets generated by DY VAL
                                                                                 2 with different sizes on DY-
(D4).
                                Linear  Deductive Abductive              Max Sum
                                                                                 VAL-generated evaluation sam-
 Prompt engineering Arithmetic                              Reachability
                               Equation  Logic     Logic                  Path   ples (D1).
 Vanilla                           42.13   14.93   56.40   54.33        49.40    5.07   Size   Arithmetic   Boolean logic   Reachability
 CoT (Wei et al., 2022)            42.33   21.93   52.93   43.73        47.73   1.93
 Fewshot (Brown et al., 2020)      47.86    2.40   35.93   41.60        81.80   12.20    7b      13.07         28.93           29.53
 Least2most (Zhou et al., 2023b)   36.73   12.47   44.07   38.80        76.53    8.07   13b      24.20         19.53           26.53
 APE (Zhou et al., 2023d)          45.20   23.40   44.67   53.13        62.80   8.87    70b      29.71         28.30           47.38
 SKiC (Chen et al., 2023)          32.07   13.70   63.00   78.27        71.40   11.80


   • Depth Constraint: Maintaining the width at 2, with neither the addition of random links nor
     the embedding of extra descriptions (both set to 0), the depth was systematically varied, with
     values set to 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
   • Width Constraint: With a fixed depth of 3, and with the addition of random links and embed-
     ding of extra descriptions both neutralized to 0, the width was tested with the values 2, 3, 4, 5,
     and 6.
   • Random Link Addition Constraint: For this, a depth of 4 and a width of 2 were maintained,
     with extra descriptions set to 0. The number of random links introduced varied as 0, 1, 2, 3,
     and 4. It should be highlighted that due to the inherent acyclic constraint, certain nodes may
     preclude the addition of extra links.
   • Embedding Extra Descriptions: With a depth and width fixed at 4 and 2, respectively, and no
     addition of random links (set to 0), the levels of embedded extra descriptions were calibrated
     to 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Across these variations, our results consistently underscore a notable trend: as the tasks become
more intricate through the augmentation of these complexity parameters, LLMs progressively strug-
gle, underscoring the inherent challenges posed by increasing task intricacy. It can be observed that
depth is the most influential complexity constraint of tree-based DAGs, indicates that LLMs struggle
to deal with problems that requires more inference steps.

D.7       D ETAILS OF P ROMPT E NGINEERING

We explored five prompting techniques to evaluate their potential impact on our most challenging
datasets (excluding boolean logic since GPT-3.5-Turbo achieved comparable results on most chal-
lenging datasets): Zeroshot-CoT (Wei et al., 2022), Few-shot (3-shot in our experiments) (Brown
et al., 2020), Least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2023b), automatic prompt engineering (APE) (Zhou et al.,
2023d), and skill-in-context (SkiC) (Chen et al., 2023). The details of these techniques are as fol-
lows:

   • Zeroshot-CoT: An approach that allows models to generalize from their pre-training without
     explicit examples in the target task (Wei et al., 2022).
   • Fewshot (3-shot in our experiments): Provides the model with a small number of examples
     from the target task to aid in understanding and generalizing to the broader task (Brown et al.,
     2020).
   • Least to Most Prompting: This technique incrementally provides more specific prompts to
     guide the model’s responses, adapting the prompt based on the difficulty level of the problem
     (Zhou et al., 2023b).
   • Automatic Prompting Engineering (APE): A method where prompts are automatically engi-
     neered to elicit the desired response from the model, often maximizing its performance (Zhou
     et al., 2023d).
   • Skill-in-Context (SKiC): This method seeks to understand a model’s inherent skills and utilize
     them in a specific context to improve its outputs (Chen et al., 2023).

D.8       H UMAN S TUDY

We conducted our human study by obeying the local laws and regulations. The demographics of the
human subjects are shown in Table 7.


                                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 7: Demographics of the recruited human subjects.
                   Sex                Age                 Degree
                   Male: 63 (63%)        20-25: 75 (75%)     Bachelor: 62 (62%)
                   Female: 37 (37%)      26-36: 25 (25%)     Master: 38 (38%)


E     D ETAILS OF F INE - TUNING
E.1    C ONSTRUCTING TRAINING DATA

The training data includes the problems and their corresponding inference steps. Constructing in-
ference steps is similar to the DAG description. For mathematics tasks and logical reasoning tasks,
which utilize T-DAG, we follow the topological order to describe how the intermediate gets its value
from its children. For algorithm tasks, the inference are indeed an algorithm, thus, we formalize each
step in the algorithm into natural language, which finally form the inference steps. Following list
presented a training sample of each task. Note that the inference steps for each task are also highly
flexible and can be augmented with more details, and we believe that the more detailed inference
steps will benefit more.

• Arithmetic:

      Input:
      Here is a description of an arithmetic problem:
      The value of aae is 2.
      The value of aad is 4.
      aaf gets its value by dividing the value of aad by those of aae.
      aag gets its value by taking the square root of the value that aaf
      has.
      Compute the result of aag. If the solution cannot be calculated,
      answer ’N/A’. Ensure your result is within a relative precision of
      0.0001 (or 0.01%) compared to the ground truth value. Ensure your
      final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if
      the answer is 1, your final result should be <<<1>>>.
      Inference steps:
      aae is 2.0
      aad is 4.0
      aaf = aad / aae = 4.0 / 2.0 = 2.0
      aag = sqrt aaf = sqrt(2.0) = 1.41421356

      Thus, the answer is <<<1.41421356>>>

• Linear Equation:

      Input:
      Given the following linear equation system with two variables:

      aag0 x + -6 y = -6
      -2 x + 6 y = 0

      The calculation of aag0 is defined as:
      The value of aab0 is 10.
      The value of aaa0 is 6.
      aac0 gets its value by adding together the value of aaa0 and aab0.
      The value of aad0 is 6.
      The value of aae0 is 1.
      aaf0 gets its value by multiplying together the value of aad0 and



                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    aae0.
    aag0 gets its value by multiplying together the value of aac0 and
    aaf0.

    Determine the values of x and y. Ensure your results are within
    a relative precision of 0.001 (or 0.1%) compared to the ground truth
    values. Your response should be formatted as: <<<x’s value y’s
    value>>>, e.g., if x=1 and y=2, then it should be <<<1 2>>>
    Inference steps:
    Let’s first solve the coefficients of the linear equation.
    aab0 is 10.0
    aaa0 is 6.0
    aac0 = aaa0 + aab0 = 6.0 + 10.0 = 16.0
    aad0 is 6.0
    aae0 is 1.0
    aaf0 = aad0 * aae0 = 6.0 * 1.0 = 6.0
    aag0 = aac0 * aaf0 = 16.0 * 6.0 = 96.0
    Thus, aag0 = 96.0

    Next, solve the linear equation:

    96.0 x + -6.0 y = -6.0
    -2.0 x + 6.0 y = 0.0
    To eliminate ’y’, multiply the first equation by 6 and the
    second equation by -6. This makes the coefficients of ’y’ equal.
    Subtracting the second equation from the first then gives: 564.0x =
    -36.0.
    From the equation 564.0x = -36.0, we can solve for x.
    Solving for x, we get x = -0.06382979.
    Substituting x = -0.06382979 into the first original equation, we
    get: -6.0y = 0.12765957, which gives y = -0.0212766.


    Thus, the answer is <<<-0.06382979 -0.0212766>>>

• Boolean Logic:

    Input:
    Here is a description of a boolean logic problem:
    aaa is False.
    aab is True.
    The value of aac equals to (aaa OR aab).
    aad is False.
    aae is False.
    The value of aaf equals to (aad AND aae).
    The value of aag equals to (aac AND aaf).
    Compute the result of aag. If the solution can not be calculated,
    answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’ and ends
    with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final result
    should be <<<True>>>.
    Inference steps:
    aaa is False.
    aab is True.
    aac = (aaa OR aab) = (False OR True) = True.
    aad is False.
    aae is False.
    aaf = (aad AND aae) = (False AND False) = False.



                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    aag = (aac AND aaf) = (True AND False) = False.

    Thus, the answer is <<<False>>>


• Deductive Logic:

    Input:
    Here is a description of a deductive logic problem:
    aaa is False.
    aab is False.
    (aaa or aab) -> aac.
    (NOT aac) -> aad.
    The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
    implies that if A is true, then B is true. If A is false, B’s truth
    value remains undetermined (N/A). Deduce the result of aad. If the
    solution can not be deduced, answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result
    begins with ’<<<’ and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is
    True, your final result should be <<<True>>>.
    Inference steps:
    aaa is False.
    aab is False.
    (aaa OR aab) = (False OR False) -> aac.
    The premise (False OR False) is False, thus, the value of aac cannot
    be deduced and is set to N/A.
    (NOT aac) = (NOT N/A) -> aad.
    The value of aad cannot be deduced, and is set to N/A.

    Thus, the answer is <<<N/A>>>


• Abductive Logic:

    Input:
    Here is a description of an abductive logic problem:
    (aad or aae) -> aaf.
    (aaa or aab) -> aac.
    (aac or aaf) -> aag.
    Given aag is False, what is the value of aab?
    The symbol ’->’ represents a deductive relationship, e.g., A -> B
    implies that if B is false, then A is false. If B is true, A’s
    truth value remains undetermined (N/A). If the solution can not be
    abduced, answer ’N/A’. Ensure your final result begins with ’<<<’
    and ends with ’>>>’, for example, if the answer is True, your final
    result should be <<<True>>>.
    Inference steps:
    (aac OR aaf) -> aag = False.
    Given aag is False, the value of premise (aac OR aaf) is False,
    thus, the value of aac is abduced as False.
    (aaa OR aab) -> aac = False.
    Given aac is False, the value of premise (aaa OR aab) is False,
    thus, the value of aab is abduced as False.

    Thus, the answer is <<<False>>>


• Reachability:



                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Input:
    Given a directed graph:
    aag points to: (None).
    aaf points to: (None).
    aaa points to: (aag, aaf).
    aac points to: (aaa).
    aab points to: (aaa).
    aad points to: (aaa).
    aae points to: (aad).
    Can aag be reached starting from aaf?
    Respond with either ’<<<True>>>’ if reachable, or ’<<<False>>>’
    otherwise.
    Inference steps:
    Starting the search process from node aaf with the goal to reach
    node aag.
    Checking node aaf.
    Node aaf has no unvisited children. Moving back.
    Exhausted all possible paths without reaching node aag.

    Thus, the answer is <<<False>>>


• Max Sum Path:

    Input:
    Given a directed graph with values assigned to each node:
    aag points to: (None).
    aaf points to: (aag).
    aae points to: (aaf, aag).
    aab points to: (aaf).
    aad points to: (aab, aae).
    aac points to: (aag, aad).
    aaa points to: (aac, aag, aae).
    The value of aaa is 3
    The value of aab is 2
    The value of aaf is 5
    The value of aag is 5
    The value of aae is 1
    The value of aad is 7
    The value of aac is 2
    What’s the maximum sum path from aab to aae?
    For exmaple, the value of the path A->B->C is obtained by summing
    the values of nodes A, B, and C. Please format your response
    as <<<Answer>>>. For example, if the answer is 1, it should be
    presented as <<<1>>>.
    Inference steps:
    Starting the search for the maximum sum path from node aab to node
    aae.
    Reaching node aab with current sum of 2.
    Now, we explore the children of node aab: aaf.
    Reaching node aaf with current sum of 7.
    Now, we explore the children of node aaf: aag.
    Reaching node aag with current sum of 12.
    Node aag has no children. Moving back.
    There is no path from node aab to node aae.

    Thus, the answer is <<<N/A>>>



                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2     T RAINING DATA AND TESTING DATA

E.2.1     T RAINING DATA
For mathematical tasks and logical reasoning tasks that utilize T-DAGs, we construct four types of
training datasets. Each dataset consists of 500 training samples. All of these types have a depth of
3. The settings are as follows:

        1. width=2, add random links=0, embed random descs=0,
        2. width=2, add random links=1, embed random descs=0,
        3. width=2, add random links=1, embed random descs=1,
        4. width=3, add random links=0, embed random descs=0.

For algorithm tasks, two types of training datasets are generated:

        1. num nodes=7, max links per node=3,
        2. num nodes=10, max links per node=4.

E.2.2     T ESTING DATA
We create three types of testing data:

    1. In-Distribution (ID) Test Set: The difficulty level matches that of the training set.
          • For T-DAGs: depth=4, width=2, with no extra links and random descriptions.
          • For G-DAGs: num nodes=15 with max links=6.
    2. Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Test Set:
          • For T-DAGs: depth=4, width=2, without extra links and random descriptions.
          • For G-DAGs: num nodes=15 with max links=6.
    3. Out-of-Distribution-Hard (OOD-hard) Test Set:
          • For T-DAGs: depth=4, width=2, with one extra link per node and one random description.
          • For G-DAGs: num nodes=20 with max links=8.

Note that the definition of OOD in our tasks is mainly on the different complexities of the samples
that may come with more advanced structures or descriptions. For model evaluation, when using the
DY VAL generated testing data, a zero-shot setting was adopted. For existing benchmarks, few-shot
COT examples were provided in the context: 4 examples for GSM8K and SVAMP, 3 for FOLIO
and RACO, and 2 for DP and LCS. The results of evaluation in our tasks are presented in Figure 10.

E.3     R ESULTS OF F INE - TUNING

We fine-tuned Llama2-13b-chat with LORA (Hu et al., 2022) for 3 epochs where the rank was 8,
the scaling factor was 16 and the drop out rate was 0.05. We used a 0.0003 learning rate with batch
size 128. Results on existing benchmarks of the fine-tuned model is in Figure 6 of the main paper.
Figure 10 displays the results after fine-tuning on our test datasets as described in Sec.E.2.2. The
performance of Llama2-13B-chat on tasks like boolean logic, deductive logic, and reachability sig-
nificantly improves after fine-tuning on our dataset. However, noticeable gaps remain, particularly
in areas such as mathematic tasks, abductive logic and the max sum path.

F     I MBALANCED G ENERATED DATASET
Our algorithm can easily satisfy the balance requirement by meticulously controlling the flexible
dynamic generation process. For example, in reachability task, we can drop the generated evaluation
samples with ’False’ labels until we generate a sample with ’True’ label. We presented the results
of GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4 in balanced datasets in Table 8. The results in balanced datasets are
similar to our initial findings: (1) GPT-3.5-Turbo consistently predicted all questions as “True.”,
resulted in a uniform accuracy rate of 50%. (2) GPT-4 demonstrated excellent performance. It
maintained significantly higher accuracy rates across all complexity levels.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Vanilla-ID              Vanilla-OOD               Vanilla-OOD hard
                                                    Gain FT-ID              Gain FT-OOD               Gain FT-OOD hard
                          1.0

                          0.8


               Accuracy
                          0.6

                          0.4

                          0.2

                          0.0
                                      metic         r Eq            Logic              Logic             Log   ic         abil   ity
                                                                                                                                               m Pa
                                                                                                                                                   th
                                Arith          Linea         Bool                ctive             ctive            Reach                  Su
                                                                             Dedu              Abdu                                    Max

Figure 10: Fine-tuned results on ID and OOD sets of our tasks. For arithmetic, linear equation,
reachability and max sum path tasks, the vanilla accuracy is zero.


 Table 8: Results of fine-tuned ChatGPT model on general natural langugage understanding tasks
                   Model                                   ChatGPT                                                        GPT4
              Complexity                     D1         D2           D3              D4           D1                 D2                  D3        D4
               Balanced                      50         50           50              50          84.54              79.03               73.5      72.41
              Imbalanced                    63.87      54.27        53.73           52.33        85.33               83                67.67      74.33


G    G ENERAL L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING A BILITY AFTER F INE - TUNING

We fine-tuned GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 using our generated data on abductive logic and reachability
datasets, as GPT-3.5 performs worst on these two datasets. Specifically, we generated 100 samples
across complexity levels D1, D2, and D3 for each task. We compared the performance of original
and fine-tuned models on several benchmark tasks in GLUE dataset. The performance of abductive
logic and reachability task are tested on D4 task (different from fine-tuning dataset). As shown in
Table 9, performance on WNLI and QNLI datasets dropped for the fine-tuned model. However, fine-
tuned model achieves better results on CoLA, QQP, and MRPC datasets. Despite the mixed results,
the overall improvement in several datasets suggests that fine-tuning on our generated datasets does
not necessarily hurt the general language understanding ability.


 Table 9: Results of fine-tuned ChatGPT model on general natural langugage understanding tasks
                  Abductive Logic                      Reachability            SST-2            CoLA                WNLI                QNLI            QQP     MRPC
   GPT3.5                       55.27                      50.00                93.29            77.00              59.15               80.00           76.50   73.0
  GPT3.5-FT                     85.10                      96.53                93.23            78.00              45.07               72.50           78.00   77.5



H    F LEXIBILITY TO NATURAL L ANGUAGE TASKS

Finally, we discuss the flexibility of DY VAL while the main focus of this paper is on reasoning tasks.
We show that DY VAL can be easily extended to natural language processing tasks using an initial
experiment on sentiment analysis.
Generally speaking, a natural language sentence can be expressed as a syntax tree, similar to DAGs.
However, generating sentences through direct syntax tree construction (which is similar to the con-
struction of arithmetic task) presents notable challenges, primarily due to the need for grammatical
correctness and the inherent naturalness of these sentences. Nevertheless, DY VAL can still be ap-
plied to generate tasks in natural language by utilizing syntax tree templates extracted by existing
sentences. For each sentence in the SST-2 dataset, we initially employ GPT-3.5-Turbo to extract
its syntactic structure. Within each syntax tree (i.e., DAGs), we identify the elements that can be
modified: namely, nouns (such as names and places) and adjectives. GPT-3.5-Turbo is then used to
create five alternative candidates for each of these modifiable components, which are subsequently
replaced in an iterative fashion. Throughout this process, we continuously assess whether these
replacements alter the original semantic meaning of the sentence. Any changes that result in a se-
mantic shift are discarded. Note that the graph cannot be randomly generated as the reasoning tasks


                                                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


since we need to constrain the naturalness and grammar correctness of the generated sentences. As
a remedy, the structure of the graph can be abstracted using the template sentences generated by
GPT-3.5-Turbo.
We generate three alternative versions for each sentence in the above process, forming our newly
generated dataset. We then evaluate the performance of both Flan-T5-large and Llama2-7b models,
using the original SST-2 dataset as well as our generated dataset for comparison. The results of these
evaluations are detailed in Table 10. It shows that using our generated samples, the performance
drops, indicating that we are creating challenging test sets. Note that this is an initial study and
extending DY VAL to NLP tasks is nontrivial that cannot be covered in this paper, but should be left
for future work.

                           Table 10: Results for Logical Reasoning Tasks
                                         Flan-T5-large Llama2-7b
                                Origin        93.12          90.37
                                DyVal         86.46          72.03


                                                 38
