Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T REE -P LANNER : E FFICIENT C LOSE - LOOP TASK
P LANNING WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Mengkang Hu ♠ Yao Mu ♠ Xinmiao Yu♡ Mingyu Ding∗♠ Shiguang Wu♢
 Wenqi Shao♣ Qiguang Chen♡ Bin Wang♢ Yu Qiao♣ Ping Luo∗ ♠
                                                        ∗


                                              A BSTRACT
          This paper studies close-loop task planning, which refers to the process of gener-
          ating a sequence of skills (a plan) to accomplish a specific goal while adapting the
          plan based on real-time observations. Recently, prompting Large Language Mod-
          els (LLMs) to generate actions iteratively has become a prevalent paradigm due to
          its superior performance and user-friendliness. However, this paradigm is plagued
          by two inefficiencies: high token consumption and redundant error correction,
          both of which hinder its scalability for large-scale testing and applications. To
          address these issues, we propose T REE -P LANNER, which reframes task planning
          with LLMs into three distinct phases: plan sampling, action tree construction, and
          grounded deciding. T REE -P LANNER starts by using an LLM to sample a set of
          potential plans before execution, followed by the aggregation of them to form an
          action tree. Finally, the LLM performs a top-down decision-making process on
          the tree, taking into account real-time environmental information. Experiments
          show that T REE -P LANNER achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintain-
          ing high efficiency. By decomposing LLM queries into a single plan-sampling call
          and multiple grounded-deciding calls, a considerable part of the prompt are less
          likely to be repeatedly consumed. As a result, token consumption is reduced by
          92.2% compared to the previously best-performing model. Additionally, by en-
          abling backtracking on the action tree as needed, the correction process becomes
          more flexible, leading to a 40.5% decrease in error corrections.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Task planning is a significant topic in the field of robotics, where a
                                                                                 Instruction: You need to
system is tasked with crafting a sequence of mid-level actions (skills)          act as a task planner, who
that enable a robot to complete complex high-level tasks (Kaelbling              decomposea high-level…
                                                                                 Global Information: You
& Lozano-Pérez, 2011). This involves a consideration of various fac-            are in a house that consists of
                                                                                 four rooms: bathroom…
tors, such as the capabilities of robots, the surrounding environment,           [In-Context Examples]
                                                                                 Observation:         Currently,
and any constraints or uncertainties that might exist. An emerging               you are standing in the
                                                                                 bathroom ...
trend within the field of task planning is using Large Language Mod-
                                                                                                                     Observation


                                                                                 Task: Take nap
                                                                                 Plan: ?
els (LLMs) to generate actions directly (Huang et al., 2022a; Song
et al., 2023), rather than searching within a pre-defined domain (Ey-
senbach et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019).                                                                     Action
                                                                                              LLMs
As shown in Figure 1, the commonly adopted paradigm for LLM-
                                                                           Iterative Planner (Multiple Calls)
based planning can be summarized as follows: (i) prompt an LLM
to generate one action at a time; (ii) execute the generated action and Figure 1: An overview of
then append the obtained observation to the LLM; and (iii) gener- the traditional paradigm.
ate the next action. We categorize such approaches as I TERATIVE -
P LANNER, which enables the model to generate subsequent actions in an auto-regressive manner.
Based on I TERATIVE -P LANNER, when errors occur during action execution, existing research en-
deavors either re-generate actions at the current timestep (Raman et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023)
or re-generate the entire plan from the initial timestep (Shinn et al., 2023), referred to as L OCAL
R EPLAN and G LOBAL R EPLAN, respectively.
    ∗
    Corresponding authors: Mingyu Ding and Ping Luo ({dingmyu, pluo.lhi}@gmail.com). ♠ The University
of Hong Kong. ♡ Harbin Institute of Technology. ♢ Noah’s Ark Laboratory. ♣ Shanghai AI Laboratory.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 I. Plan Sampling (Single Call)                                                                   II. Action Tree Construction
    Instruction: You need to act as a task planner, who decomposea high-level…
    Global Information: You are in a house that consists of four rooms: bathroom…                                                      Take nap                                                𝒕𝟎
    Initial Observation: Currently, you are standing in the bathroom ...
    [In-Context Examples]
                 Task: Take nap                             Plan: ?

                                                                                                     [Walk] <bedroom>             [Walk] <bedroom>               [Walk] <couch>            𝒕𝟏
                                         LLMs

          Plan 1                          Plan 2                          Plan 3                        [Walk] <bed>               [Walk] <couch>                 [Lie] <couch>                𝒕𝟐

    [Walk] <bedroom>               [Walk] <bedroom>                 [Walk] <couch>

      [Walk] <bed>                  [Walk] <couch>                   [Lie] <couch>                       [Lie] <bed>                [Sit] <couch>                [Close] <curtain>             𝒕𝟑

       [Lie] <bed>                    [Sit] <couch>                [Close] <curtain>

          [Sleep]                        [Sleep]                         [Sleep]                            [Sleep]                     [Sleep]                       [Sleep]                  𝒕𝟒


 III. Grounded Deciding (Multiple Calls)
    Instruction: At each moment, I will provide you with observationsof your current environment,as well as the high-level task I want you to do, and previous mid-level sub-tasks that have
    been executed. You need to select the best sub-task from the options I provide to complete the designated home task based on the observation…
    Observation (𝒕𝟏): Currently, you are standing in the bedroom, … bed is close to character,…
    [History]
    Task: Take nap
    Decision Request (𝒕𝟏): Among the following actions, which action should you take.
    A. [Walk] <bedroom>B. [Walk] <couch> C. …


                               [Instruction]                                                                                [Instruction]
                               [Observation] (𝒕𝟐)                                          LLMs                             [Observation] (𝒕𝟏)
        ✔                      History: You have executed the                                                               Error Info:                                              ✘
                               following sub-tasks:                                                                         The previously choosed action
                               [Walk] <bedroom>                                                                             “[Walk] <couch>” caused an error
                               Decision Request(𝒕𝟐):                               ✔A                  B✘                   “<couch>” not in the environment.
                               Among the following actions,                                                                 Decision Request (𝒕𝟏):
                                                                             Observation             Error Information      A correctivechoice of sub-task is:
                               which action should you take.
                               A. [Find] <bed>                                                                              A. [Walk] <bedroom>
                               B. [Find] <couch>                                                                            B. ….


Figure 2: An overview of our T REE -P LANNER pipeline: (I) prompt an LLM to sample potential
plans for “Take nap” before execution; (II) construct an action tree to aggregate sampled plans; (III)
prompt the LLM again in closed loops to reason on the action tree. Bottom-left: “[WALK] <bed-
room>” is successfully executed. Move on to the next level. Bottom-right: “[WALK] <couch>”
fails because the absense of “couch”. Mark the failed node as invalid, then track back and re-decide.
The complete prompt and action tree can be found in Appendix F and Appendix G, respectively.

All methods above have the following two drawbacks: (i) Token Inefficiency: The expenses for a sin-
gle LLM call increase proportionally with the number of tokens utilized, including both the prompt
tokens and the generated tokens. However, in the scenario of task planning, the prompt tokens often
consists of instructions, global information about the environment, in-context learning examples,
and environmental observation (Vemprala et al., 2023) while the generated tokens predominantly
represent a concise action. The discrepancy in the number of tokens between prompt tokens and
generated tokens results in the issue of token inefficiency (Cheng et al., 2023). Moreover, due to the
multi-step nature of a complex task (usually involving 5-20 steps), the prompt tokens incur repeated
charges, leading to even higher costs. (ii) Correction Inefficiency: L OCAL R EPLAN can be viewed
as a trial-and-error approach implemented at the execution-failed time step, which makes it difficult
for the model to detect errors that occurred several time steps earlier. While G LOBAL R EPLAN can
mitigate this problem by regenerating the entire plan, it may still come at the cost of increased time
and token consumption. The token and correction inefficiencies inherent in I TERATIVE -P LANNER
limit its applicability for large-scale inference or frequent use in everyday life.
To address the issues above while maintaining high performance, we propose T REE -P LANNER as
illustrated in Figure 2. In general, T REE -P LANNER divides the queries to an LLM into two parts:
a single plan-sampling call and multiple grounded-deciding calls to reduce the repetitive computa-
tional cost for several components in prompt tokens. These two stages are bridged using a tree-like
structure, which leads to more effective logical correction. More specifically, T REE -P LANNER first
prompts the LLM to sample potential task plans with its inherent commonsense (Stage I). Sub-
sequently, an action tree is constructed to aggregate the sampled plans (Stage II). Lastly, T REE -
P LANNER instructs the LLM again in closed loops to reason on the action tree with the environ-
mental observations (Stage III). In terms of token efficiency, T REE -P LANNER only charges once for
global information about the environment and in-context examples in plan sampling. However, for
I TERATIVE -P LANNER, this information must be charged at each time step. In terms of correction
efficiency, the correction process based on the action tree can be seen as an intermediate between


                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L OCAL R EPLAN and G LOBAL R EPLAN. T REE -P LANNER not only reduces the likelihood of re-
dundant decision-making at a specific time step through backtracking but also significantly reduces
the time and tokens required to generate the entire plan from scratch.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of T REE -P LANNER framework in VirtualHome (Puig et al., 2018),
a simulated environment for complex household tasks. The experiments are conducted under two
different settings: with correction and without correction. In with correction setting, the model is
required to modify the plan when errors occur, while in without correction setting, the opposite is
true. The main result shows that T REE -P LANNER achieves state-of-the-art results in both experi-
mental settings, surpassing the best baseline models by 1.29% and 3.65% in terms of success rate,
respectively. At the same time, T REE -P LANNER exhibits high efficiency. In terms of token effi-
ciency, T REE -P LANNER reduces the token cost of I TERATIVE -P LANNER by 53.29%. Furthermore,
when compared to L OCAL R EPLAN and G LOBAL R EPLAN under the with correction setting, T REE -
P LANNER achieves even greater improvement with reductions of 74.36% and 92.24%, respectively.
In terms of correction efficiency, T REE -P LANNER reduces the number of corrections by 37.99%
and 40.52%, respectively. In further analysis, we formally verify the token efficiency of T REE -
P LANNER and derive the critical value of the number of sampled plans required for the model to
possess token efficiency. We also perform an ablation study on both plan sampling and grounded de-
ciding, demonstrating the effectiveness of the individual components of T REE -P LANNER. Finally,
we provide a manual error analysis of potential areas for improvement in the model.


2     P RELIMINARY

Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) (Kaelbling & Lozano-Pérez, 2011) is the process of generating
a sequence of actions and robot motions to achieve a desired goal in a given environment. As is
shown in Figure 2, a high-level task description such as “Take nap” is decomposed into several mid-
level actions. We assume the existence of a low-level controller that can execute these mid-level
actions, which typically requires training using reinforcement learning (RL) methods or fine-tuning
with expert data. Task planning can be categorized into closed-loop task planning and open-loop task
planning. Open-loop task planning aims to decompose a high-level task description into a mid-level
plan without any feedback from the environment. Closed-loop task planning, on the other hand,
involves continuously adjusting planning strategies through perception and feedback mechanisms to
adapt to environmental changes and uncertainties during execution. This paper focuses on closed-
loop task planning, which is more suitable for task execution in dynamic and complex environments.
Problem Setup We formulate the closed-loop task planning problem as a partially observable
Markov decision processes (POMDPs) denoted by ⟨S, O, A, T ⟩, which is similar to Li et al. (2022a).
S, O, A are sets of states, observations and actions respectively and T (st+1 |st , at ) is a transition
model. In a POMDP setting, the observation ot represents a subset of the underlying state st . Let g
be the task, the optimal policy π(at |g, ht , ot ) must take into account not only the current observation
ot , but also the entire history of actions ht = {a1 , . . . , at−1 }.


3     M ODEL

3.1   P LAN S AMPLING

Abstract specifications often restrict task planning. Take the “Take nap” task as an example, the
robot needs to understand that napping can be done on a bed, and the bed is typically located in a
bedroom. Many works hold the belief that LLMs trained on large-scale data encode commonsense
knowledge about the real-world (Davison et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022b; Bian et al., 2023). Recently,
several studies have investigated the integration of LLMs into task planning, which aims to address
language ambiguities and provide robots with background knowledge (Huang et al., 2022a; Li et al.,
2022a; Ahn et al., 2022). In contrast to these approaches, which typically use LLMs directly as
policies, T REE -P LANNER prompts an LLM to generate prospective task plans before executing them
in a specific environment. We consider this as a way to extract commonsense knowledge from LLM
through sampling, which serves as prior knowledge for task planning. Let ρps be the prompt for plan
sampling, g be the task name, the process of plan sampling can be formalized as: LLM(ρps , g) =
c = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cN }, where N is a hyper-parameter which determines the number of sampled


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


plans. Each plan candidate ci is a sequence of actions, i.e., ci = {ait |t = 1, . . . , m(i)}. m(i) is the
number of actions in plan i and ait is the action of plan i at time step t. The prompt consists of four
parts: instruction, global information, initial observation, and in-context examples. The instruction
provides the LLM with a clear and concise explanation of the process of task planning. The global
information provides the LLM with background knowledge about the environment and available
action space. The initial observation provides the LLM with an initial snapshot at the starting point
of the task. The in-context examples are additional task plans that serve to indicate the format of the
output plan and have also been proven to be helpful in enhancing performance (Brown et al., 2020).
In Section 5.2, we provide a quantitive analysis of the upper-bound on plan sampling.

3.2      ACTION T REE C ONSTRUCTION

                                     Take nap                                                                                     Take nap


      Same Prefix                                                 Same Prefix

          [Walk]        [Walk]                   [Walk]         [Walk]                                   [Walk]                                         [Walk]
         <bedroom>     <bedroom>                <couch>        <couch>                                  <bedroom>                                      <couch>

                                                                                Aggregation
        [Walk] <bed>   [Walk] <bed>         [Lie] <couch>    [Sit] <couch>                          [Walk] <bed>                         [Lie] <couch>           [Sit] <couch>


         [Lie] <bed>   [Sit] <bed>          [Close] <door>   [Lie] <couch>               [Lie] <bed>                [Sit] <bed>          [Close] <door>          [Lie] <couch>


            [Sleep]      [Sleep]                [Sleep]         [Sleep]                       [Sleep]                 [Sleep]                [Sleep]                [Sleep]

                               Sampled Plans                                                                                Action Tree

Figure 3: The process of constructing the action tree. Left: each path represents a sampled plan.
Right: plans with the same prefix are aggregated together. Note that although certain paths have the
same action ([Sleep]), they are not aggregated together due to inconsistent prefixes.

To select an optimal plan from potential plans, an obvious approach would be to execute and test
each plan in the environment. However, this approach has two drawbacks: (i) It is time-consuming
to execute multiple plans in the environment; (ii) Different plans may have overlapping parts, so
repeating the execution of these overlapping parts in the environment is redundant. For example,
in plan 1 and plan 2 shown in Figure 2, the first step in both plans is: “[Walk] <bedroom>”.
Based on the previous analysis, we designed a structured representation that aggregates the sampled
potential plans called Action Tree. As is shown in Figure 3, when two plans share a common
prefix but differ in their actions at a specific time step, their shared prefix is aggregated into a single
branch, while their differing actions form divergent paths. This process repeats iteratively until all
sampled plans are organized into a complete tree structure. The motivation behind it is to convert
the filtering of the plan level into a search at the action level, thereby reducing the execution time
in the environment. an action tree with root node r can be formalized as T (c) = (V, E), where V
and E represent the sets of nodes and edges respectively. Each node v is associated with an action
av and a time step tv , i.e., v = (av , tv ). Each edge e represents a pair of adjacent actions in plan
ci , i.e., E = {e(v1 , v2 ) | v1 , v2 ∈ V, v1 = (ait , t), v2 = (ai(t+1) , t + 1)}. The root node r is not
associated with any specific action, and its child nodes are the set of nodes obtained by aggregating
the first action of each plan. The construction process of the action tree is presented in Algorithm 1.

3.3      G ROUNDED D ECIDING

During grounded deciding, an LLM functions as the policy π(at |g, ht , ot ). However, instead of
sampling from the entire corpus of LLMs as the I TERATIVE -P LANNER, we limit the choices to a
few child nodes of the current node at time t on the action tree. This process simulates the decision-
making process of humans, who first propose several action options and then combine their current
real-world observations to make decisions. Specifically, we provide an LLM with instruction, ob-
servation, and history (the previously executed actions) as prompts, and then the LLM chooses one
from the child nodes of the current node. Furthermore, we also designed a corresponding error
correction method. When a chosen action fails to execute in the environment, T REE -P LANNER (i)
marks the nodes on the subtree rooted at the failed node as invalid nodes; (ii) traces back on the
action tree to find the previous valid fork node with available valid child nodes. If all the child nodes
of a particular node are invalid, then the fork node should also be marked as invalid. (iii) executes
the inverse process of previously executed actions (e.g., the inverse of [SwitchOn] is [SwitchOff])
to recover the state of the agent; (iv) re-decides at the fork node. Error correction with grounded


                                                                                 4
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm 1: Action Tree Construction
    Input : c, r
    Output: r
 1 Function ConstructActionTree(c, r):
 2     forall ci ∈ c do
 3         n ← r;
 4         for t = 1 to m(i) do
 5              cn ← GetChildNode(n, ait );
 6              if cn is None then
  7                  cn ← CreateChildNode(ait );
  8                  AddChildNode(n, cn);
 9              end
10              n ← cn;
11         end
12     end



  deciding is more effective than the commonly adopted methods presented in Section 1. This is be-
  cause the action tree serves as an important prior to completing the current task. Therefore, when
  an error occurs at a node on the tree, it is possible to selectively backtrack on the action tree, thus
  alleviating repetitive decisions at a particular time step as in L OCAL R EPLAN. Performing error
  correction on the action tree also relieves the need to return to the initial time step as in G LOBAL
  R EPLAN, thereby reducing time and token consumption. The process described above is displayed
  in Figure 4. Quantitive analysis of the effectiveness of error correction is presented in Section 5.3.

      (a) Error Correction                     (b) Successful Execution                  Legend

                                                                                              Execution Position

                                                                                              Executed Path
                                ✘
                                                                                              Trackback Path

       ✘                        ✘                  ✔                                          Root Node

                                                                                              Leave Node
                             ✘ ✘
                                                                                              Deprecated Path

                                ✘                                                         ✘   Deprecated Node



  Figure 4: An overview of the process of grounded deciding. Left: When an error occurs, T REE -
  P LANNER tracks back and marks the nodes along the way as invalid. Afterward, T REE -P LANNER
  makes a new decision at the previous fork node. Right: After the action is successfully executed,
  T REE -P LANNER makes a decision at the current node, and then the agent moves on to the next level.

  4      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

  4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

  Environment. We conduct the experiments in the VirtualHome (VH) Environment (Puig et al.,
  2018), a simulation platform for household tasks. Each scene in every VH environment contains
  hundreds of objects. These objects may possess individual properties, and there may also be rela-
  tionships between different objects. There are 28 different action types in VH, which are listed in
  Appendix A.1. The task-relevant goal conditions refer to a set of specific states of objects or predi-
  cates between objects. For example, a goal condition for Turn on TV would be On(TV), while a goal
  condition for Sit would be On(character, chair).
  Dataset. We constructed a dataset consisting of 4 VH scenes and 35 unique VH tasks. Each task
  includes a task name, goal conditions, and a gold plan. We started by annotating goal conditions for
  each task from ActivityPrograms knowledge base by Puig et al. (2018) via executing the programs.
  And then, we applied simple heuristics to filter the low-quality annotations in the dataset: (i) the
  length of the plan is less than 3; (ii) the execution of the program fails. To highlight the necessity of
  grounding LLMs in the real environment which has variation in the objects and preconditions, we


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


replicated the annotation above process across 4 distinct scenes provided in VirtualHome, ultimately
yielding 71 annotated tasks. We denote the 4 distinct scenes as ENV-{1, 2, 3, 4}. Then, we hired two
CS-majored graduate students to conduct manual quality control to ensure that the task descriptions
were in line with their corresponding goal conditions and programs. We eliminate cases that do
not meet the alignment criteria or were originally annotated with errors, resulting in a high-quality
dataset comprising 35 tasks. To double-check the quality of the dataset, we also study the agreement
between annotators. The results indicated “almost perfect agreement” with Fleiss Kappa (Landis &
Koch, 1977) scores of 0.88.
Evaluation Metrics. We use four metrics to evaluate the performance of different methods: exe-
cutability (E XEC .), success rate (SR), goal conditions recall (GCR), and the financial expenditure
for evaluation ($C OST). E XEC . refers to whether the plan can be executed in the given environ-
ment, regardless of its relevance to the task. GCR is calculated by taking the difference between
the ground truth goal conditions and the goal conditions that were achieved with the generated plan
and then dividing this difference by the total number of goal conditions. SR measures whether all
goal conditions are fulfilled, i.e., SR = 1 only when GCR = 1. $C OST is used to evaluate the to-
ken efficiency of different methods, which is calculated based on the pricing provided by OpenAI.1
For evaluation with error correction, we use N O .EC to represent the number of error corrections of
each method. N O .EC does not directly measure performance but rather evaluates how effectively
different models can correct errors.
Baselines. For experiments without error correction, we compare our method to two strong pub-
lished LLM-based task planning methods with OpenAI APIs, including: (i) Z ERO - SHOT P LAN -
NER (Huang et al., 2022a); (ii) P ROG P ROMPT (Singh et al., 2022). Furthermore, we also implement
the I TERATIVE -P LANNER method discussed in Section 1 as a baseline model. For experiments with
error correction, we enhance the I TERATIVE -P LANNER method with the two re-planning methods:
L OCAL R EPLAN and G LOBAL R EPLAN, and consider them as the baseline models. More imple-
mentation details and an introduction to each baseline model can be found in Appendix B.2.
Implementation Details. We use the OpenAI GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) API 2 model as a LLM
backbone in our experiments for all evaluated methods. The cost of this model is 0.02$ per 1000
tokens. The prompt for T REE -P LANNER and I TERATIVE -P LANNER was designed with the prin-
ciples proposed in Vemprala et al. (2023), and examples can be found in Appendix F. We take 4
representative tasks from the dataset as in-context learning exemplars and the rest as the validation
set. The examples are fixed to be: “Watch TV”, “Turn on light”, “Go to sleep”, and “Brush teeth”.
To sample diverse plans, we applied a temperature of 0.8 and a top-p value of 0.95. We heuristically
set the number of samplings N ∈ {25, 50}. During grounded deciding, we set the temperature to
0.7, top-p to 1.0, and sampling parameter n to 20. Additionally, we utilize a majority vote to obtain
the final option in order to alleviate format errors in the output of LLMs. The maximum number of
error corrections is set to 10 for all evaluated approaches.

4.2     M AIN R ESULTS

Based on the results presented in Table 1, several advantages of T REE -P LANNER can be derived:
(i) T REE -P LANNER outperforms listed baseline systems, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art
by absolute 11.2% and 7.04% on Executability, 6.71% and 7.29% on GCR and 1.29% and 3.65%
on SR under both experimental settings respectively. This experimental observation demonstrates
that reframing the LLM-based planning pipeline does not compromise its performance. (ii) T REE -
P LANNER has a significant advantage in token efficiency. In without correction setting, T REE -
P LANNER reduces the cost of I TERATIVE -P LANNER by 53.29%. In with correction setting, the
token cost is further reduced by 74.36% and 92.24%, respectively, compared to L OCAL R EPLAN
and G LOBAL R EPLAN. (iii) T REE -P LANNER also demonstrates high correction efficiency, resulting
in a reduction of the number of action-retry times for L OCAL R EPLAN and G LOBAL R EPLAN by
37.99% and 40.52%, respectively. A reduced amount of corrections also contributes to a decrease
in token consumption.
Note that, while not having a token efficiency advantage compared to Z ERO - SHOT P LANNER and
P ROG P ROMPT, T REE -P LANNER significantly outperforms these methods in terms of performance
   1
       https://openai.com/pricing
   2
       https://openai.com/


                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance of different methods on Virtual Home. w/o correction means that during the
plan execution, there is no allowance for retrying failed actions. While with correction implies the
opposite. The reported evaluation metrics are the average of 3 independent runs across the 4 scenes.
                             E XEC . ↑        SR ↑          GCR ↑          $C OST ↓      N O .EC ↓
    w/o correction
    Z ERO - SHOT P LANNER   16.49±3.08     1.07±0.76      1.52±0.75       1.36±0.09         N/A
    P ROG P ROMPT           35.04±3.98    12.54±2.20      19.99±2.83      1.25±0.55         N/A
    I TERATIVE -P LANNER    44.54±6.09    27.04±4.65      33.25±5.32      5.12±0.14         N/A
    T REE -P LANNERN =25    55.74±0.92    28.33±1.18      39.96±0.16      2.39±0.44         N/A
    T REE -P LANNERN =50    49.01±5.67    28.14±2.45      35.84±4.20      3.48±0.04         N/A
    with correction
    L OCAL R EPLAN          79.66±2.33    37.46±1.71      51.9±0.15      12.88±0.17      3.29±0.46
    G LOBAL R EPLAN         82.09±1.32    37.93±1.22      52.46±0.86     42.55±0.09      3.43±0.15
    T REE -P LANNERN =25    89.13±0.17    35.30±1.78      56.65±1.09      3.30±0.01      1.85±0.05
    T REE -P LANNERN =50    88.26±2.47    41.58±3.20      59.55±3.20      4.54±0.16      2.04±0.26

by 27.26% and 15.79% on SR respectively. It is also worth noting that increasing the hyper-
parameter N does not result in consistently improved performance. This experimental phenomenon
will be further discussed in Section 5.2.


5     A NALYSIS

5.1    T OKEN E FFICIENCY

In Section 4.2, the quantitative analysis has demonstrated that T REE -P LANNER consumes fewer
tokens compared to I TERATIVE -P LANNER. In this section, we will further provide a specific for-
mulation to demonstrate this point. The number of tokens required for an LLM API call typically
includes two parts: prompt tokens and generated tokens. Let ρ and φ represent the prompt tokens
and generated tokens. Let ps, gd, ip stand for plan sampling, grounded deciding, and I TERATIVE -
P LANNER, respectively. Normally, we have ρip ≈ ρps + ρgd . That is because, as shown in Figure 2
and Figure 1, the prompt for plan sampling typically includes global information and in-context
examples, while the prompt for grounded deciding includes observation and history. These types
of information usually need to be included in every step of I TERATIVE -P LANNER. Assuming that
the number of tokens for each action type |a| is the same and the total number of steps M is the
same for each generated plan. The hyper-parameter number of sampling is N for plan sampling and
grounded decoding and is 1 for I TERATIVE -P LANNER. Based on the given information, we have
φps = M N |a|, φgd = N and φip = |a|. The consumed tokens µours and µip can be calculated as
follows: µours = ρps + φps + M · (ρgd + φgd ) and µip = M · (ρip + φip ). Based on the above
formula, we can determine the boundary conditions for N that satisfy the inequality µours < µip as
                1−1/M ρps         |a|
follows: N < 1+1/|a|    · |a| + |a|+1 . And we have ρps ≫ |a|, since the prompt of plan sampling may
contain thousands of tokens and an action only contains a few tokens. We use the average number
of tokens for all action types to estimate |a| and the average length of all gold plans to estimate M .
As a result, we obtain the critical value of N in our experiment as follows: N < 197.72. Detailed
derivation can be found in Appendix D. In conclusion, our model exhibits a remarkably high token
efficiency, especially in scenarios where N is not particularly high.

5.2    P LAN S AMPLING

Since grounded deciding fundamentally involves selecting from the sampled plans, the upper limit
of our T REE -P LANNER is determined by plan sampling. We propose two additional metrics to study
the upper limit of plan sampling: (i) the maximum GCR for all generated plans, i.e., GCRmax (c) =
  N                                                                                PN
max(GCR(ci )); (ii) the average GCR for all generated plans, i.e., GCRavg (c) = N1   i=1 (GCR(ci )).
 i=1
GCRmax represents the upper limit of the performance of T REE -P LANNER. In other words, the
model can only succeed if there is a “correct” plan among the sampled plans. GCRavg reflects the
proportion of “correct” plans to sampled plans. When GCRavg is low, it undoubtedly poses greater


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 E XEC .    SR       GCR
                                                                                    w/o correction

                                                                                         T REE -P LANNERN =25     55.74    28.33     38.96
                                                                        GCRmax           † with oracle ↑           7.16     9.84       8.5
                                                                        GCRavg
%


                                                                                         T REE -P LANNERN =50     49.01    28.14     35.84
                                                                                         † with oracle ↑           3.41     6.54      4.78

                                                                                         with correction
                                                                                    T REE -P LANNERN =25     89.13    35.3      56.65


                                                                                         † with oracle ↑           8.45     26.8     19.76

                      N                                                                  T REE -P LANNERN =50     88.26    41.58     59.55
                                                                                         † with oracle ↑            6.9    10.57      7.47
Figure 5: Maximum and average GCR for
all sampled plans. The x-axis of the anno-                                            Table 2: Ablation study on grounded deciding.
tated coordinate points represents the cho-                                           † represents the performance improvement after
sen N for the main experiments.                                                       adding a gold plan to action tree construction.

challenges for grounded deciding. Some conclusions can be drawn from Figure 5: (i) The maximum
value of GCRmax being 81.2% indicates that plan sampling is effective. (ii) As N increases, there
is a noticeable increase in GCRmax , but it eventually reaches a threshold. Therefore, a large value
of N will lead to increased token consumption without necessarily improving the performance limit.
When applying T REE -P LANNER, it is essential to choose an appropriate value of N that balances
token assumption and model performance. (iii) GCRavg does not consistently increase with an
increased N . This implies that as N becomes larger, the proportion of “correct” plans to sampled
plans may not necessarily increase.

5.3          G ROUNDED D ECIDING

To investigate the effectiveness of grounded deciding, we conducted ablation experiments. We in-
corporated the gold plan for each task into the construction of the action tree. As is shown in
Table 2, after incorporating the gold plan, there was a significant improvement in performance. Ad-
ditionally, there was also a decrease in the number of error corrections. For T REE -P LANNERN =25 ,
the number decreased from 1.85 to 1.21, and for T REE -P LANNERN =50 , it decreased from 2.04 to
1.39. The quantitive experimental results presented above demonstrate the effectiveness of grounded
deciding. Another noteworthy experimental phenomenon is that the improvement in performance
for T REE -P LANNERN =25 was greater than that for T REE -P LANNERN =50 . This further validates
the conclusion we drew in Section 5.2: when the number of plans increases, but the proportion of
correct plans decreases, the performance may be negatively impacted.

5.4          E RROR A NALYSIS

We categorize error types into two distinct classifications: (i) Missing Correct Plan; (ii) Grounded
Deciding Error. As is listed in Table 3, the majority of errors are attributed to the missing correct
plans (54.5%). Therefore, despite the ability of plan sampling to achieve relatively high GCRmax as
is discussed in Section 5.2, it still serves as a bottleneck for our model to some extent. Furthermore, a
considerable portion of the errors occurred due to mistakes made by LLM during grounded deciding
(45.5%). We also provide a qualitative analysis of each error type in Appendix E.


             Table 3: Distribution of error types of the T REE -P LANNERN =25 w/o correction model.
           Error Type                                                      Explanation                                     Proportion(%)
           Missing Correct Plans                                           Plan sampling did not yield correct plans       54.5%
             Environment Misunderstanding                                  Misunderstandings on actions or objects           18.2%
             Incomplete Plan                                               The absence of essential steps                    18.2%
             Illogical Error                                               The generated plan is logically incorrect         13.6%
             Semantically Correct                                          Execution failed but semantically correct         9.1%
           Grounded Deciding Error                                         Execution error during grounded deciding        45.5%
             Incorrect Deciding                                            Incorrect decisions at specific nodes             31.8%
             Semantically Correct                                          Execution failed but semantically correct         13.7%


                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   R ELATED W ORKS

Task Planning with Large Language Models. We categorize the mainstream methods in the task
planning domain into two groups: search-based methods (Jiang et al., 2018; Garrett et al., 2018) and
generate-based methods (Song et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023a; Ding et al., 2023; Mu et al., 2023).
LLMs trained on a large-scale corpus contain a vast amount of commonsense knowledge for task
planning (Pallagani et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023b;a). Thanks to this advancement, generate-based
methods have gradually become a hot topic of research in recent years. When considering the
utilization of LLM, some works directly generate the entire plan without executing in the environ-
ment (Singh et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b; Zeng et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023b;
Yang et al., 2023). While these models possess token efficiency, they are unable to modify the plan
when encountering errors dynamically. Another line of works has adopted the paradigm presented
in Section 1 to generate actions iteratively (Vemprala et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022a;b; Shinn et al., 2023), which is more flexible for error correction, human interaction and the
grounding of environment. Works like Carta et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023); Ahn et al. (2022) in-
volve the use of implicit representations of LLM. In contrast to these works, our study concentrates
on Black-box LLMs, which are utilized in a manner more frequently by researchers and industry, as
they provide only input and output without any additional information.
Tree-based Modeling for the Output of Large Language Models. Yao et al. (2023); Long (2023)
both propose an alternative for chain-of-thought, called “tree-of-thought”, for problem-solving.
These studies do not involve the interaction between inner steps in the tree and the environment but
rather focus on reasoning tasks. Considering the robotic area, Cao & Lee (2023) leverages LLMs for
automatic behavior-tree-based task generation. Zhao et al. (2023); Hao et al. (2023) propose using
an LLM as a world model to assist planning algorithms such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS).
However, T REE -P LANNER samples diverse paths once and aggregates the paths into an action tree
rather than requiring multiple calls to LLM like the aforementioned studies. This approach offers
advantages in terms of both run-time efficiency and token efficiency.
Generate then Select. From another perspective, grounded deciding selects a prediction from the
sampled potential plans. Hence, T REE -P LANNER follows the paradigm of generate then select,
which is commonly adopted to optimize the output of LLMs. Some models (Glass et al., 2022;
Suzgun et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Gu et al., 2023) use external controllers to re-rank the
generations. In Wang et al. (2023a), the best answer is selected from multiple generations of an LLM
through a majority vote. Logeswaran et al. (2022) proposes to incorporate the state information from
the environment to re-rank the generated plans. Unlike these works, instead of selecting at the level
of entire generation, we use action trees to perform more fine-grained selection (action-level).
Efficient Inference with Large Language Models. Most previous works suggest modifying the
architecture of transformer or decoding strategy to achieve efficient inference (Wang et al., 2020;
Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Cheng et al. (2023) pro-
pose a batch prompting method to reduce the frequency of invoking LLMs. Lin et al. (2023a)
achieve efficient inference with LLMs by incorporating a small LM fine-tuned on oracle trajectories.
T REE -P LANNER differs from previous studies by simply reframing the process of LLM planning to
alleviate repeated token consumption without the need for additional training.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have introduced T REE -P LANNER, a novel framework for task planning with LLMs.
The motivation behind T REE -P LANNER is to address the inefficiencies of the commonly adopted
paradigm while still achieving high performance. Through extensive experiments in the Virtual-
Home environment, we have demonstrated that T REE -P LANNER outperforms other strong baselines
and achieves state-of-the-art performance. We have also shown that our framework is highly effi-
cient in terms of token consumption and error correction. To gain a deeper understanding of our
framework, we have conducted several studies analyzing its performance gains and identifying po-
tential bottlenecks. Furthermore, we have performed a qualitative error analysis to identify areas
where the model may fail. Overall, we believe that T REE -P LANNER represents a new paradigm for
LLM-based task planning that strikes a balance between efficiency and performance. We hope that
our work will inspire further research and the development of more efficient task-planning methods.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   E THICS S TATEMENTS

We build the dataset based on the ActivityPrograms knowledge base by Puig et al. (2018), which
is under the MIT license. Our approach has no ethical or social issues on its own, except those
inherited from large language models.

9   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper is partially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China No.2022ZD0161000
and the General Research Fund of Hong Kong No.17200622.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022. 3, 9

Ning Bian, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, and Ben He. Chatgpt is a knowledgeable
  but inexperienced solver: An investigation of commonsense problem in large language models,
  2023. 3

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. 4

Yue Cao and C. S. George Lee. Robot behavior-tree-based task generation with large language
  models, 2023. 9

Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning, 2023. 9

Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling, 2023. 9

Zhoujun Cheng, Jungo Kasai, and Tao Yu. Batch prompting: Efficient inference with large language
  model apis, 2023. 2, 9

Joe Davison, Joshua Feldman, and Alexander Rush. Commonsense knowledge mining from pre-
  trained models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 1173–1178, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1109. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D19-1109. 3

Yan Ding, Xiaohan Zhang, Chris Paxton, and Shiqi Zhang. Task and motion planning with large
  language models for object rearrangement, 2023. 9

Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridg-
  ing planning and reinforcement learning. arXiv: Artificial Intelligence,arXiv: Artificial Intelli-
  gence, Jun 2019. 1


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CaelanReed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and LesliePack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating sym-
  bolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. arXiv: Artificial Intelli-
  gence,arXiv: Artificial Intelligence, Feb 2018. 9
Michael Glass, Gaetano Rossiello, Md Faisal Mahbub Chowdhury, Ankita Rajaram Naik, Pengshan
 Cai, and Alfio Gliozzo. Re2g: Retrieve, rerank, generate, 2022. 9
Yu Gu, Xiang Deng, and Yu Su. Don’t generate, discriminate: A proposal for grounding language
  models to real-world environments, 2023. 9
Yanjiang Guo, Yen-Jen Wang, Lihan Zha, Zheyuan Jiang, and Jianyu Chen. Doremi: Grounding
  language model by detecting and recovering from plan-execution misalignment, 2023. 1
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023. 9
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-
 shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Kamalika Chaudhuri,
 Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International
 Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA,
 volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html. 1, 3, 6, 9, 15

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models, 2022b. 9
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Dhruv Shah, Danny Driess, Andy Zeng, Yao Lu, Pete Florence, Igor
 Mordatch, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Grounded decoding: Guiding text
 generation with grounded models for robot control, 2023. 9
Yuqian Jiang, Shiqi Zhang, Piyush Khandelwal, and Peter Stone. Task planning in robotics: an
  empirical comparison of pddl-based and asp-based systems. Cornell University - arXiv,Cornell
  University - arXiv, Apr 2018. 9
Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Hierarchical task and motion planning in the now.
  In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1470–1477, 2011. doi:
  10.1109/ICRA.2011.5980391. 1, 3
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention, 2020. 9
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data.
   Biometrics, 33(1):159–174, 1977. ISSN 0006341X, 15410420. URL http://www.jstor.org/
   stable/2529310. 6

Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding, 2023. 9
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, Jacob Andreas, Igor Mordatch, Antonio Torralba, and Yuke
  Zhu. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agar-
  wal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FWMQYjFso-a. 3, 14
Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Jordan Hoffmann, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Phil Blun-
  som, and Aida Nematzadeh. A systematic investigation of commonsense knowledge in large
  language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 11838–11855, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022b.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.812. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.812. 3


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control, 2023. 9
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. Swiftsage: A generative agent with fast and
  slow thinking for complex interactive tasks, 2023a. 9
Bill Yuchen Lin, Chengsong Huang, Qian Liu, Wenda Gu, Sam Sommerer, and Xiang Ren. On
  grounded planning for embodied tasks with language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13192–13200, 2023b. 9
Lajanugen Logeswaran, Yao Fu, Moontae Lee, and Honglak Lee. Few-shot subgoal planning with
  language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5493–5506,
  Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2022.naacl-main.402. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.402. 9
Jieyi Long. Large language model guided tree-of-thought, 2023. 9
Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng
  Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of
  thought, 2023. 9
Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Keerthiram Murugesan, Francesca Rossi, Biplav Srivastava,
  Lior Horesh, Francesco Fabiano, and Andrea Loreggia. Understanding the capabilities of large
  language models for automated planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16151, 2023. 9
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Tor-
  ralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018. 3, 5, 10, 14
Shreyas Sundara Raman, Vanya Cohen, Eric Rosen, Ifrah Idrees, David Paulius, and Stefanie Tellex.
  Planning with large language models via corrective re-prompting. CoRR, abs/2211.09935, 2022.
  doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.09935. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.09935.
  1
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023. 1, 9
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models, 2022. 6, 9, 15
Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M. Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-
  planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models, 2023. 1,
  9
Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang. Adaplanner: Adaptive
  planning from feedback with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16653, 2023a. 9
Simeng Sun, Yang Liu, Shuohang Wang, Chenguang Zhu, and Mohit Iyyer. Pearl: Prompt-
  ing large language models to plan and execute actions over long documents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14564, 2023b. 9
Mirac Suzgun, Luke Melas-Kyriazi, and Dan Jurafsky. Prompt-and-rerank: A method for zero-shot
 and few-shot arbitrary textual style transfer with small language models. In arXiv, 2022. 9
Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. Microsoft Autonomous Systems and Robotics Research, 2023. 2,
  6, 9
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z. Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity, 2020. 9


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw. 9

Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents,
  2023b. 9
Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, Tom
  Mitchell, and Shrimai Prabhumoye. Plan, eliminate, and track – language models are good teach-
  ers for embodied agents, 2023a. 9
Zhenyu Wu, Ziwei Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Jiwen Lu, and Haibin Yan. Embodied task planning with
  large language models, 2023b. 9
Danfei Xu, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Re-
  gression planning networks. arXiv: Artificial Intelligence,arXiv: Artificial Intelligence, Sep 2019.
  1
Sherry Yang, Ofir Nachum, Yilun Du, Jason Wei, Pieter Abbeel, and Dale Schuurmans. Foundation
  models for decision making: Problems, methods, and opportunities, 2023. 9
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022. 9
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023. 9
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, brian ichter, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan
  Welker, Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael S Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vin-
  cent Vanhoucke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reason-
  ing with language. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=G2Q2Mh3avow. 9
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning, 2023. 9


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
A     E NVIRONMENT

A.1   ACTION S PACE

The action types in the Virtual Home Environment are listed as follows:

      1. Sleep                              8. Wipe                                 15. Touch                     22. Drop
      2. StandUp                            9. Pull                                 16. Open                      23. Lie
      3. WakeUp                         10. Push                                    17. Close                     24. SwitchOn
      4. Walk                           11. Pour                                    18. Run                       25. SwitchOff
      5. Find                           12. TurnTo                                  19. Sit                       26. Drink
      6. Grab                           13. PointAt                                 20. Read                      27. PutIn
      7. Wash                           14. Watch                                   21. PutOn                     28. PutBack


                                       12                12
                                                  11
                                       10

                                       8
                           Frequency


                                       6
                                                                         5
                                       4
                                                                3               3
                                       2
                                                                                                       1
                                       0                                                    0
                                            2.5    5.0   7.5   10.0     12.5 15.0    17.5       20.0       22.5
                                                                      Plan Length


                                            Figure 6: Distribution of plan length.



A.2   PARTIAL O BSERVATION

We implemented partial observation based on Li et al. (2022a). The official definition of partial
observation is that when the agent is situated in a room, its observation consists of all the objects
in the room that are not located inside enclosed objects. For instance, if an apple is placed inside a
closed refrigerator, it will not appear in the observation of the agent.

A.3   O BSERVATION R EPRESENTATION

In the VirtualHome Environment (Puig et al., 2018), observations primarily consist of two compo-
nents: object states and inter-object relationships. The object states describes the state in which
an object exists. For example, the state of television can either be “on” or “off”, i.e., “On(TV)” or
“Off(TV)”. The inter-object relationships are represented using predicates to express the relation-
ships between objects. For example, when a character is in close proximity to a television, there
may be a predicate such as: “Close(character, TV)”. We convert the observations from VH into
English sentences using a rule-based approach. For example, the predicate “Close(character, TV)”
is transformed into “character is close to TV”, and the predicate “”Off(TV)” is transformed into ”TV
is off”.


                                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4            BASIC S TATISTICS

In the gold plan annotated in the dataset, the plan with the longest length consists of 23 actions,
while the average length is 8.13. The frequency distribution histogram regarding the length of the
plan is shown in Figure 6. Furthermore, we have also computed the frequency histograms for actions
and objects, which are depicted in Figure 7 and Figure 8.



               70                                                    30
               60
                                                                     25
               50
                                                                     20
      Counts


                                                            Counts
               40
                                                                     15
               30
                                                                     10
               20

               10                                                    5

               0                                                     0
                         TurnTo


                          Touch
                            Type
                            Find
                            Walk


                           Wash

                        PointAt


                           Read


                                                                                keyboard
                            Pour


                                                                          clothes_jacket
                           Wipe


                            Drop
                         LookAt


                                                                               bathroom


                                                                                bedroom

                                                                                  dresser
                    PutObjBack
                       PutBack


                             Pull

                          PutOff

                          PutOn


                                                                             alarm_clock
                            Grab
                      SwitchOn
                              Sit


                      SwitchOff
                          Scrub


                       StandUp
                           Rinse
                              Lie
                           Sleep

                           Open


                           Drink


                                                                                     chair
                                                                               computer
                                                                                    brush
                                                                                       rag
                                                                                    toilet


                                                                                      sink
                                                                            home_office
                                                                                   faucet
                                                                                      coin


                                                                                      bed

                                                                                    razor


                                                                             hands_both
                                                                                      cup
                                                                               television
Figure 7: Histogram ofActions
                        action frequencies. Cer-        Figure 8: Histogram ofObjects
                                                                                object frequencies. Only
tain actions exhibit a significantly higher fre-        objects with a frequency in the top 20 are in-
quency than others, such as Find and Walk.              cluded for better visualization.


B        M ORE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
B.1            H YPER - PARAMETER S EARCH

For both Grounded Deciding and I TERATIVE -P LANNER, we conducted a grid search over the sam-
pling parameters of OpenAI APIs. The search range for temperature was set from 0.1 to 1.0 in
increments of 0.1, while the search range for top-p was set to 0.85, 0.9, 0.95, and 1.0.
In the case of Grounded Deciding, the optimal hyperparameter combination was found to be a
temperature of 0.7 and topp of 1.0. As for I TERATIVE -P LANNER, the optimal hyperparameter
combination was a temperature of 0 and topp of 1.0.

B.2            BASELINE M ODELS

Z ERO - SHOT P LANNER (Huang et al., 2022a) propose to translate each unstructured action gen-
erated by LLM into an admissible action via another pre-trained masked language model. The
translated action is then appended to the prompt used for generating the remaining steps. We uti-
lize the official implementation provided by Huang et al. (2022a), which employs a dynamically
retrieved plan as an exemplar in the prompt. Moreover, concerning the hyper-parameters, we con-
figure the maximum number of steps as 20 and set the early stopping threshold to 0.5 to achieve
optimal performance.
P ROG P ROMPT (Singh et al., 2022) proposes a programming language-inspired prompt with an
assert statement. These assert statements provide a mechanism for incorporating environment feed-
back into the plan generation process, ensuring that preconditions for each action are met;

B.3            P OST-P ROCESSING

To ensure the generated plan is actionable in the environment, we further implement a post-
processing module after plan sampling: (i) Format Checking: Actions that do not conform to the
required format and thus cannot be parsed, is discarded. Given the strong format following ability of
GPT-3.5, the number of discarded items is minimal; (ii) Object & Action Translation: Even with
the correct format, the plan generated by the LLM might include actions or objects not present in the
environment. This issue often arises from semantically accurate but not exactly matching results.
For instance, if the environment’s object name is ”food egg”, but the generated action includes


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


”egg”, this discrepancy requires resolution. Firstly, we parse the LLM’s action string to identify
the action and object names. Then we use BERT similarity to match these with the environment’s
available actions and objects 3 . For example, for the LLM’s generated string ’[Switch On] <telly
>’, the action parser identifies ”Switch On” as the action and ”telly” as the object. These are then
matched with available actions and objects to result in the actionable action ”[SwitchOn] <TV >”.


C        M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

C.1       R ESULTS BY P LAN L ENGTH

                                   E XEC . ↑          SR ↑         GCR ↑        N O .EC ↓
               0 < |a| ≤ 5       100.00 ± 0.00     64.72±5.20    77.12±4.13     0.30±0.15
               5 < |a| ≤ 10       83.59±4.03       35.10±5.95    52.25±3.33     2.47±0.35
               10 < |a| ≤ 15      88.09±8.48       26.98±4.89    55.98±7.00     3.20±1.12
               15 < |a|           66.67±0.00       22.22±0.00    36.11±0.00     4.09±0.21

        Table 4: The performance of T REE -P LANNERN =50 across different plan sequence lengths.

Table 4 above presents the performance of T REE -P LANNERN =50 , categorized by different plan se-
quence lengths. In general, as the plan sequence length increases, the performance of the model
tends to decrease. Specifically, for tasks with plan lengths smaller than 5, the SR can reach 64.72%
and even 100% for E XEC .. However, for tasks with plan lengths larger than 15, the SR decreases
to 22.22% (-42.5%), and E XEC . decreases to 66.67% (-33.33%). Furthermore, as the plan length
increases, the number of corrections in the model also increases. This is due to the higher likeli-
hood of errors accumulating in longer sequential task planning, thus necessitating a greater need
for error correction. The above experimental results provide a more comprehensive analysis of the
performance of our approach, emphasizing potential directions for future enhancements. Further-
more, we have provided the results of L OCAL R EPLAN as shown in Table 5. It can be observed that
while T REE -P LANNER maintains comparable performance across different plan lengths, it exhibits
a significant advantage in terms of the number of corrections.

                                 E XEC . ↑          SR ↑           GCR ↑         N O .EC ↓
             0 < |a| ≤ 5        94.17 ± 2.04     56.94 ± 0.79    69.46 ± 1.70   1.05 ± 0.32
             5 < |a| ≤ 10       77.02 ± 7.63     38.10 ± 3.57    49.66 ± 5.45   3.92 ± 0.56
             10 < |a| ≤ 15      69.84 ± 2.97     24.78 ± 5.83    44.52 ± 2.16   5.14 ± 0.17
             15 < |a|          72.22 ± 28.33     22.22 ± 0.00    35.65 ± 8.36   4.83 ± 0.87

          Table 5: The performance of L OCAL R EPLAN across different plan sequence lengths.


C.2       R ESULTS BY S CENE

As is shown in Table 6, T REE -P LANNER exhibits consistent performance across various scenes,
thereby further illustrating its robustness.

                                E XEC . ↑        SR ↑           GCR ↑      N O .EC ↓
                    ENV-1      92.42±2.14      45.45±3.71    64.72±3.25    1.74±0.44
                    ENV-2      91.30±4.10      36.75±4.10    52.43±7.13    2.33±0.47
                    ENV-3      85.18±2.62      37.04±2.62    50.80±3.19    1.83±0.39
                    ENV-4      88.89±3.14      48.89±3.14    66.74±1.72    2.35±0.58

               Table 6: The performance of T REE -P LANNERN =50 across different scenes.

    3
        https://www.sbert.net/


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3   D IVERSITY OF S AMPLED P LANS

As shown in Figure 9, the number of different plans varies approximately linearly with the change
in the sampling n. Therefore, when conducting plan sampling, the issue of homogenization due to
the sampled plans will not arise.


                        Number of Different Plans


                                                                                                   Sampling n
Figure 9: The diversity of plans generated. The x-axis represents the number of programs sampled,
while the y-axis represents the average number of different plans generated.


C.4   U PPER L IMIT OF P LAN S AMPLING

We also compute the corresponding Success Rate (SR) result of Figure 5 by: (i) the maximum SR
                                            N
for all generated plans, i.e., SRmax (c) = max(SR(ci )); (ii) the average SR for all generated plans,
                                                                                       i=1
i.e., SRavg (c) = N1 N
                    P
                       i=1 (SR(ci )). As is shown in Figure 10, the trend of SR concerning N closely
aligns with the trajectory of GCR.

                                                                       SRmax
                                                                     SRavg


                        %


                                                                                                              N
            Figure 10: Maximum and average Success Rate (SR) for all sampled plans.


C.5   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS WITH B EST-F IRST S EARCH

Language-Guided Best-First Search The edges of the action tree are assigned weights based on
the log probabilities of the actions they lead to. These weights are aggregated when multiple paths
converge into the same action, thereby reflecting the cumulative likelihood of reaching that action
within the context of the tree’s structure. The evaluation function of Language-Guided Best-First
                                       log(Prob(ai ))
Search is defined as: fL (ai ) = Pe log(Prob(aj )) . Here, ai represents one of the child nodes of a
                                                                       j e
given node and iterates over all child nodes. The softmax function normalizes the log probabilities,
making them suitable for probabilistic comparison and selection.
Environment-Guided Best-First Search Actions are weighted based on the observability of their
associated objects. If all objects involved in an action are observable in the environment, the action


                                                                                                       17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 is assigned a higher weight (1), otherwise, a lower weight (0). To facilitate comparative analysis and
 to account for varying numbers of actions and objects, a softmax function is applied to the weights
 of actions emanating from each node. The evaluation function of Environment-Guided Best-First
                                    Observability(ai )
 Search is defined as fE (ai ) = Pe Observability(aj ) .
                                                           j e

 Hybrid Best-First Search The Hybrid Method combines the probabilistic language and environ-
 ment observability factors. The evaluation function is: fHybrid (ai ) = αfL (ai ) + (1 − α)fE (ai ) In this
 function, α is a hyper-parameter between 0 and 1 that balances the influence of the language-based
 probabilities and the environmental observability
 Experimental Setup We conducted experiments in the case of N=50 without error correction. As
 for the hyper-parameter α, we heuristically set it to 0.5.
 Experimental Results As demonstrated by Table 7, although heuristic methods exhibit a greater
 advantage in terms of token efficiency, their SR falls short compared to grounded deciding (using
 LLM as an implicit evaluation function). Moreover, combining both evaluation functions yields
 even greater performance improvements, thus demonstrating that there is still room for enhancement
 through the optimization of the evaluation function in heuristic methods.

                                                  Table 7: Experimental Results with Best-First Search

                                                                  E XEC . ↑        SR ↑         GCR ↑        $C OST ↓
                                   T REE -P LANNER               49.01±5.67    28.14±2.45      35.84±4.20   3.48±0.04
                                   L ANGUAGE G UIDED             34.71±0.65    15.06±1.02      22.47±1.72   2.16±0.02
                                   E NVIRONMENT G UIDED          37.26±0.17     6.24±0.65      12.10±1.41   2.16±0.02
                                   H YBRIDα=0.5                  38.71±0.42    17.74±0.69      25.34±0.95   2.16±0.02


  C.6                         P ROPORTION OF N EW O BJECTS

 The relationship between the number of steps and the proportion of new objects in evaluated tasks
 is shown in Figure 11.


                            0.85
Proportion of New Objects


                            0.80

                            0.75

                            0.70

                            0.65


                                   2.5      5.0         7.5        10.0      12.5       15.0      17.5      20.0        22.5
                                                                          Number of Steps
 Figure 11: Each point represents a distinct task. The proportion of new objects is calculated with
 gold plans in the dataset.


                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     D ETAILS ON T OKEN E FFICIENCY
The detailed derivation of the boundary conditions for N is as follows:
                          to prove µours < µsbs
                           ⇒ ρps + M N |a| + M · (ρgd + N ) < M · (ρps + ρgd + |a|)
                           ⇒ M N |a| + M · N < (M − 1) · ρps + M · |a|
                           ⇒ M · (|a| + 1) · N < (M − 1) · ρps + M · |a|
                                    1 − 1/M ρps       |a|
                           ⇒ N<               ·   +
                                    1 + 1/|a| |a|   |a| + 1



E     Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS ON E RRORS
E.1   I NCORRECT D ECIDING

Task: Hang up jacket
Action Tree: See Figure 12


                                                        Hang up jacket
                                                          Layer:-1


                          [Walk] <clothes_jacket> (1)                         [Walk] <bedroom> (1)
                                   Layer:0                                           Layer:0


       [Find] <clothes_jacket> (1)                [Walk] <hanger> (1)                [Find] <clothes_jacket> (1)           [Walk] <clothes_jacket> (1)
                 Layer:1                                Layer:1                                Layer:1                              Layer:1


       [Grab] <clothes_jacket> (1)                [Find] <hanger> (1)                [Grab] <clothes_jacket> (1)           [Find] <clothes_jacket> (1)
                Layer:2                                 Layer:2                               Layer:2                                Layer:2


          [Walk] <hanger> (1)                  [Find] <clothes_jacket> (1)              [Walk] <hanger> (1)                 [Grab] <clothes_jacket> (1)
                Layer:3                                  Layer:3                              Layer:3                                Layer:3


          [Find] <hanger> (1)                  [Grab] <clothes_jacket> (1)               [Find] <hanger> (1)                    [Walk] <hanger> (1)
                Layer:4                                 Layer:4                                Layer:4                                Layer:4


                [END]                                   [END]                [PutBack] <clothes_jacket> (1) <hanger> (1)          [Find] <hanger> (1)
                Layer:5                                 Layer:5                                Layer:5                                  Layer:5


                                                                                               [END]                                    [END]
                                                                                               Layer:6                                  Layer:6


Figure 12: Visualization of the action tree for Hang up jacket. The red path is the plan chosen by
LLM, while the green path is the correct plan.


Explanation: As depicted in Figure 12, the model made an incorrect decision during the second
step. This is due to the failure of T REE -P LANNER to comprehend the sequential order of searching
for a jacket and searching for a hanger.

E.2   E NVIRONMENT M ISUNDERSTANDING

Task: Clean toilet


                                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Example Plan:

      1. [Walk] <bathroom>(1)                           7. [Wash] <toilet>(1)
      2. [Walk] <toilet>(1)                             8. [Find] <mop bucket>(1)
      3. [Pull] <toilet>(1)                             9. [Walk] <detergent>(1)
      4. [Wash] <toilet>(1)                            10. [Grab] <detergent>(1)
      5. [Wipe] <toilet>(1)                            11. [Pour] <detergent>(1)
      6. [Push] <toilet>(1)                                <mop bucket>(1)

Explanation: The toilet is not movable, so the execution of step 3 would be failed.

E.3   I NCOMPLETE P LAN

Task: Put alarm clock in bedroom
Example Plan:

      1. [Walk] <bedroom>(1)
      2. [Walk] <alarm clock>(1)
      3. [Find] <alarm clock>(1)
      4. [Grab] <alarm clock>(1)
      5. [Find] <dresser>(1)
      6. [Open] <dresser>(1)
      7. [SwitchOn] <alarm clock>(1)

Explanation: After executing this plan, the alarm clock will be in the hand of the character. How-
ever, a step is missing: [PutBack] the <alarm clock>(1) on the <dresser>(1) to place the alarm
clock in bedroom.

E.4   I LLOGICAL E RROR

Task: Shave
Example Plan:

      1. [Walk] <bathroom>(1)                           7. [Walk] <razor>(1)
      2. [Find] <shaving cream>(1)                      8. [Find] <razor>(1)
      3. [Grab] <shaving cream>(1)                      9. [Grab] <razor>(1)
      4. [Walk] <after shave>(1)                       10. [PutOn] <shaving cream>(1)
      5. [Find] <after shave>(1)                       11. [Wash] <headset>(1)
      6. [Grab] <after shave>(1)                       12. [PutOn] <after shave>(1)

Explanation: The character does not have a free hand when executing step 9. This is because, in
steps 3 and 6, the character has already picked up two items.

E.5   S EMANTICALLY C ORRECT

Task: Use computer
Example Plan:

      1. [Walk] <home office>(1)
      2. [Walk] <computer>(1)


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        3. [Find] <chair>(1)
        4. [Sit] <chair>(1)
        5. [SwitchOn] <computer>(1)
        6. [Type] <keyboard>(1)

Explanation: The error information from the environment is as follows: “<keyboard >” cannot be
found when executing “[Type] <keyboard >(1)”. However, at this moment, the character is seated
in front of the computer, indicating that the keyboard should be located near the character.

E.6     M ORE R ESULTS ON E RROR T YPES

As illustrated in Table 8, we conducted a further analysis of the error types in the
T REE -P LANNERN =25 model with correction. The distribution is strikingly similar to that of the
model without correction. Moreover, owing to the presence of error correction, the model demon-
strates enhanced capability in avoiding semantically correct errors during the grounded deciding
stage.

F      P ROMPTS
F.1     I TERATIVE -P LANNER

(Instruction) You need to act as a task planner who decomposes a high-level household task into
several sub-tasks. The temporal relationship between subtask sequences must adhere to common-
sense logic. Each sub-task can be one of the following form: 1. [action name]; 2. [action name]
<object name 1>(object id 1). 3. [action name] <object name 1>(object id 1) <object name
2>(object id 2). The number of arguments depends on the action type. The (object id) is used to tell
the simulator that the actions should be done on the same object instance. For example a program
as: [Walk] <glass>(1) [Grab] <glass>(1) Indicates that the agent should first walk to a glass and
then grab that same glass. If you think your task has been successful, you can output [END], which
is action type 1.
(Global Information) For action type 1, the available actions are: [Sleep], [StandUp], [WakeUp]
For action type 2, the available actions are: [Walk], [Find], [Grab], [Wash], [Wipe], [Pull], [Push],
[Pour], [TurnTo], [PointAt], [Watch], [Touch], [Open], [Close], [Run], [Sit], [Read], [PutOn],
[Drop], [Lie], [SwitchOn], [SwitchOff], [Drink] For action type 3, the available actions are: [PutIn],
[PutBack] All action name of the sub-tasks must be chosen from the above actions, and follow the
corresponding format. You are in a house that consists of four rooms. These rooms are bathroom,
dining room, bedroom, home office. Available objects in the house are : clothes hat, ceilinglamp,
cpuscreen, orchid, couch, trashcan, dresser, dishwasher, centerpiece, phone, toaster, measuring cup,
stereo, mat, computer, envelope, oven mitts, piano bench, box, photoframe, shower, ceiling, wall,
window, freezer, faucet, detergent, light, desk, napkin, food rice, kitchen counter, folder, stovefan,
walllamp, food food, coffee pot, food steak, jelly, vacuum cleaner, powersocket, filing cabinet, al-
cohol, bathroom, door, bathroom counter, clothes gloves, microwave, oven, sink, milk, ice, bed-
room, laptop, doorjamb, food cake, bills, tea bag, television, laser pointer, toilet, board game,
sponge, food carrot, table, tray, cupboard, mousepad, picture, tvstand, tablelamp, hanger, pot,


        Table 8: Distribution of error types of the T REE -P LANNERN =25 with correction model.
      Error Type                       Explanation                                   Proportion(%)
      Missing Correct Plans            Plan sampling did not yield correct plans     52.6%
        Environment Misunderstanding   Misunderstandings on actions or objects         21.1%
        Incomplete Plan                The absence of essential steps                  15.8%
        Illogical Error                The generated plan is logically incorrect       5.3%
        Semantically Correct           Execution failed but semantically correct       10.5%
      Grounded Deciding Error          Errors during grounded deciding               47.4%
        Incorrect Deciding             Incorrect decisions at specific nodes           47.4%
        Semantically Correct           Execution failed but semantically correct       0.0%


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dry pasta, floor, knifeblock, curtain, chair, food bread, drawing, creditcard, check, coffe maker,
character, pasta, bag, food bacon, bookshelf, toothbrush holder, cutting board, home office, din-
ing room, nail polish, pillow, tape, nightstand, bathroom cabinet, bench, conditioner, cat, bed, key-
board, mouse All object names must be chosen from the above object list
(Observation) Currently, you are standing in the bedroom, and holding nothing in your right hand
and nothing in your left hand. pillow is clean. napkin is clean. pillow is dirty. bed is clean. mat is
dirty. pillow is close to drawing. tablelamp is close to bed. mat is facing drawing. pillow is inside
bedroom. mat is close to table. bed is close to drawing. table is close to mat. pillow is on floor. floor
is close to bed. tablelamp is close to pillow. mat is close to curtain. bed is facing computer. mat is
close to floor. pillow is facing drawing. curtain is close to mat. bed is close to tablelamp. wall is
close to mat. napkin is inside bedroom. window is close to mat. pillow is close to tablelamp. bed is
close to floor. pillow is close to wall. mat is close to filing cabinet. drawing is close to bed. pillow
is close to floor. bed is close to wall. filing cabinet is close to mat. bed is close to nightstand. mat is
inside bedroom. pillow is close to pillow. pillow is close to nightstand. mat is close to wall. wall is
close to pillow. nightstand is close to pillow. nightstand is close to bed. drawing is close to pillow.
floor is close to pillow. bed is inside bedroom. floor is close to mat. wall is close to bed. mat is close
to window. pillow,napkin,pillow,mat,bed,pillow,pillow is inside bedroom.
(In-Context Examples)
Task: Watch TV
[Find] <remote control>(1)
[Find] <television>(1)
[SwitchOn] <television>(1)
[Find] <couch>(1)
[Sit] <couch>(1)
[Touch] <remote control>(1)
[TurnTo] <television>(1)
[LookAt] <television>(1)

Task: Turn on light
[Walk] <dining room>(1)
[Walk] <light>(1)
[Find] <light>(1)
[SwitchOn] <light>(1)
[Find] <light>(2)
[SwitchOn] <light>(2)

Task: Go to sleep
[Walk] <bedroom>(1)
[Walk] <bed>(1)
[Lie] <bed>(1)
[Sleep]

Task: Brush teeth
[Walk] <bathroom>(1)
[Walk] <toothbrush holder>(1)
[Find] <toothbrush holder>(1)
[Find] <toothbrush>(1)
[Grab] <toothbrush>(1)
[Walk] <tooth paste>(1)
[Find] <tooth paste>(1)
[Grab] <tooth paste>(1)
[Pour] <tooth paste>(1) <toothbrush>(1)
[Find] <teeth>(1)
[Scrub] <teeth>(1)


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Task: Take nap
[Walk] <bedroom>(1)


F.2   P LAN S AMPLING

(Instruction) You need to act as a task planner, who decompose a high-level household task into
several sub-tasks. The temporal relationship between subtask sequences must adhere to common-
sense logic. Each sub-task can be one of the following form: 1. [action name]; 2. [action name]
<object name 1 >(object id 1). 3. [action name] <object name 1 >(object id 1) <object name 2
>(object id 2). The number of arguments depends on the action type. The (object id) is used to tell
the simulator that the actions should be done on the same object instance. For example a program
as: [Walk] <glass>(1) [Grab] <glass>(1) Indicates that the agent should first walk to a glass, and
then grab that same glass.
(Global Information) For action type 1, the available actions are: [Sleep], [StandUp], [WakeUp]
For action type 2, the available actions are: [Walk], [Find], [Grab], [Wash], [Wipe], [Pull], [Push],
[Pour], [TurnTo], [PointAt], [Watch], [Touch], [Open], [Close], [Run], [Sit], [Read], [PutOn],
[Drop], [Lie], [SwitchOn], [SwitchOff], [Drink] For action type 3, the available actions are: [PutIn],
[PutBack] All action name of the sub-tasks must be chosen from the above actions, and follow the
corresponding format. You are in a house that consists of four rooms. These rooms are bathroom,
dining room, bedroom, home office. Available objects in the house are : clothes hat, ceilinglamp,
cpuscreen, orchid, couch, trashcan, dresser, dishwasher, centerpiece, phone, toaster, measuring cup,
stereo, mat, computer, envelope, oven mitts, piano bench, box, photoframe, shower, ceiling, wall,
window, freezer, faucet, detergent, light, desk, napkin, food rice, kitchen counter, folder, stovefan,
walllamp, food food, coffee pot, food steak, jelly, vacuum cleaner, powersocket, filing cabinet, al-
cohol, bathroom, door, bathroom counter, clothes gloves, microwave, oven, sink, milk, ice, bed-
room, laptop, doorjamb, food cake, bills, tea bag, television, laser pointer, toilet, board game,
sponge, food carrot, table, tray, cupboard, mousepad, picture, tvstand, tablelamp, hanger, pot,
dry pasta, floor, knifeblock, curtain, chair, food bread, drawing, creditcard, check, coffe maker,
character, pasta, bag, food bacon, bookshelf, toothbrush holder, cutting board, home office, din-
ing room, nail polish, pillow, tape, nightstand, bathroom cabinet, bench, conditioner, cat, bed, key-
board, mouse All object names must be chosen from the above object list
(Initial Observation) Currently, you are standing in the home office, and holding nothing in your
right hand and nothing in your left hand.
(In-Context Examples)
Task: Watch TV
[Find] <remote control>(1)
[Find] <television>(1)
[SwitchOn] <television>(1)
[Find] <couch>(1)
[Sit] <couch>(1)
[Touch] <remote control>(1)
[TurnTo] <television>(1)
[LookAt] <television>(1)

Task: Turn on light
[Walk] <dining room>(1)
[Walk] <light>(1)
[Find] <light>(1)
[SwitchOn] <light>(1)
[Find] <light>(2)
[SwitchOn] <light>(2)

Task: Go to sleep
[Walk] <bedroom>(1)
[Walk] <bed>(1)
[Lie] <bed>(1)


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[Sleep]

Task: Brush teeth
[Walk] <bathroom>(1)
[Walk] <toothbrush holder>(1)
[Find] <toothbrush holder>(1)
[Find] <toothbrush>(1)
[Grab] <toothbrush>(1)
[Walk] <tooth paste>(1)
[Find] <tooth paste>(1)
[Grab] <tooth paste>(1)
[Pour] <tooth paste>(1) <toothbrush>(1)
[Find] <teeth>(1)
[Scrub] <teeth>(1)

Task: Take nap


F.3   G ROUNDED D ECIDING

(Instruction) You need to act as a home robot. At each moment, I will provide you with observations
of your current environment, as well as the high-level task I want you to do, and previous mid-level
sub-tasks that have been executed. Then, you need to select the best sub-task from the options I
provide to complete the designated home task based on the observation and your past experience.
When one choosed sub-task causes an error in the environment, you will be provided with the error
information and the corresponding sub-task, and you need to re-choose a corrective sub-task at the
current time step. For example, The sub-tasks that have been executed in the environment are:
[GRAB] <plate>(1)
[WALK] <dining room>(1)
The choosed sub-task is: [PUTBACK] <plate>(1) <table>(1)
The prompt (error information) would be: The sub-task: ”[PUTBACK] <plate>(1) <table>(1)”
caused an error: Script is not executable, since <character>(1) is not close to <table>(1) when
executing ”[PUTBACK] <plate>(1) <table>(1) [1]” Among the following actions, which action
would you take.
A. [Find] <table>(1)
B. [Find] <plate>(1)
A corrective choice of sub-task would be (You just need to provide the mark before the option you
want to choose): A
(Observation) Currently, you are standing in the bedroom, and holding nothing in your right hand
and nothing in your left hand. pillow is clean. napkin is clean. pillow is dirty. bed is clean. mat is
dirty. pillow is close to drawing. tablelamp is close to bed. mat is facing drawing. pillow is inside
bedroom. mat is close to table. bed is close to drawing. table is close to mat. pillow is on floor. floor
is close to bed. tablelamp is close to pillow. mat is close to curtain. bed is facing computer. mat is
close to floor. pillow is facing drawing. curtain is close to mat. bed is close to tablelamp. wall is
close to mat. napkin is inside bedroom. window is close to mat. pillow is close to tablelamp. bed is
close to floor. pillow is close to wall. mat is close to filing cabinet. drawing is close to bed. pillow
is close to floor. bed is close to wall. filing cabinet is close to mat. bed is close to nightstand. mat is
inside bedroom. pillow is close to pillow. pillow is close to nightstand. mat is close to wall. wall is
close to pillow. nightstand is close to pillow. nightstand is close to bed. drawing is close to pillow.
floor is close to pillow. bed is inside bedroom. floor is close to mat. wall is close to bed. mat is close
to window. pillow,napkin,pillow,mat,bed,pillow,pillow is inside bedroom.
Your task is: Take nap.
(History)
Your previously executed sub-tasks are:
[Walk] <bedroom>(1)
Among the following sub-tasks, which one would you take.
A. [FIND] <bed>(1)


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B. [WALK] <couch>(1)
C. [WALK] <bed>(1)
D. [FIND] <couch>(1)
E. [FIND] <pillow>(1)
The best choice of sub-task is:

G    V ISUALIZED ACTION T REE
We visualized the action trees for the tasks listed in Table 9 for interested readers.

                                      Task                                                                    Action Tree
                                      Take nap                                                                See Figure 13
                                      Put on your shoes                                                       See Figure 14
                                      Pick up spare change on dresser                                         See Figure 15
                                      Clean toilet                                                            See Figure 16
                                      Put alarm clock in bedroom                                              See Figure 17

                                                Table 9: Action trees for various tasks.


                                                                            Take nap
                                                                            Layer:-1


                                                    [Walk] <couch> (1)                 [Walk] <bedroom> (1)
                                                         Layer:0                              Layer:0


                          [Find] <couch> (1)         [Lie] <couch> (1)                  [Walk] <couch> (1)       [Walk] <bed> (1)
                                Layer:1                    Layer:1                           Layer:1                 Layer:1


     [Lie] <couch> (1)   [TurnTo] <couch> (1)       [Close] <curtain> (1)               [Find] <couch> (1)        [Find] <bed> (1)
           Layer:2             Layer:2                    Layer:2                             Layer:2                  Layer:2


         [Sleep]         [LookAt] <couch> (1)             [Sleep]                        [Lie] <couch> (1)       [Lie] <bed> (1)       [TurnTo] <bed> (1)
         Layer:3               Layer:3                    Layer:3                              Layer:3               Layer:3                 Layer:3


         [END]             [Lie] <couch> (1)              [END]                              [Sleep]                 [Sleep]           [LookAt] <bed> (1)
         Layer:4                 Layer:4                  Layer:4                            Layer:4                 Layer:4                Layer:4


                               [Sleep]                                                       [END]                   [END]           [Sit] <bed> (1)        [Lie] <bed> (1)
                               Layer:5                                                       Layer:5                 Layer:5             Layer:5                Layer:5


                               [END]                                                                                                 [Lie] <bed> (1)           [Sleep]
                               Layer:6                                                                                                   Layer:6               Layer:6


                                                                                                                                        [Sleep]                [END]
                                                                                                                                        Layer:7                Layer:7


                                                                                                                                        [END]
                                                                                                                                        Layer:8


                               Figure 13: Visualization of the action tree for Take nap.


                                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Put on your shoes
                                Layer:-1


     [Walk] <shoes> (1)   [Find] <shoes> (1)                             [Walk] <bedroom> (1)
          Layer:0               Layer:0                                         Layer:0


     [Find] <shoes> (1)   [Grab] <shoes> (1)                               [Walk] <shoes> (1)                        [Find] <shoes> (1)
           Layer:1             Layer:1                                          Layer:1                                    Layer:1


    [Grab] <shoes> (1)    [PutOn] <shoes> (1)                              [Find] <shoes> (1)                                             [Grab] <shoes> (1)
         Layer:2                Layer:2                                          Layer:2                                                       Layer:2


    [PutOn] <shoes> (1)   [Find] <shoes> (2)                               [Grab] <shoes> (1)                                             [PutOn] <shoes> (1)         [Find] <feet_both> (1)
          Layer:3               Layer:3                                         Layer:3                                                         Layer:3                       Layer:3


    [Find] <shoes> (2)    [Grab] <shoes> (2)    [Walk] <feet_both> (1)    [Find] <feet_both> (1)    [PutOn] <shoes> (1)                     [Find] <shoes> (2)        [PutOn] <shoes> (1)
          Layer:4              Layer:4                 Layer:4                    Layer:4                 Layer:4                                 Layer:4                   Layer:4


    [Grab] <shoes> (2)    [PutOn] <shoes> (2)    [PutOn] <shoes> (1)     [PutOn] <feet_both> (1)   [END]            [Find] <shoes> (2)          [Grab] <shoes> (2)           [END]
         Layer:5                Layer:5                Layer:5                   Layer:5           Layer:5                Layer:5                    Layer:5                 Layer:5


    [PutOn] <shoes> (2)         [END]                  [END]                     [END]                              [Grab] <shoes> (2)          [PutOn] <shoes> (2)
          Layer:6               Layer:6                Layer:6                   Layer:6                                 Layer:6                      Layer:6


          [END]                                                                                                    [PutOn] <shoes> (2)                [END]
          Layer:7                                                                                                        Layer:7                      Layer:7


                                                                                                                          [END]
                                                                                                                          Layer:8


                          Figure 14: Visualization of the action tree for Put on your shoes.


                                                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pick up spare change on dresser
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Layer:-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [Walk] <bedroom> (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Layer:0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [Walk] <dresser> (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Layer:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [Find] <dresser> (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Layer:2


                                                                            [Pull] <dresser> (1)                                                                                                                                                            [Grab] <coin> (1)                                                                                                                       [Open] <dresser> (1)                                                                                                                                     [Find] <coin> (1)
                                                                                   Layer:3                                                                                                                                                                       Layer:3                                                                                                                                  Layer:3                                                                                                                                                 Layer:3


                                                   [Find] <coin> (1)                                                                                                                            [Grab] <coin> (2)                                                                                                               [END]                                                                          [Find] <coin> (1)                                                                                                                            [Grab] <coin> (1)
                                                        Layer:4                                                                                                                                      Layer:4                                                                                                                    Layer:4                                                                             Layer:4                                                                                                                                      Layer:4


                                               [Grab] <coin> (1)                                                                                                                                                         [END]                                                                                                                                                                                [Grab] <coin> (1)                                                                                                                                           [END]
                                                    Layer:5                                                                                                                                                              Layer:5                                                                                                                                                                                   Layer:5                                                                                                                                                Layer:5


                                                                         [END]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [Close] <dresser> (1)                                                                                                                                   [END]
                                                                         Layer:6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Layer:6                                                                                                                                          Layer:6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [END]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Layer:7


                                                                Figure 15: Visualization of the action tree for Pick up spare change on dresser.


                                                                                                Clean toilet
                                                                                                 Layer:-1


                                  [Find] <bathroom> (1)                   [Walk] <toilet> (1)                  [Find] <toilet> (1)                                             [Walk] <bathroom> (1)
                                          Layer:0                              Layer:0                              Layer:0                                                           Layer:0


                                    [Walk] <toilet> (1)                  [Find] <toilet> (1)                   [Walk] <toilet> (1)                                               [Find] <toilet> (1)                                                                                                                                                        [Walk] <toilet> (1)
                                         Layer:1                              Layer:1                               Layer:1                                                           Layer:1                                                                                                                                                                    Layer:1


                             [Find] <toilet> (1)                   [Pull] <toilet> (1)                   [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)                                [Wash] <toilet> (1)               [Grab] <toilet> (1)                                                                     [Wash] <toilet> (1)                       [Pull] <toilet> (1)                       [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)                  [Grab] <toilet> (1)                                                                                        [Find] <toilet> (1)
                                  Layer:2                               Layer:2                                  Layer:2                                             Layer:2                           Layer:2                                                                                 Layer:2                                   Layer:2                                      Layer:2                               Layer:2                                                                                                    Layer:2


            [Pull] <toilet> (1)                            [Find] <mop_bucket> (1)                              [Grab] <detergent> (1)                        [Find] <sponge> (1)                 [Wash] <toilet> (1)              [Scrub] <toilet> (1)                 [Wipe] <toilet> (1)               [Grab] <brush> (1)       [Wash] <toilet> (1)                       [Pour] <detergent> (1) <mop_bucket> (1)          [Pour] <toilet> (1) <toilet> (1)                [Wipe] <toilet> (1)            [Find] <sponge> (1)                    [Grab] <toilet> (1)   [Wash] <toilet> (1)     [Pull] <toilet> (1)
                 Layer:3                                           Layer:3                                             Layer:3                                       Layer:3                           Layer:3                          Layer:3                              Layer:3                           Layer:3                  Layer:3                                               Layer:3                                     Layer:3                                  Layer:3                          Layer:3                              Layer:3               Layer:3                 Layer:3


    [Walk] <mop_bucket> (1)                          [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)                            [Pour] <detergent> (1) <mop_bucket> (1)               [Grab] <sponge> (1)                 [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                 [Wipe] <toilet> (1)              [Walk] <brush> (1)                 [Wash] <toilet> (1)         [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                                      [END]                               [Scrub] <toilet> (1)                     [Find] <toilet> (1)            [Grab] <sponge> (1)                     [Wash] <toilet> (1)    [Find] <sponge> (1)    [Wash] <toilet> (1)           [Find] <sponge> (1)
            Layer:4                                          Layer:4                                                     Layer:4                                    Layer:4                            Layer:4                             Layer:4                          Layer:4                            Layer:4                     Layer:4                                             Layer:4                                  Layer:4                                  Layer:4                         Layer:4                                Layer:4                  Layer:4              Layer:4                         Layer:4


   [Find] <mop_bucket> (1)                         [Pour] <faucet> (1) <toilet> (1)                                  [Grab] <toilet> (1)           [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                 [PutBack] <toilet> (1) <toilet> (1)             [Find] <detergent> (1)          [Find] <brush> (1)                [Grab] <sponge> (1)             [Push] <toilet> (1)                                                                              [END]                       [Grab] <toilet> (1)                 [Find] <detergent> (1)                    [Wipe] <toilet> (1)   [Grab] <sponge> (1)    [Wipe] <toilet> (1)          [Grab] <sponge> (1)
           Layer:5                                            Layer:5                                                     Layer:5                       Layer:5                                    Layer:5                                    Layer:5                       Layer:5                            Layer:5                        Layer:5                                                                                     Layer:5                          Layer:5                               Layer:5                                 Layer:5                Layer:5               Layer:5                       Layer:5


   [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)                            [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)                                        [Scrub] <toilet> (1)         [Drop] <sponge> (1)                                  [END]                 [Pour] <detergent> (1) <toilet> (1)       [Grab] <brush> (1)                 [Wipe] <toilet> (1)            [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                      [Wash] <toilet> (1)                                                            [Find] <toilet> (1)                [Pour] <detergent> (1) <sponge> (1)                    [END]           [Wipe] <toilet> (1)   [Drop] <toilet> (1)          [Walk] <detergent> (1)
           Layer:6                                            Layer:6                                                     Layer:6                       Layer:6                                        Layer:6                            Layer:6                           Layer:6                            Layer:6                        Layer:6                                  Layer:6                                                                        Layer:6                                     Layer:6                                  Layer:6              Layer:6               Layer:6                        Layer:6


 [Pour] <faucet> (1) <toilet> (1)                         [Wash] <toilet> (1)                                              [END]                        [END]                                                                       [Scrub] <toilet> (1)           [Scrub] <toilet> (1)                [Grab] <mop_bucket> (1)          [Find] <sponge> (1)                        [Find] <mop_bucket> (1)                                                       [Scrub] <toilet> (1)                       [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                                           [Drop] <sponge> (1)         [END]                   [Find] <detergent> (1)
            Layer:7                                            Layer:7                                                     Layer:7                      Layer:7                                                                          Layer:7                        Layer:7                                Layer:7                         Layer:7                                     Layer:7                                                                    Layer:7                                    Layer:7                                                        Layer:7               Layer:7                        Layer:7


       [Wash] <toilet> (1)                            [Drop] <mop_bucket> (1)                                                                                                                                                       [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                  [END]                         [Drop] <mop_bucket> (1)          [Grab] <sponge> (1)                         [Walk] <detergent> (1)                                                             [END]                                      [END]                                                         [END]                                         [Grab] <detergent> (1)
            Layer:8                                           Layer:8                                                                                                                                                                    Layer:8                         Layer:8                               Layer:8                        Layer:8                                      Layer:8                                                                     Layer:8                                    Layer:8                                                       Layer:8                                              Layer:8


       [Wipe] <toilet> (1)                                     [END]                                                                                                                                                                [Drop] <toilet> (1)                                                         [END]                   [Scrub] <toilet> (1)                         [Grab] <detergent> (1)                                                                                                                                                                                                             [Pour] <detergent> (1) <sponge> (1)
            Layer:9                                            Layer:9                                                                                                                                                                   Layer:9                                                                Layer:9                      Layer:9                                        Layer:9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Layer:9


   [Drop] <mop_bucket> (1)                                                                                                                                                                                                        [Drop] <detergent> (1)                                                                                       [END]                      [Pour] <detergent> (1) <mop_bucket> (1)                                                                                                                                                                                                               [Wipe] <toilet> (1)
           Layer:10                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Layer:10                                                                                             Layer:10                                    Layer:10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Layer:10


             [END]                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [END]                                                                                                                                             [END]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [END]
            Layer:11                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Layer:11                                                                                                                                          Layer:11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Layer:11


                                                                                                                                            Figure 16: Visualization of the action tree for Clean toilet.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Put alarm clock in bedroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Layer:-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                     [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                                     [Walk] <alarm_clock> (1)                                [Walk] <bedroom> (1)                                                               [Find] <bedroom> (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Layer:0                                                     Layer:0                                                Layer:0                                                                            Layer:0


                                                                                                                                                        [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                                                 [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                   [Find] <nightstand> (1)                      [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                           [Walk] <alarm_clock> (1)                               [Walk] <nightstand> (1)                        [Walk] <bedroom> (1)
                                                                                                                                                                Layer:1                                                                   Layer:1                                   Layer:1                                       Layer:1                                           Layer:1                                                Layer:1                                       Layer:1


                                                                                                       [Walk] <bedroom> (1)                                                                          [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                                           [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                         [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                                                 [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                       [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)                      [Find] <alarm_clock> (1)
                                                                                                              Layer:2                                                                                        Layer:2                                                             Layer:2                                         Layer:2                                                                   Layer:2                                        Layer:2                                       Layer:2


                               [Find] <nightstand> (1)                                                 [Walk] <nightstand> (1)                                                 [Walk] <bedroom> (1)                                           [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                                     [Walk] <nightstand> (1)                         [Find] <nightstand> (1)                            [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                            [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)                                [Grab] <alarm_clock> (1)
                                       Layer:3                                                                 Layer:3                                                                Layer:3                                                         Layer:3                                                      Layer:3                                         Layer:3                                            Layer:3                                             Layer:3                                                 Layer:3


  [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)              [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                      [Find] <nightstand> (1)                     [Find] <nightstand> (1)                                [PutBack] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                               [Find] <nightstand> (1)                      [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                      [Walk] <nightstand> (1)                                [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                       [Find] <nightstand> (1)
                   Layer:4                                                 Layer:4                                                Layer:4                                     Layer:4                                                          Layer:4                                                          Layer:4                                               Layer:4                                                Layer:4                                                         Layer:4                                                 Layer:4


                   [END]                                                   [END]                           [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)   [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                 [END]                    [PutBack] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                             [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                [END]                      [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                    [Find] <nightstand> (1)               [END]                   [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)
                   Layer:5                                                 Layer:5                                          Layer:5                                      Layer:5                                   Layer:5                                    Layer:5                                                                 Layer:5                                  Layer:5                                     Layer:5                                              Layer:5                       Layer:5                                  Layer:5


                                                                                                                             [END]                                       [END]                                                                                [END]                                                                   [END]                                                                                  [END]                            [PutIn] <alarm_clock> (1) <nightstand> (1)                                               [END]
                                                                                                                             Layer:6                                     Layer:6                                                                              Layer:6                                                                 Layer:6                                                                                Layer:6                                           Layer:6                                                                 Layer:6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [END]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Layer:7


                                                         Figure 17: Visualization of the action tree for Put alarm clock in bedroom.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               28
