Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T-M EASURE : A M EASURE FOR M ODEL T RANSFER -
ABILITY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

             A popular paradigm in AI modeling, including computer vision, natural language
             processing, and graph modeling, is applying a large pre-trained model that has
             been fine-tuned for a particular task on novel datasets. However, many such mod-
             els are published in model repositories, fine-tuned using different types of source
             data. Consequently, practitioners face the problem of model selection – choosing
             the best model for their task from a repository of models. Model performance in
             a target domain depends on factors including task definition, model architecture,
             data distribution, and the model transfer method. Previous model selection meth-
             ods in transfer learning focus on task definition when assessing transferability,
             and often require a labeled dataset in the target domain. We formulate the transfer
             problem as label-agnostic model selection, where the goal is to choose the best-
             performing model on a target domain without access to labeled data. Specifically,
             we analyze the impact of source domain training data on model transferability. To
             measure this transferability, we introduce a new type of quantitative measure, the
             T- Measure, which correlates with the test-time performance of a model on an un-
             labeled target domain. We propose a T- Measure estimation method which incor-
             porates distributional measures of the source domain’s training data instances, the
             distribution of the target domain’s instances, and the base performance of a task-
             specific model to create a ranking of models. We then adapt previous task-centric
             transferability measures for data-centric selection and compare them against T-
             M easure. We thoroughly evaluate the T- M easure performance for 4 tasks and 11
             datasets and show its effectiveness in ranking models for model selection com-
             pared to baselines.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The emergence of pre-trained models have led to a substantial improvement in different machine
learning domains such as computer vision, natural language processing (NLP), and graph predic-
tion. A common paradigm is that a model is first pre-trained in an unsupervised manner on a vast
corpus, and afterward the resulting model parameters are used as a starting point for training (fine-
tuning) models to complete various tasks using a much smaller set of labeled data. In NLP, for
example, a single pre-trained model (Devlin et al., 2019) has been fine-tuned for tasks including text
classification, emotion detection, question answering, inference, etc. In this paradigm, models share
the same pre-trained model and differ primarily on the dataset used during fine-tuning. Practitioners
seeking to reuse fine-tuned models in a new domain face the problem of model selection – choos-
ing an appropriate model configuration to apply to their problem. In this paper we introduce the
T- Measure, a measure of model transferability that is label-agnostic and can guide practitioners in
model selection. T- Measure focuses on the model transferability from the perspective of data.
Model selection is the problem of selecting a model most appropriate for a specific task. Model
selection is challenging for practitioners for several reasons. The sheer number of models available
makes evaluating models a time-consuming and computationally intensive process. For example,
a practitioner looking for a text classification model is faced with 780 options when searching a
popular model repository, huggingface 1 . Many model selection approaches require a labeled de-
velopment set to evaluate models. Researchers exploring new domains may have no labeled data
    1
        accessed on 30 Jun 2023


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


available, making model evaluation difficult without a laborious labeling effort. These challenges
can result in haphazard model selection conducted through trial and error. To address these model
selection challenges, we propose a principled model selection approach based on unsupervised rep-
resentation learning that requires no labeled data while remaining computationally efficient.
Model transferability, the performance of the model after transfer learning, is an important problem
given the computational costs of training large, parameter-dense models. Recently there have been
a few measures introduced to estimate the transferability of the models. A key assumption of these
measures is the availability of a labeled development dataset for the target domain making them
computationally expensive and incompatible in label agnostic setting (Zamir et al., 2018). Another
shortcoming of these prior works is the narrowness of their evaluation, which have focused on
computer vision tasks on the CIFAR (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)
datasets. The limited evaluation of these measure in the context of only few datasets raises concerns
regarding the generalizability of them across different tasks and domains. In particular the effect
of the source dataset on transfer is overlooked in all of those measures. Some recent body of work
suggest that source dataset is an important factor in transfer: (Zhao et al., 2022) suggests that some
datasets are intrinsically harder than other datasets for any task. (Ethayarajh et al., 2021) show that
training datasets have different amount of useful information for trained models.
In this paper, we propose T- Measure as a criteria for model selection for machine learning tasks. T-
M easure estimates the transferability of the models from the dataset perspective. It utilizes unsuper-
vised representation learning to gain insight from datasets without requiring any label. It leverages
the representation learning to quantify the effect of datasets during transfer. To the best of our knowl-
edge T- Measure is the first data-centric transfer measure in zero-shot transfer. We adapt the pre-
viously used transfer measures to the data-centric zero-shot setting, compare T- Measure with them,
and evaluate T- Measure on 4 different tasks and 11 different datasets. We show that T- Measure has
better performance compared to other transfer measures and is more robust. Our contributions are:

       • We introduce the novel problem of label-agnostic model selection.
       • We present T- Measure as a transfer measure.
       • We use representation learning and introduce a method to compute T- Measure in a zero-
         shot transfer setting.
       • We adapt the previous transfer measures to the zero-shot constraint.
       • We analyze the performance of T- Measure among 4 different tasks and 11 datasets.


2     P ROBLEM D EFINITIONS

In this section, we formally define the problem of model selection in zero-shot transfer learning.
First, we introduce the general problem of model selection. Second, we focus on the model selection
and its challenges in transfer learning. Then we introduce transfer measure for model selection.
Finally, we scope the problem by focusing on the model selection in zero-shot transfer learning.

2.1   M ODEL S ELECTION
                                                                      Table 1: Symbol descriptions
Suppose Φ = {ϕi }ni=1 is a set of n models, each trained
                                                                  Symbol   Description
on a task Ti . Each task
                     S Ti is represented by a labeled              Dx      Dataset x
dataset Di = Ditrain Ditest and has an evaluation met-            Dtrain   Training subset of the dataset D
ric Ei to measure its performance. Let βi be the archi-            Tx      Task x
tecture of the model ϕi . Therefore each trained model is          Ei      Evaluation metric i
                                                                   βx      Model architecture x
identified with three variables (Ti , Di , βi ) and its perfor-    αi      Transfer method i
mance is denoted by Ei (Ti , Ditest , ϕi ).                         ϕ      Model
                                                                   RD      Representation space based on dataset D
Let Ttrg be the target task with dataset Dtrg and evalua-
tion metric Etrg . In general, model selection for Ttrg is
the problem of selecting a model ϕ∗ ∈ Φ which has the best performance on target:
                                  ϕ∗ = Argmax Etrg (Ttrg , Dtrg
                                                            test
                                                                 , ϕ)                                          (1)
                                            ϕ∈Φ


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   M ODEL S ELECTION IN T RANSFER

In this subsection, we specify the model selection prob-
lem in a transfer setting. Let TS
                                trg be a target task with la-
                          train      test
beled dataset Dtrg = Dtrg          Dtrg   . Let α be a model
transfer method characterized as a function that transfers
a model ϕ based on the target task and dataset and creates
a new model ϕ′ = α(Ttrg , Dtrg   train
                                       , ϕ). Figure 1 shows
parameters of the transfer method.
The model selection problem in this transfer setting be-
comes the problem of finding a model ϕ∗ ∈ Φ which Figure 1: Components in model transfer
shows the best performance after transfer on a target from a source model to a target model
dataset. Ideally the selected model is ϕ∗ :
                                 ϕ∗ = Argmax Etrg (Ttrg , Dtrg
                                                           test
                                                                , ϕ′ )                                  (2)
                                           ϕ∈Φ

             trg                                                                      trg        trg
In reality, Dtest is not accessible during model selection. However, we assume that Dtest and Dtrain
                                                                                           trg
are sampled from the similar underlying distribution. Therefore, model performance on Dtest is cor-
                trg                                                                         train
related with Dtrain   . And model selection chooses the model ϕ̂ with best performance on Dtrg    , i.e:
                                                           train
                                 ϕ̂ = Argmax Etrg (Ttrg , Dtrg   , ϕ′ )                                 (3)
                                         ϕ∈Φ

Where ϕ′ is the model ϕ transferred with method α using Dtrg
                                                         train
                                                               dataset for the task Ttrg .

2.3   T RANSFER M EASURE

In this subsection, we define an abstract transfer measure for model selection in a transfer setting,
and describe our approach in 3. A transfer measure is a proxy that estimates the relative performance
of different models on a target dataset after model transfer. The value of a transfer measure assigned
to models, facilitates the selection of the best performing model on target dataset. Without loss of
generality, we identify a transfer measure as a function of a model ϕ, a target task Ttrg and dataset
Dtrg . Ideally, the value of a transfer measure is highly correlated with the performance of the
transferred model ϕ̂ on the target.
                   T ransf er − M easure(Ttrg , Dtrg , ϕ) ∝ Etrg (Ttrg , Dtrg , ϕ′ )                    (4)
                           ′                                                       ′
where Etrg (Ttrg , Dtrg , ϕ ) ∈ R is the value indicating the performance of ϕ on the target. Ideally,
a transfer measure enables us to compare the performance of different models in a transfer. For
example, for the two transferred models ϕ1 , ϕ2 the inequality:
        T ransf er − M easure(Ttrg , Dtrg , ϕ1 ) ≤ T ransf er − M easure(Ttrg , Dtrg , ϕ2 )             (5)
means that ϕ2 is predicted to have a better performance on target task Ttrg and dataset Dtrg and is
a better choice for model selection compared to ϕ2 .
In general, a transfer measure has four confounders: dataset, task, transfer method and model archi-
tecture. Figure 2 shows examples for confounders. In this paper, we focus on the dataset confounder
and assume the other confounders are invariant, i.e. we isolate the dataset confounder to assess
dataset effect on transfer. This assumption causes the proposed transfer measure to rely on the
training dataset characteristics which are easier to quantify.

2.4   M ODEL S ELECTION IN Z ERO - SHOT T RANSFER

We specify the model selection problem in zero-shot transfer when the only variable confounder of
transfer is dataset. Let Ttrg , Dtrg , Etrg be a target task, dataset and evaluation metric respectively.
Let Φ = {ϕ}i be a family of models with the same architecture β and task Tsrc where each is trained
on Di . Let α be a transfer method. We represent ϕ′i = α(T, Dtrg      train
                                                                            , ϕi ) as the transferred model
                           train                                                          train
by the method α using Dtrg . In this paper, the transfer method is zero-shot: Dtrg              is unlabeled
                                        ′            train
and α is the identity function, i.e., ϕi = α(T, Dtrg , ϕi ) = ϕi . Furthermore, models are trained,


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transferred and evaluated for the same task i.e,: Tsrc = Ttrg , Esrc = Etrg . For simplicity we denote
task and evaluation metric with T , E respectively. Ideally the model selection chooses ϕ∗ ∈ {ϕ}i :
ϕ∗ = Argmax E(T, Dtrg   test                    test
                             , ϕ). In reality, Dtrg                                                test
                                                     is not available in transfer and assume that Dtrg
         ϕ∈Φ
     test                                                    test              train
and Dtrg  are from the same distribution. Consequently E(T, Dtrg  , ϕ) ∝ E(T, Dtrg   , ϕ) and the
model selection, finds ϕ̂:
                          train                                         train
        ϕ̂ = Argmax E(T, Dtrg   , ϕ) = Argmax T ransf er − M easure(T, Dtrg   , ϕ)                    (6)
                ϕ∈Φ                             ϕ∈Φ


3     M ODEL
In this section, we introduce T- Measure, a transfer
measure for zero-shot model transfer. T- Measure
is data-centric, i.e. it is characterized by a pair of
datasets: a source dataset Dsrc which the model is
trained on and a target dataset Dtrg . Intuitively T- Figure 2: Confounders of transferred model
M easure assesses the similarity of datasets Dsrc and
                                                         performance with examples on the left side.
Dtrg in terms of a task. We propose a representation
space that quantifies characteristics of datasets and hypothesize that it determines datasets transfer-
ability. We introduce a self-supervised representation learning approach to achieve a representation
space for Dsrc . Then, we utilize it to compute T- Measure for task-agnostic model selection in a
zero-shot setting. More specifically the task, model architecture and transfer method are invariant
in this transfer setting. By using the learned representation space, we identify a subset of datapoints
from Dsrc which have similar characteristics to Dtrg . We estimate T- Measure using the identified
subset. The components of our method, creating source dataset representation space and T- Measure
estimation, are shown in Figures 3, 4 respectively.

3.1   S OURCE DATASET R EPRESENTATION S PACE

In this section, we introduce a representation space for decomposable datasets. A dataset D is de-
composable if we can represent an instnace P in the dataset as a union of smaller units (datapoints).
Moreover, datapoints in each instance are dependent on each other and independent of datapoints in
other instances.
For each source dataset, we identify a representation space at datapoint level. The identified repre-
sentation should have the following objectives to capture dataset structure and specifics:The relative
distance of datapoints should be preserved in this representation space. The representation should
be smooth, i.e. a small difference in datapoints should result in a small difference in their repre-
sentation. Dependency of datapoints should be manifested as distance in their representations, i.e.
dependent datapoints (datapoints in the same instance) should be closer to each other compared to
independent datapoints. We say a representation is aligned with a dataset if it meets these conditions.
Dataset Representation Alignment We describe our approach for finding a representation space
which characterizes a decomposable dataset D. Our approach leverages contrastive learning (Liu
et al., 2021) to model the dependencies in the dataset. Specifically, we construct triplets to capture
the relation of datapoints in the dataset. Then we use the triplet loss objective(Schroff et al., 2015) to
find a representation space aligned with these triplets. In other words, given an initial representation
space R and a dataset D, an aligned representation
                                                S space is created by fine-tuning the space with the
triplet loss objective in the dataset. Let D = Pi . We describe the triplet construction process for
D in the next paragraph.
Triplet Construction A triplet (a, p, n) contains three points from D: anchor, positive, negative.
Datapoints in a triplet are sampled with the goal of making the distance of the anchor and the positive
sample relatively less than distance of the anchor and the negative sample. The goal of the triplet
construction step is to sample triplets that capture the dependency structure of datapoints. Therefore
given a pair of dependent datapoints (a, p′ ), we create a triplet by adding an independent datapoint
to the pair. Since D is decomposable, triplets are: {(a, p, n)|a, p ∈ Pi , n ∈ Pj } .
Ideally in an aligned space with D, the relative distance constraint of triplets is satisfied, i.e. for
any triplet (a, p, n) : d(a, p) < d(a, n). Triplet loss objective is a proxy to estimate this distance


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


constraint among a set of triplets in a representation space R. For a triplet (a, p, n):
                 T ripletLoss = M ax(||R(a) − R(p)|| − ||R(a) − R(n)|| + ϵ, 0)                          (7)
where R(a) is the representation of the anchor, ||.|| is a distance metric and ϵ is a margin. For
a dataset D and a representation space R, we identify an aligned representation space(RD ) by
minimizing the triplet loss objective on triplets from D. Figure 3 shows steps of this process.

3.2   T- MEASURE E STIMATION

In this subsection, we describe T- Measure estimation
in zero-shot transfer for decomposable datasets. Our
method leverages dataset aligned representation spaces
from the previous subsection to represent Dsrc and
Dtrg . We identify a subset of Dsrc which is highly
similar to Dtrg . Then, we compute T- Measure by as-
sessing the effect of this subset in the trained model.
                                                                 Figure 3: The steps for creating an aligned
For every model ϕi (identified by (T, Dsrc , β)) and tar-
                                                                 representation space for a data source D.
get dataset Dtrg and the representation space aligned
                                                                 ϕD is the model trained on D and RD is
with the source dataset Rsrc , T- Measure is estimated
                                                                 the representation space aligned with D.
via the following steps:
Step 1: Intuitively the performance of a trained model is close for similar input datasets. Also,
similar subsets of training data are expected to have similar effects on a model during training.
Therefore the task of estimating the effect of Dtrg on a trained model is reduced to finding a subset
of Dsrc similar to Dtrg and computing its effect on the trained model. In this step, we seek a subset
Ssrc,trg from the source dataset which is similar to the Dtrg , i.e.:
                                      [
                         Ssrc,trg =        {s∗ = Argmin||R(d) − R(s)||}                           (8)
                                                        s∈Dsrc
                                     d∈Dtrg

Where R is the representation space used for datapoints. We use the Rsrc which is the Dsrc aligned
representation space in finding the similarity for T- Measure estimation since this representation
space captures the structure of the Dsrc and is more accurate in finding similar datapoints.
Step 2: We use Ssrc,trg , the most similar subset of the source dataset to the target dataset, to
estimate T- Measure. We compute T- Measure by estimating the effect of Ssrc,trg on the model
during training. In (Ethayarajh et al., 2021), the authors introduced V-Usabiltiy and Pointwise V-
Information(PVI). We briefly describe PVI in the next paragraph. First, we describe predictive
entropry then we describe PVI.
Definition Let X, Y denote random variables with sample spaces X , Y respectively. Let θ denote
                                                                                          S a
null input that provides no information about Y . Given a predictive family V ⊂ Ω = {f : X θ →
P (Y )}, the predictive V-entropy(HV (Y )) and the conditional V-entropy are:
                                 HV (Y ) = inff ∈V E[log2 f [θ](Y )]                                    (9)
                              HV (Y |X) = inff ∈V E[log2 f [X](Y )]                                    (10)
where f [X] and f [θ] produce a probability distribution over the labels.
Definition Given random variables X, Y and a predictive family V, the pointwise V-information
(PVI) of an instance (x, y) is:
                           P V I(x → y) = − log2 g[θ](y) + log2 g ′ [x](y)                             (11)
                                                    ′                     ′
where g ∈ V s.t. E[log g[θ](Y )] = HV (Y ) and g ∈ V s.t. E[log g [X](Y )] = HV (Y |X).
They used V-Usabiltiy and Pointwise V-Information(PVI) as a proxy to estimate the difficulty of
datapoints and their effect on a model during training. V-usability of a random variable is defined
as the expected change in the predictive entropy of the label distribution caused by conditioning on
that random variable, i.e. how much information the random variable contains and how it changes
the label distribution. Pointwise V-Information computes the change of label distribution predictive
entropy given a single datapoint. Therefore, more difficult datapoints have less V-Usable information
and have less effect on the trained model. Intuitively higher Pointwise V-Information (PVI) of


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ssrc,trg on the trained model indicates the higher similarity of ϕ (trained on Dsrc ) to a hypothetical
model trained on Dtrg . The T- Measure value of the Dtrg is achieved by finding the average PVI of
Ssrc,trg for model ϕ. Figure 4 shows this process.
                                                      Σ(x,y)∈Ssrc,trg P V Iϕ (x → y)
                          T- Measure(T, Dtrg , ϕ) =                                                          (12)
                                                                |Ssrc,trg |

4       E VALUATION
In this section we describe our experiments to evaluate the
performance of T- Measure. First, we describe implemen-
tation details common to all experiments. Then, we de-
scribe evaluation metrics. Finally, we describe the model        Figure 4: T- Measure estimation step
selection experiment scenario to evaluate T- Measure.            1: given Dtrg and a model trained on
                                                                 Dsrc . Ssrc,trg is the subset of Dsrc
4.1       I MPLEMENTATION                                        which is similar to Dtrg .

As described in section 3.1, T- Measure requires a dataset specific representation space for each
source dataset. We describe the process and parameters used to identify dataset specific spaces
for source datasets introduced in Table ??. The introduced source datasets are all decomposable
to documents. For example, DailyDialog is perfectly decomposed to independent conversations.
Furthermore, the decomposed documents have a sequential structure and can be viewed as a se-
quence of smaller dependent units, i.e. sentences in paragraphs or utterances in the conversations.
We represent each document d ∈ Dsrc as a sequence. For example, a conversation can be repre-
sented as u1 , u2 , ..., un where ui is the ith utterance. Let Dsrc be an arbitrary source dataset, and
d = u1 , ..., un be a document in Dsrc . Following (Zhou et al., 2022b), for every pair (ui , ui+1 ),
we create 20 triplets (ui , ui+1 , u′ ) by randomly sampling u′ from other documents in that dataset
i.e u′ ∈ d′ ∈ Dsrc − {d}. After creating triplets for the Dsrc , we use SentenceBERT(Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019) for the initial representation of the utterances (or sentences in non-conversational
datasets). We use the Sentence-Transformer library 2 and triplet loss objective to fine-tune the
sentence-transformer. We continue the process for 5 epochs. We repeat the same process for source
datasets in Table ?? and identify an aligned representation space for each of them.
                                                             Table 2: Dataset Statistics. The last column
4.2       E VALUATION M ETRIC
                                                             shows tasks for which the dataset is labeled.
The principal goal of T- Measure is to provide a quan-      Dataset   Dataset Size Avg Doc Size      Tasks
                                                          PersonaChat   19,893         14.8            RS
titative score for trained models that helps with select-   Casino       1030          11.6            RS
ing the best model for a target dataset. In other words,    MuTual       6,371          4.7            RS
                                                          DailyDialog   11,118           8          RS, ERC
the relative value of T- Measure for trained models       Empathetic    24,850          4.3         RS, ERC
should correlate with their performance in the target       Friends       897           14        RS, ERC, QA
                                                            CIDER         807           15             QA
dataset. Therefore, we evaluate T- Measure as a model      DREAM         6,444          6.3            QA
selection and ranking criteria. We evaluate the rank-      DialogRE      1,788         12.9            RC
                                                          ReDocRED       3,053          7.9            RC
ing of models based on T- Measure and compare it to         DDRel        6,300          8.4            RC
the ranking of the model performances on the target
set. We use the Kendall−τ correlation to evaluate the ranking, computed as:
                                        #Concordant P airs − #Discordant P airs
                        Kendall − τ =                                                                        (13)
                                                       # P airs
Therefore higher value of Kendall−τ is an indicator of better ranking. We also compare the F 1 of
the best selected model by each transfer measure and compare it against the ground truth in Figure
6.

4.3       M ODEL S ELECTION E XPERIMENT

We evaluate the performance of T- Measure as a transfer measure. We compare the performance of
T- Measure with two baselines and a set of transfer measures created based on previous task-centric
    2
        www.sbert.net


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Kendall-τ of model ranking based on transfer measures. From left to right transfer mea-
sures in each plot are: Naive, V-Usability, PARC, T- Measure.
transfer measures A.2, i.e. PARC based models Bolya et al. (2021). Naive baseline for model
selection, chooses the model with the best performance on the corresponding source dataset. The V-
UsabilityEthayarajh et al. (2021) baseline chooses the source dataset with highest V-Usability value
which is interpreted as the easiest source dataset for the given task. We conduct the experiment for
4 tasks:
Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) is the task of assigning an emotion label to each
utterance in a conversation. Since the datasets for ERC were annotated using different granularity of
emotions, we relabeled the emotions to basic emotions (Ekman et al., 1999) using the feeling wheel
(Willcox, 1982). Therefore the task is modeled as assigning an emotion label from {”happy”, ”sad”,
”anger”, ”surprise”, ”fear”, ”disgust” ,”no emotion”} to each utterance.
Relation Classification (RC) is the task of assigning a relation type between two named entities
given a document. We selected the subset of relationships common in available datasets. These rela-
tionships are {”spouse”, ”sibling”,”boss”, ”child—parent”, ”girl/boyfriend”, ”other”}. We merged
the rest of the relations in each dataset to the ”other” relation class.
Question Answering (QA) includes a document and a set of questions which can be answered
based on the given document. In this paper, we modeled this task as the task of choosing the correct
answer from a set of provided options.
Response Selection (RS) is the task of choosing the next utterance in a conversation based on the
conversation history. We created response selection datasets for experiments from available con-
versation datasets: For each utterance in a dataset we randomly sampled 5 utterances from other
conversations and used them as wrong options while the next utterance was the correct option. To
ensure consistency, we adopt a uniform architecture for all task models, treating each task as a clas-
sification problem. In Question Answering and Response Selection, we format the training data as
a binary classification task, i.e. given a context, a question (or current utterance) and an option, the
task is to determine whether the given option is correct or not. For each task, we trained models
with similar architecture and training parameters on different source datasets. We used the publicly
available BERT based architecture for all models. The details of the performance of these models
on different datasets are available in the appendix A.4. To evaluate the model selection based on
different transfer measures, we include at least three target datasets for each task. Table ?? contains
statistics of these datasets. More details are available in the appendix A.1. In this experiment, the
probe set of target datasets consists of 100 instances. The results of this experiment are presented
in Table 3, where we report the Kendall-τ of model rankings based on different measures. We also
present the relative performance of the selected model compared to the ground truth in Figure 6.

5   A NALYSIS

Table 3 shows the results of the model selection experi-
ment. The key observations are:
Average Kendall-τ of T- Measure is always positive.
We observe that T- Measure average Kendall−τ is al-
ways positive for all tasks, i.e. the ranking based on T-
M easure robustly contains more concordant pairs com-
pared to discordant pairs.
T- Measure ranks better than Naive method. Naive
method, ranks models based on their performance on the
source dataset. This observation suggests the benefit of Figure 6: F1 score of the best selected
using a T- Measure instead of the Naive method.               model based on transfer measures.
T- Measure achieves the best transferability estimation and ranking model for three tasks. We
observe that for three tasks of Response Selection, Emotion Recognition and Question Answering
T- Measure achieves the best transferability estimation and ranking of models with Kendall-τ of 0.14,
0.33, 0.77.
T- Measure average performance is at least as good as V-Usability We observe that T- Measure


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The result of model ranking based on different transfer measures. The reported numbers are
the Kendall-τ of the ranked models based on the given transfer measure compared to the ranking of
models based on their performance on the target dataset. The size of the probe set in this experiment
for targets is 100. The PARC model uses SentenceBERT for data representation.
                  Task             Target Dataset       Naive   V-Usability   T- Measure   PARC
                                    DailyDialog          0.4       -0.8           0.0      -0.2
                                      Friends           -0.2        0.6           0.0       0.0
                                    Empathetic           0.0       -0.4           0.8      -0.6
                                    PersonaChat          0.2       -0.6           0.0       0.6
           Response Selection          Casino            0.6       -0.6           0.2       0.4
               6 Models            DailyDialog++         0.0        0.4           0.6      -0.2
                                      MuTual             0.0        0.4          -0.6      -0.2
                                      AVG τ             0.14       -0.14        0.14       -0.02

         Emotion Recognition        Empathetic           0.33      -0.33        -0.33      -1.0
                                    DailyDialog         -0.33       0.33         0.33       1.0
              3 Models
                                      Friends            0.33      -0.33          1.0      -1.0
                                      AVG τ             0.11       -0.11        0.33       -0.33

          Question Answering          Dream             0.33        1.0          1.0       0.33
                                      CIDER             1.0        0.33         0.33       0.33
               3 Models
                                      Friends           0.33        1.0          1.0       0.33
                                      AVG τ             0.55       0.77         0.77       0.33
                                      DDRel             0.66        1.0          1.0       0.66
         Relation Classification
                3 Models             DialogRE           0.0        0.33         0.33        1.0
                                    ReDocRED            0.0        0.33         0.33       0.66
                                      AVG τ             0.22       0.55         0.55       0.77

average performance is at least as good as V-Usability and Naive method in all tasks. Its perfor-
mance is similar to V-Usability in Question Answering and Relation Classification. However it
shows a better average performance on Emotion Recognition (+0.44 in τ ), and Response Selection
(+0.28 in τ ), which supports the idea of selecting a subset of the source dataset based on the target
dataset and computing their V-Usability can lead to better transferability estimation.
T- Measure is more robust compared to Naive method. We observe that Naive method is only
creating a reasonable ranking of models for the task of Response Selection. While it fails in order-
ing the trained models for more challenging tasks of Emotion Recognition, Question Answering and
Relation Classification. This failure is more prominent in the scenario where the available trained
models have high variability in their reported source performance. For example, in the task of Emo-
tion Recognition, the model trained on the DailyDialog dataset achieves 80% accuracy while the
models trained on Empathetic and Friends datasets achieve 44% and 38% accuracy on their corre-
sponding sources. However DailyDialog is not always the best performing model for a new target
dataset. Tables 4, 6 contain the model ranking scenario for the Emotion Recognition task which
provides justification for employing a T- Measure rather than ranking based on model performance
on source datasets. Although the naive model performs better than random ranking for all tasks on
average. Refer to the appendix A.4 for the table of model accuracy for all datasets and tasks.
T- Measure presents less performance variation in comparison to PARC. We observe that T-
M easure presents less variation compared to PARC. Figure 6 presents boxplots of ranking perfor-
mance of the methods. We observe that except Relation Classification tasks, the interquartile range
of T- Measure is above the other measures. Moreover the interquartile range of T- Measure is smaller
than PARC across Response Selection, Emotion Recognition and Question Answering indicating
a more robust performance compared to the PARC family. We observe that PARC based transfer
measures do not show consistent advantage over T- Measure in Table 12. Though they have a better
performance on Relation Classification, their performance on the rest of tasks is not competitive to
T- Measure. We believe this issue is mainly rooted in the zero-shot characteristics of our problem.
Relative F1 score of the selected model is high for most measures. Relative F1 score of T-
M easure based selected model is always better than PARC. We observe that for the Response
Selection task, the reported relative F1 is high for all the methods. This is mainly because of the
high performance of all source models on all targets. In other words, the difference between per-
formance of the best model and other models for every target was not high which resulted in high
values of relative F1 for all methods. Therefore, for the Response Selection task, not choosing the


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


best performing model has negligible impact. However in Emotion Recognition, Question Answer-
ing and Relation Classification, the performance of the best performing model is higher compared
to the other methods. We observe that for Question Answering and Relation Classification, model
selection based on T- Measure has resulted in getting a model with relative F1 > 0.9. Which makes
T- Measure a more reliable criteria compared to PARC based methods. Furthermore, we can con-
clude that for all tasks except Emotion Recognition, T- Measure failure cases in choosing the best
performing model happens when the difference in performance of the best model and another model
is not high. T- Measure failure in Emotion Recognition is mostly due to the difference in label distri-
bution of the datasets, i.e. the DailyDialog dataset frequently includes ”no emotion” label whereas
the Empathetic dataset rarely has a ”no emotion” label.


6   R ELATED W ORK

As pre-trained models and transfer learning gain traction, the issue of model selection in trans-
fer learning has recently garnered significant attention. Transferability is a complex combination
of model parameters (Jiang et al., 2019b; Yang et al., 2022), training, task definition, and dataset
Sinapov et al., 2015. A number of contemporary studies have concentrated on evaluating and es-
timating the transferability of models across various transfer settings. Specifically, (Bolya et al.,
2021; Kornblith et al., 2018) examined trained models to discern features that optimize transfer ca-
pabilities. (Bolya et al., 2021) introduced a scalable framework designed to predict the accuracy of
a model on a specific dataset post-fine-tuning, while (Kornblith et al., 2018) demonstrated a corre-
lation between the accuracy of pre-trained and fine-tuned models.
Another body of work, including (Bao et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2019), has zeroed
in on quantifying and characterizing different tasks, with (Achille et al., 2019) shedding light on task
transfers in particular. Among these, (Bao et al., 2019) introduced an innovative metric, the H-score,
which provides a straightforward evaluation method for gauging the efficacy of transferring repre-
sentations between tasks in classification contexts. LEEP, as detailed in (Nguyen et al., 2020), offers
a quantitative metric for the ease of transferring knowledge between classification tasks. (Tran et al.,
2019), on the other hand, evaluates the complexity of supervised classification tasks by analyzing
label statistics as if they were random variables. Additionally, (Albalak et al., 2022) established a
benchmark specifically for task transfers in dialogue systems. Recently, (Tan et al., 2021) introduced
a transferability measure which takes into account data difficulty and task difficulty.
Previous transfer measures, are built on the assumption of having enough labeled data in the target
task and domain. However, in the real world, there often isn’t readily available annotated data,
or creating such datasets can be prohibitively costly (Tan et al., 2018). This situation highlights
the practical significance of transfer learning, particularly in cases where labeled data is scarce or
expensive to obtain. A body of work Ben-David et al. (2010); Huang et al. (2021); Li et al. (2020)
has focused on methods for unsupervised domain adaptation. More recent works, such as (Huh et al.,
2016; Yan et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022; Ilyas et al., 2022), delved into quantifying the attributes
of the source dataset and its influence on transferability. For instance, (Yan et al., 2020) developed
a data server that identifies the most pertinent subset of source data for a novel dataset, and (Zhao
et al., 2022) investigated the specific characteristics of data that enhance its suitability for few-shot
learning and questioned if these are independent of adaptation methods.
Recent research has been looking at pre-trained models and the representation they learn (Peters
et al., 2019). More specifically, it’s trying to understand and predict how these models behave in
transfer learning(You et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2019a; Peters et al., 2019).


7   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we defined the problem of data-centric transfer estimation in zero-shot transfer. We
introduced T- Measure and proposed the method to estimate it. We conducted experiments to show
the effect of using the introduced transfer measures for the model selection task. In the future, we
plan to expand the T- Measure estimation to estimate transferability based on other transfer con-
founders. In particular, we plan to introduce a general transfer measure and model selection tool
which can help people with choosing the best model based on their conditions and requirements.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alessandro Achille, Michael Lam, Rahul Tewari, Avinash Ravichandran, Subhransu Maji, Char-
  less C. Fowlkes, Stefano Soatto, and Pietro Perona. Task2vec: Task embedding for meta-learning.
  2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 6429–6438, 2019.
Alon Albalak, Yi-Lin Tuan, Pegah Jandaghi, Connor Pryor, Luke Yoffe, Deepak Ramachandran,
  Lise Getoor, Jay Pujara, and William Yang Wang. Feta: A benchmark for few-sample task transfer
  in open-domain dialogue. ArXiv, abs/2205.06262, 2022.
Yajie Bao, Yang Li, Shao-Lun Huang, Lin Zhang, Lizhong Zheng, Amir Zamir, and Leonidas
  Guibas. An information-theoretic approach to transferability in task transfer learning. In
  2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2309–2313, 2019. doi:
  10.1109/ICIP.2019.8803726.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando C Pereira, and Jen-
  nifer Wortman Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine Learning, 79:
  151–175, 2010. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8577357.
Daniel Bolya, Rohit Mittapalli, and Judy Hoffman. Scalable diverse model selection for accessible
  transfer learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Kushal Chawla, Jaysa Ramirez, Rene Clever, Gale Lucas, Jonathan May, and Jonathan Gratch.
  CaSiNo: A corpus of campsite negotiation dialogues for automatic negotiation systems. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3167–3185, Online, June 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.254. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.254.
Leyang Cui, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Yue Zhang, and Ming Zhou. MuTual: A dataset for multi-turn
  dialogue reasoning. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, pp. 1406–1416, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.130. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.130.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ArXiv, abs/1810.04805, 2019. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52967399.
Paul Ekman et al. Basic emotions. Handbook of cognition and emotion, 98(45-60):16, 1999.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. Understanding dataset difficulty with
  ${V}$-usable information. 2021.
Deepanway Ghosal, Pengfei Hong, Siqi Shen, Navonil Majumder, Rada Mihalcea, and Soujanya
  Poria. Cider: Commonsense inference for dialogue explanation and reasoning. In SIGDIAL
  Conferences, 2021.
Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Behnam Hedayatnia, Qinlang Chen, Anna Gottardi, Sanjeev Kwa-
  tra, Anu Venkatesh, Raefer Gabriel, and Dilek Hakkani-Tür.     Topical-Chat: Towards
  Knowledge-Grounded Open-Domain Conversations. In Proc. Interspeech 2019, pp. 1891–1895,
  2019. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-3079. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.21437/
  Interspeech.2019-3079.
Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Aoran Xiao, and Shijian Lu. Model adaptation: Historical con-
   trastive learning for unsupervised domain adaptation without source data. In Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   238418996.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Minyoung Huh, Pulkit Agrawal, and Alexei A. Efros. What makes imagenet good for transfer
 learning? ArXiv, abs/1608.08614, 2016.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data, 2022.
Qi Jia, Hongru Huang, and Kenny Q. Zhu. Ddrel: A new dataset for interpersonal relation
  classification in dyadic dialogues. ArXiv, abs/2012.02553, 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:227305795.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them. ArXiv, abs/1912.02178, 2019a. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:204893960.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them, 2019b.
Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. Do better imagenet models transfer better?
  2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2656–
  2666, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:43928547.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Rui Li, Qianfen Jiao, Wenming Cao, Hau-San Wong, and Si Wu. Model adaptation: Unsupervised
  domain adaptation without source data. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9638–9647, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00966.
Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. DailyDialog: A man-
  ually labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 986–995, Taipei,
  Taiwan, November 2017. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/I17-1099.
Che Liu, Rui Wang, Jinghua Liu, Jian Sun, Fei Huang, and Luo Si. Dialoguecse: Dialogue-based
  contrastive learning of sentence embeddings, 2021.
Cuong V Nguyen, Tal Hassner, C. Archambeau, and Matthias W. Seeger. Leep: A new measure to
  evaluate transferability of learned representations. ArXiv, abs/2002.12462, 2020.
Matthew E. Peters, Sebastian Ruder, and Noah A. Smith. To tune or not to tune? adapting pre-
 trained representations to diverse tasks. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Representation
 Learning for NLP (RepL4NLP-2019), pp. 7–14, Florence, Italy, August 2019. Association for
 Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-4302. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/W19-4302.
Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and Y-Lan Boureau. Towards empathetic open-
  domain conversation models: A new benchmark and dataset. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. ArXiv, abs/1908.10084, 2019.
Ananya B. Sai, Akash Kumar Mohankumar, Siddharth Arora, and Mitesh M. Khapra. Improving
  dialog evaluation with a multi-reference adversarial dataset and large scale pretraining. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:810–827, 2020.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 815–823, 2015.
Jivko Sinapov, Sanmit Narvekar, Matteo Leonetti, and Peter Stone. Learning inter-task transfer-
   ability in the absence of target task samples. In Adaptive Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2015.
   URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16510135.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kai Sun, Dian Yu, Jianshu Chen, Dong Yu, Yejin Choi, and Claire Cardie. Dream: A challenge data
  set and models for dialogue-based reading comprehension. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 7:217–231, 2019.
Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. A survey
  on deep transfer learning. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, 2018. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:51929263.
Qingyu Tan, Lu Xu, Lidong Bing, Hwee Tou Ng, and Sharifah Mahani Aljunied. Revisiting docred
  – addressing the false negative problem in relation extraction. In Proceedings of EMNLP, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12696.
Yang Tan, Yang Li, and Shao-Lun Huang. Otce: A transferability metric for cross-domain cross-
  task representations. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR), pp. 15774–15783, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:232352783.
A. Tran, Cuong V Nguyen, and Tal Hassner. Transferability and hardness of supervised classification
  tasks. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1395–1405,
  2019.
Gloria Willcox. The feeling wheel: A tool for expanding awareness of emotions and increasing
  spontaneity and intimacy. Transactional Analysis Journal, 12(4):274–276, 1982. doi: 10.1177/
  036215378201200411. URL https://doi.org/10.1177/036215378201200411.
Xi Yan, David Acuna, and Sanja Fidler. Neural data server: A large-scale search engine for transfer
  learning data. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 3892–3901, 2020.
Greg Yang, Edward J. Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer, 2022.
Kaichao You, Yong Liu, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Logme: Practical assessment of
  pre-trained models for transfer learning. ArXiv, abs/2102.11005, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231985863.
Dian Yu, Kai Sun, Claire Cardie, and Dong Yu. Dialogue-based relation extraction. In Proceed-
  ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08056v1.
Sayyed M. Zahiri and Jinho D. Choi. Emotion detection on tv show transcripts with sequence-based
  convolutional neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1708.04299, 2017.
Amir Roshan Zamir, Alexander Sax, Bokui (William) Shen, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and
 Silvio Savarese. Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3712–3722, 2018. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5046249.
Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur D. Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston.
  Personalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Xinran Zhao, Shikhar Murty, and Christopher Manning. On measuring the intrinsic few-shot
  hardness of datasets. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
  ral Language Processing, pp. 3955–3963, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  emnlp-main.262.
Pei Zhou, Hyundong J. Cho, Pegah Jandaghi, Dong-Ho Lee, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jay Pujara, and Xiang
  Ren. Reflect not reflex: Inference-based common ground improves dialogue response quality.
  In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  2022a.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhihan Zhou, Dejiao Zhang, Wei Xiao, Nicholas Dingwall, Xiaofei Ma, Andrew O. Arnold, and
  Bing Xiang. Learning dialogue representations from consecutive utterances, 2022b.



A     A PPENDIX

A.1   DATASETS

Daily Dialog (Li et al., 2017) is a dyadic text dataset containing conversations like typical daily
communication. The conversations are short and focused on a specific topic. The conversations in
this dataset have utterance level annotation for the task of emotion recognition and dialog act. The
annotation for the emotion recognition are based on six basic emotions(Ekman et al., 1999).
Daily Dialog++ (Sai et al., 2020) is an extension of Daily Dialog that contains incorrect response
options for each utterance. The incorrect responses are two types i.e. random and adversarial. Ran-
dom incorrect responses are utterances randomly selected from other conversations. Adversarial
incorrect responses are created by human annotators.
Friends(Zahiri & Choi, 2017) is a dataset based on the popular sitcom with the same name. This
dataset contains transcript of conversations among actors and actresses for all 10 seasons of the
show. The dataset is annotated for several tasks: emotion recognition, causal entailment, question
answering, etc.
Empathetic dialogs(Rashkin et al., 2018) includes conversations with dialog level emotion annota-
tion. The emotion labels include 32 classes.
Topical chat(Gopalakrishnan et al., 2019) is a conversational dataset, where each conversation is
focused on one topic selected from 8 specific topics. The dataset is created via MTurk.
Persona chat(Zhang et al., 2018) is a dialog dataset collected via MTurk. In each conversation,
speakers are given a set of sentences called persona and are asked to talk and get to know the other
speaker.
CaSiNo(Chawla et al., 2021) is a conversational dataset where speakers are negotiating for resources
in a limited domain. Each participant is given a set of requirements and preferences and negotiates
with another participant for resources such as Water. It includes utterance level annotation for the
participant strategy for negotiation.
Reflect(Zhou et al., 2022a) is a dialog dataset created based on the one-to-many property of con-
versations. It includes 5 different inference types and responses based on them for the utterances
collected by human.
MuTual(Cui et al., 2020) is a conversational dataset translated from Chinese Reading Comprehen-
sion exam. It includes multi-turn dialogues. It includes annotations for the task of response selection
in multi-turn dialogues.
CIDER (Ghosal et al., 2021) is a conversational dataset annotated for the task of dialog explana-
tion. Additionally it includes annotation for tasks of span extraction, common sense inference and
multiple choice span selection.
DREAM (Sun et al., 2019) is a multiple choice question answering dataset. Documents are conver-
sations selected from the English-as-a-foreign-language examinations and questions are created by
human experts.
ReDocRED (Tan et al., 2022) is a revision of the DocRED dataset which is widely used for docu-
ment level relation extraction. It includes annotation for 95 different relations.
DDRel (Jia et al., 2020) is a dataset for interpersonal relation classification in dyadic conversations.
The conversations are extracted from movie scripts in IMSDB and they include annotation for 13
classes of relations.
DialogRE (Yu et al., 2020) is a human annotated conversations extracted from Friends sitcom. It
includes annotation for 36 relation types between a pair of arguments in a dialogue.


A.2   A DAPTING TASK - CENTRIC T RANSFER M EASURES

As mentioned in 3, T- Measure is the first data-centric transfer measure in zero-shot setting. In this
section, we create semantically equivalent data-centric measures based on previous task-centric mea-
sures. Particularly, we create data-centric Pairwise Annotation Representation Comparison (PARC)
based on the task-centric PARC (Bolya et al., 2021).


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pairwise Annotation Representation Comparison (PARC) is a measure to compute the trans-
ferability of the model during task transfer i.e. for a trained model ϕ with parameters (Tsrc , D, β),
PARC estimates the transferabilty of ϕ on a target task Ttrg . To compute the transferabiltiy it re-
quires a labeled set of the dataset D for Ttrg which they refer to as the target probe set P. We
represent probe set P as a set of pairs (x, y) where x is a datapoint in D and y is its label for Ttrg .
PARC computes the following distance matrices given the probe set P:
                     Aϕ = 1 − corrcoef (f (x)) , Atrg = 1 − corrcoef (g(y))                           (14)
where correcoef is the Pearson corelation matrix, f (x) is the feature vector of the datapoint x and
g(y) is a function of the label of dataset. e.g. for the task of classification g can be the one-hot vector
of the classes. Then they compute the transfer estimation as:
               P ARC(ϕ, P) = Spearmanr({Aϕ [i, j] : i < j}, {Atrg [i, j] : i < j})                    (15)
PARC assumes that model transferability is higher if datapoints with similar features have similar
label for the target task. Therefore it estimates the corelation between distance matrices of datapoint
in the feature space and in the target label space.
We use the similar idea of pairwise distances and create data-centric PARC in zero-shot setting. For
a trained model ϕ with parameters (T, Dsrc , β), data-centric PARC, estimates the transferabiltiy of
ϕ on target dataset Dtrg . Let P be an unlabeled probe set from Dtrg . We create distance matrices:
                     Aϕ = 1 − corrcoef (R(x)) , Atrg = 1 − corrcoef (ϕ(x))                            (16)
Where x is a datapoint in the probe set and ϕ(x) is the models output for the datapoint x and R(x)
is the representation of the datapoint in a dataset representation space R. Similar to the task-centric
PARC, we compute the transferability as follows:
             P ARCdata (ϕ, P) = Spearmanr({Aϕ [i, j] : i < j}, {Atrg [i, j] : i < j})                 (17)
We implement different versions of PARC by assigning different representation space R and probe
sets.

A.3    M ODEL S ELECTION E XPERIMENT

In this section, we include the additional tables used to create the final model selection evaluation
table. Tables 4, 5, 9, 11 contain the ground truth of models performance in zero-shot transfer for
different tasks. Table 6, 7, 8, 10 contains the T- Measure values assiged for each source task give a
target dataset.

                        Table 4: Accuracy of the transferred models for ERC.

                                                        Source Dataset
                        Target Dataset    Empathetic       DailyDialog    Friends
                         Empathetic           0.44            0.31          0.28
                         DailyDialog          0.11             0.8          0.35
                           Friends            0.18            0.49          0.38


                         Table 5: Accuracy of the transferred models for QA.

                                                        Source Dataset
                           Target Dataset     DREAM         CIDER     Friends
                              DREAM              0.43        0.54        0.58
                              CIDER              0.44        0.99        0.97
                              Friends            0.48        0.83        0.88


A.4    R ESULTS


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Table 6: T- Measure for ERC.

                                                     Source Dataset
                    Target Dataset      Empathetic        DailyDialog    Friends
                     Empathetic            0.50              0.44          0.19
                     DailyDialog           0.26              0.44          0.18
                       Friends             0.26              0.47          0.24



                                    Table 7: T- Measure for QA.

                                                     Source Dataset
                         Target Dataset    DREAM           CIDER      Friends
                           DREAM              1.13          0.56        0.63
                           CIDER              0.62          0.57        0.71
                           Friends            0.61          0.65        0.59



                                    Table 8: T- Measure for RC.

                                                     Source Dataset
                      Target Dataset      DDRel         DialogRE    ReDocRED
                           DDRel          0.27            1.80          0.43
                          DialogRE        0.08            1.76          0.35
                         ReDocRED         0.13            1.83          0.51



                      Table 9: Accuracy of the transferred models for RC.

                                                     Source Dataset
                      Target Dataset      DDRel         DialogRE    ReDocRED
                           DDRel          0.29            0.49          0.23
                          DialogRE        0.07            0.76          0.8
                         ReDocRED         0.01            0.98          0.99



                     Table 10: Accuracy of the transferred models for RS.

                                                     Source Dataset
        Target Dataset    DailyDialog      Friends       Empathetic     PersonaChat   Casino
         DailyDialog         0.72           0.76            0.75           0.72        0.61
           Friends           0.44           0.75            0.60           0.72        0.62
         Empathetic          0.40           0.63            0.63           0.69        0.70
         PersonaChat         0.56           0.73            0.61           0.81        0.59
            Casino           0.40           0.64            0.69           0.76        0.74
        DailyDialog++        0.87           0.73            0.71           0.70        0.70
           MuTual            0.63           0.66            0.59           0.72        0.73



                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 11: Accuracy of the transferred models for RS.

                                                                        Source Dataset
            Target Dataset          DailyDialog          Friends          Empathetic           PersonaChat       Casino
            DailyDialog                       1            0.99                 0.99              0.99            0.99
              Friends                       0.99           0.98                  0.9              0.96            0.95
            Empathetic                        1             1                     1                 1              1
            PersonaChat                       1            0.99                 0.99                1              1
               Casino                       0.94           0.89                 0.89               0.9            0.97
           DailyDialog++                      1             1                     1                 1              1
              MuTual                        0.74           0.72                 0.71              0.71            0.72


Table 12: The result of model selection based on different transfer measures. The reported numbers
are the Kendall-τ of the ranked models based on the given transfer measure. The size of the probe
set in this experiment for all targets is 100. The PARC(SBERT) is the PARC based model that uses
SentenceBERT for data representation. PARC(Rsrc ) is a PARC based model that uses a source
dataset specific representation space. PARC(TRG) is the version which considers the point-wise
co-relation between target and source in computing the transfer measure.

          Task             Target Dataset    Naive   V-Usability    T- Measure    PARC(SBERT)      PARC(Rsrc )   PARC(TRG)   TM
                            DailyDialog       0.4       -0.8             0.0           -0.2           0.4           -0.8
                              Friends         -0.2       0.6             0.0            0.0           -0.4          -0.2
                            Empathetic        0.0       -0.4             0.8           -0.6           0.4            0.4
                            PersonaChat       0.2       -0.6             0.0            0.6           -0.2           0.4
  Response Selection           Casino         0.6       -0.6             0.2            0.4           0.6            0.4
      6 Models             DailyDialog++      0.0        0.4             0.6           -0.2           -0.4          -0.2
                              MuTual          0.0        0.4            -0.6           -0.2           -0.4           0.4
                              AVG τ           0.14     -0.14             0.14          -0.02           0.09         0.05
                            Relative F1      0.994     0.994            0.949          0.913          0.904        0.904

 Emotion Recognition        Empathetic        0.33      -0.33           -0.33          -1.0           -1.0          -1.0
                            DailyDialog      -0.33      0.33             0.33           1.0           1.0            1.0
      3 Models
                              Friends         0.33      -0.33             1.0          -1.0           -1.0           1.0
                              AVG τ           0.11     -0.11             0.33          -0.33          -0.33         0.33
                            Relative F1      0.901     0.501            0.637          0.501           0.37        0.803

  Question Answering          Dream           0.33       1.0             1.0           0.33            0.33         0.33
                              CIDER           1.0       0.33            0.33           0.33            0.33         1.0
       3 Models
                              Friends         0.33       1.0             1.0           0.33           -0.33        -0.33
                              AVG τ           0.55     0.77              0.77          0.33            0.11         0.33
                            Relative F1      0.960     0.962            0.966          0.943          0.924        0.966
                              DDRel           0.66       1.0             1.0           0.66           0.66          0.33
 Relation Classification
        3 Models             DialogRE         0.0       0.33            0.33            1.0           0.66          1.0
                            ReDocRED          0.0       0.33            0.33           0.66           0.66          0.33
                              AVG τ           0.22     0.55              0.55          0.77            0.66         0.55
                            Relative F1      0.823     0.979            0.979          0.556          0.843        0.559


                                                                   16
