Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ICA MODEL ESTIMATION USING AN OPTIMIZED VER -
SION OF GENETIC ALGORITHMS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         This paper presents a method of estimating the independent component analysis
         model based on the use of a training algorithm based on an optimized version
         of genetic algorithms with a neural network algorithm. The mixed training algo-
         rithm is applied to optimize the objective function negentropy used to estimate
         the ICA model. The proposed estimation algorithm improves the training scheme
         based on genetic algorithms by using for crossover the most suitable chromosomes
         evaluated by the objective function with the parameters calculated calculated ac-
         cordingly by a multilayer neural network algorithm. The performances of the
         proposed algorithm for estimating the independent components were evaluated
         through a comparative analysis with the versions of FastICA algorithms based on
         the standard Newton method, as well as on the secant method of derivation of the
         training scheme at the level of the optimization stage of the approximate objec-
         tive function. The experimental results for the proposed algorithm for estimating
         the independent components are established in specific blind source separation
         applications using unidimensional and bidimensional signals.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In various research fields such as signal processing, mathematical statistics or neural networks, an
important problem is the need to obtain adequate representations for multidimensional data. The
problem can be formulated in terms of finding a function f such that the n dimensional transform
defined by s = f (x) possesses some desired properties, where x is a m dimensional random vector.
Being given its computational simplicity, frequently the linear approach is attractive, that is the
transform is
                                              s = Wx                                             (1)
where W is a matrix to be optimally determined from the point of view of a pre-established crite-
rion. There are a long series of methods and principles already proposed in the literature for solv-
ing the problem of fitting an adequate linear transform for multidimensional data as for instance,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), factor analysis, projection methods and Independent Com-
ponent Analysis (3), (6), (18), (19). The aim of Independent Component Analysis is to determine
a transform such that the components si , i = 1..n becomes statistically independent, or at least al-
most statistically independent. In order to find a suitable linear transform to assure that equation 1
si , i = 1..n become ’nearly’ statistically independent several methods have been developed so far.
Some of them, as for instance Principal Component Analysis and factor analysis are second order
approaches, that is they use exclusively the information contained by the covariance matrix of the
random vector x, some of them, as for instance the projection methods and blind deconvolution are
higher order methods that use an additional information to reduce the redundancies in the data. Inde-
pendent Component Analysis has became one of the most promising approaches in this respect and,
consists in the estimation of the generative model of the form x = As, where the s = (s1 s2 , . . . sn )T
are supposed to be independent, and A is the mixing matrix m × n− dimensional of the model. The
data model estimation in the framework of independent component analysis is stated in terms of
a variational problem formulated on a given objective function (5), (24). The aim of the research
reported in this paper is to introduce a new version of the FastICA algorithm; an algorithm that is
based on genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks and to analyze the performances of the
algorithm in blind signal separation applications.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     D ERIVATION OF TRAINING ALGORITHM FOR INDEPENDENT COMPONENT
      ESTIMATION BASED ON GENETIC ALGORITHMS AND NEURAL NETWORKS

2.1   T HE STANDARD FAST ICA A LGORITHM

In this part the ICA model and the standard FastICA algorithm are briefly exposed. The ICA model
is state as x = As, where x is the observations vector and A is the mixing matrix of the original
sources, s. The aim is to determine the sources, on the basis of x. One of the basic working
assumption in estimation the ICA model is that the sources s are statistically independent and they
have nongaussian distributions. This way the problem becomes to find the weighting matrix W (the
demixing matrix), such that the transform y = W x gives suitable approximations of the independent
sources. In the following, the standard version of the independent components estimation algorithm
using negentropy as objective function is presented (18). The negentropy is defined by:
                                      I(y) = H(ygauss ) − H(y)                                        (2)
                   R
where H(y) = − py (η) log py (η)dη is the differential entropy of the random vector y. Consider-
ing that that the Gaussian repartition is of largest differential entropy in the class of the repartitions
having the same covariance matrix, the maximization of the negentropy (2) gives the best estimation
of the ICA model. Although this approaches is well founded from information point of view the di-
rect use of the expression (2) is not computationally tractable, and some approximations are needed
instead. We use the approximation introduced in (Hyvarinen, 98):
                                                                     2
                                  I(y) = [E {G(y)} − E {G(ν)}]                                        (3)
where G is an nonquadratic function, ν and y are Gaussian variables of zero mean and unit variance.
Some of the most frequently used expressions of G are, G1 (y) = a11 log cosh(a1 y); 1 ≤ a1 ≤ 2,
                       2               4
G2 (y) = − exp(− y2 ); G3 (y) = y4 . Note that the expressions of their first order derivatives are
                                                        2
given by: g1 (y) = tanh(a1 y); g2 (y) = y exp(− y2 ); g3 (y) = y 3 , respectively. The variational
problem can be formulated as a constraint optimization problem as follows,
                                                            2
                                           max F (w), ∥w∥ = 1                                         (4)
that is the objective function F (w) has to be maximized on the unit sphere. In case the negentropy
is taken as the objective function, we get,
                                                                      2
                                  F (w) = [E {G(y)} − E {G(ν)}]                                       (5)
where y = wT z. To solve the optimization problem from the equation 4 relation we write the
Lagrange function using the Lagrange multiplications method:
                                                                2
                                    L(w) = F (w) − λ(∥w∥ − 1)                                         (6)
The weighting vectors being normalized, we arrive at the following approximation scheme,
                                   ′
     1. w ← E{zg wT z } − E{g wT z }w
      2. w ← w/ ∥w∥.

A detailed version of the FastICA algorithm based on Lagrange function and Newton method is
described in the following scheme.

The standard FastICA algorithm based on Lagrange function and Newton method

Step 1 : Center the data to make its mean zero.
Step 2 : Applying the whitening transformation and obtaining the data signals z.
Step 3 : Choose the number of independent components n and set counter r ← 1.
Step 4 : Choose an initial approximation (usually randomly generated subunit values) of unit norm
         for wr .


                                                    2
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Step 5 : Let
                                                         ′
                                    w ← E{zg wT z } − E{g wT z }w

                                                                                                     (7)

          where g is previously defined (versions              :   g1 (y)   =   tanh(a1 y); g2 (y)    =
                    2
          y exp(− y2 ); g3 (y) = y 3 ).
 Step 6 : Do the orthogonalization transform:
                                                        r−1
                                                        X
                                           wr ← wr −        (wrT wj )wj                              (8)
                                                        j=1


 Step 7 : Let wr ← wr /∥wr ∥.
 Step 8 : If wr has not converged (< wn+1 , wn > ↛ 1), go back to step 5.
 Step 9 : Set r ← r + 1. If r ≤ n then go to step 4.
Step 10 : The discovered signals are determined based on the weight vectors w1 , ..., wn as follows:
          s discoveredi = wi T ∗ z, for i = 1..n.

 2.2   G ENETIC ALGORITHMS

 Genetic algorithms are adaptive heuristic search techniques based on principles genetics and natural
 selection, stated by Darwin (survival of the best adapted). The mechanism is similar to the biological
 process of evolution. According to this process only the species that adapt better to the environment
 are able to survive and evolve over generations, while those less adapted do not manage to survive
 and eventually disappear, as a result of natural selection. The probability that the species will sur-
 vive and evolve over generations becomes greater as the degree of adaptation increases, which in
 terms of optimization means that the solution approaches the optimum (17), (21). As practical ap-
 plications, genetic algorithms are most often used in solving problems of optimization, planning or
 search. Evolutionary algorithms use a vocabulary borrowed from genetics: the evolution is simu-
 lated through a sequence of generations of a population of candidate solutions; a candidate solution
 is called a chromosome and is represented as a string of genes; the population evolves through the
 application of genetic operators: selection, mutation and crossing; the chromosome on which a ge-
 netic operator is applied is called the parent and the chromosome the result is called the descendant;
 selection is the process by which the chromosomes that will survive in the generation are chosen
 next; better adapted individuals will be given greater chances; the degree of adaptation to the en-
 vironment is measured by the fitness function; the solution returned by a genetic algorithm is the
 best individual from the last generation. The fitness function is used to measure the quality of the
 chromosomes. She is formulated starting from the numerical function to be optimized. The general
 structure of a genetic algorithm Set the time t ← 0. Creation of the initial population P (t). Evalua-
 tion of the initial population with the fitness function (f itness(P (t))). While the final condition is
 false: t ← t + 1, Selection of new generation P (t) from P (t − 1), Application of the crossover op-
 erator for the selected chromosomes for the new population P (t), Evaluation of the new population
 with the fitness function (f itness(P (t))) and determining the final chromosomes (keeping the best
 chromosomes).

 2.3   T HE FAST ICA A LGORITHM VERSION BASED ON THE G ENETIC A LGORITHMS AND
       A RTIFICIAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

 This part for the ICA model describes the FastICA type algorithm developed by using genetic al-
 gorithms to optimize the negentropy objective function, as well as artificial neural networks in the
 process of crossing the genes of the selected chromosomes to produce the new generation of chro-
 mosomes. In the following, the numerical estimation of the independent components is going to
 be obtained using the genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks approaches, the variational
 problem being imposed on the negentropy taken as criterion function. The variational problem can
 be formulated as a constraint optimization problem as follows,
                                                           2
                                        max F (w), ∥w∥ = 1                                           (9)


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that is the objective function F (w) has to be maximized on the unit sphere. In case the negentropy
is taken as the objective function, we get,
                                                                  2
                                F (w) = [E {G(y)} − E {G(ν)}]                                   (10)
where y = wT z. To solve the optimization problem from the equation 9 relation a genetic algorithm
will be used to maximize the objective function F (w). In the stages of transformation of the chro-
mosomes in the current population, by using genetic operators, a artificial neural networks model
will be used for crossing the genes of the chromosomes selected for reproduction. For the proposed
model, the optimization of the objective function F (w)) is achieved by using a genetic algorithm
in which the roulette type method is used in the selection stage of candidate chromosomes for the
new generation, in the reproduction stage the intermediate recombination method combined with a
model is used the backpropagation algorithm from artificial neural networks, with only one hidden
layer in the neural architecture and 12 neurons on the hidden layer, that calculates the appropriate
values of the recombination weights by referring to the performance standard achieved in the previ-
ous generation by the best chromosome evaluated by the fitness function, and in the mutation step
the Gaussian mutation model is used. Looking at the crossing stage, the combined method with arti-
ficial neural networks (CMCNN learning algorithm - combined method for crossover with artificial
neural networks) can be formulated as follows:

     1) for each Wi chromosome from the N chromosomes selected in the selection stage, in order
        to create the new generation, N − 1 artificial neural networks (denoted by N Wi1 , N Wi2 ,
        ..., N WiN −1 ) corresponding to the other N − 1 chromosomes initially chosen are designed
        and developed.
     2) the artificial neural networks N Wi1 , N Wi2 , ..., N WiN −1 establish a learning process of
        the memory weights associated with the intermediate recombination weights from the re-
        production stage of the genetic algorithm used.
     3) the training law for the N Wij neural network is based on the backpropagation training
        algorithm with the target value returned by the objective function value for the best chro-
        mosome from the previous generation of chromosomes.
     4) Finally, the values of the synaptic weights corresponding to the neural network N Wij will
        be chosen for which the best approximation of the target value is obtained. The neural
        network N Wij provides the following information: the values of the synaptic weights
        represent the most suitable values for the weights used in the crossover stage of the genes
        of the Wi chromosome, and the Wj chromosome is the most suitable for the crossover with
        Wi in order to create new chromosomes for the next generation.

A detailed version of the FastICA algorithm based on Genetic Algorithms and Artificial Neural
Networks is described in the following scheme.

The standard FastICA algorithm based on Genetic Algorithms and Artificial Neural Networks
(ICAGNN)

     1 : Center the data to make its mean zero.
     2 : Applying the whitening transformation and obtaining the data signals z.
     3 : Choose the number of independent components n and set counter r ← 1.
     4 : Choose an initial approximation (usually randomly generated subunit values) of unit norm
         for wr .
     5 : The weight vector wr is determined by applying the genetic algorithm (GA).
        5.1 : Set the time t ← 0.
        5.2 : creation of the initial population P (t) = {W1 , ..., WM } for the weight vector wr and
              M is the number of chromosomes.
        5.3 : Evaluation of the initial population with the fitness function F (w).
        5.4 : While the final condition is false (the convergence condition is rendered by a maxi-
              mum number of generations or insignificant updates between epochs):
              a. t ← t + 1.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              b. Apply the chromosome selection operator that participates in the formation of the
                 new generation of chromosomes by the roulette method. The set of chromosomes
                 selected, by renumbering, are SP (t) = {W1 , ..., WM }, with M < N , SP repre-
                 sents the selected chromosomes.
              c. Application of the CMCNN learning algorithm for the selected chromosomes
                 SP (t). The target value is set by the objective function value for the best chro-
                 mosome in the previous generation. The obtained values of the synaptic weights
                 represent the most suitable values for the weights used in the crossover stage of
                 the genes of the Wi chromosome, and the Wj chromosome is the most suitable for
                 the crossover with Wi in order to create new chromosomes for the next generation.
              d. New descendant chromosomes are determined by crossing the genes of the corre-
                 sponding Wi and Wj chromosomes by using the crossing weights resulting from
                 the CMCNN learning algorithm.
              e. The mutation operator in the Gaussian variant is applied for some chromosomes
                 resulting from crossing.
              f. Do the orthogonalization transform for the obtained chromosomes:
                                                            r−1
                                                            X
                                             Ws ← Ws −          (WsT wj )wj                        (11)
                                                            j=1

                  with s = 1..M .
               g. Evaluation of the chromosomes population (new descendant chromosomes result-
                  ing after crossing over, mutation and orthogonalized and chromosomes from the
                  current population P (t − 1)) with the fitness function F (w) and determining the
                  final chromosomes (eg keeping the best chromosomes).
        5.5 : The best chromosome from the last generation from the point of view of the fitness
              function will denote the weight vector wr set for the r independent component.
     6 : Let wr ← wr /∥wr ∥.
     7 : Set r ← r + 1. If r ≤ n then go to step 4.
     8 : The discovered signals are determined based on the weight vectors w1 , ..., wn as follows:
         s discoveredi = wi T ∗ z, for i = 1..n.
     9 : Evaluation of the error that occurs in the process of discovering the original signals from the
         mixed signals for the n independent components (the absolute distance type error function
         calculated for the discovered independent signals and the original ones will be used).

3   RELATED WORK
The development of the field of independent components analysis led to the appearance of sev-
eral works that bring improvements to the standard FastICA algorithm for determining the original
sources from mixtures of multidimensional input data. J.M. Gorriz and C.G. Puntonet proposed a
genetic algorithm to minimize a non-convex and nonlinear cost function based on statistical esti-
mators for solving the independent component analysis problem of blind source separation (12). H.
Yaping, L. Siwei proposed a new ICA feature selection based on genetic algorithms. To demonstrate
its effectiveness, recognition experiments were conducted for face and iris recognition (36). Also,
H. Shahamat and A.A. Pouyan proposed a new method for classifying subjects into schizophrenia
and control groups using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. In the preprocessing
step, the number of fMRI time points was reduced using principal component analysis. Then, in-
dependent component analysis was used for further data analysis and for feature selection, genetic
algorithm was used to obtain a set of features with high discriminating power (31).

4   EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
To evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm based on genetic algorithms and neural
networks, three categories of input data (input signals) are considered. Each category of data in-
cludes signals generated with a certain probability distribution or two-dimensional signals. Thus,


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           AFTER ICA(tanh)                    Marginal PDF2                           AFTER Mixing                      Marginal PDF2                        PDF COMUN                     Marginal PDF2

                 4                                4                                                                                                                4                              4
                                                                                         10                                    10
                 2                                2                                                                                                                2                              2

                 0                                0                                       0                                     0                                  0                              0

                −2                               −2                                                                                                               −2                             −2
                                                                                        −10                                −10
                −4                               −4                                                                                                               −4                             −4
                      −5         0           5        0   2       4     6      8               −10    −5   0    5     10            0   1      2        3               −5         0         5        0   0.005   0.01     0.015
                                                                                   −3                                                                       −3
                                                                              x 10                                                                      x 10
                            Marginal PDF1                                                        −3   Marginal PDF1                                                          Marginal PDF1
                                                                                              x 10
                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                 0.06
              0.015                                                                       2
                                                                                        1.5                                                                      0.04
               0.01
                                                                                          1
              0.005                                                                                                                                              0.02
                                                                                        0.5
                 0                                                                        0                                                                        0
                      −5         0           5                                                 −10    −5   0    5     10                                                −5         0         5


Figure 1: Test I - 2 normal signals (density function of Discovered signals, Mixed Signals and
Original Signals)


Figure 2: Test I - data density functions used in cases with 3, 5 and 7 signals with normal distribution


the three categories include data generated with uniform distribution, normal distribution, respec-
tively, face images. For each category of data, a comparative study is carried out regarding the
performance of determining the independent components with a variation in the number of input
data (the cases with 2 mixed signals, 3 mixed signals, 5 mixed signals, respectively, 7 mixed sig-
nals for each data category are analyzed signals). Also, for each category of data and each number
of mixed input signals, the experimental results are established both for the proposed based algo-
rithm (ICAGNN) and for the versions of the standard FastICA algorithm based on the use of the
negentropy objective function optimization through the Lagrange method and Newton or secant
numerical methods. For the population of chromosomes used by the genetic algorithm, between
20-50 chromosomes were gradually used, and the size of each chromosome is represented by the
size of the representation space of the mixed input signals for the algorithm. In order to establish
the performances in the discovery of independent signals from mixed signals, the average abso-
lute error at the level of the values of the compared signals was used, and also the average value
of the number of iterations required for the convergence of the weight vectors associated with the
discovered independent signals was also retained. The mean absolute error (AbsME) used is ex-
                           N
                           P
pressed by: AbsM E =          |si − s estimatedi |/N , where si and s estimatedi represent the i-th
                                                 i=1
pixel values for original and restored signals, respectively, and N is the total number of pixels.
For the negentropy objective function, use the proposed algorithm for estimating the independent
components, the approximations established in the description of the negentropy are used, being
established experimentally for each choice of the function g from the approximation formula. From
the comparative study carried out for the three categories of one-dimensional and two-dimensional
signals mixed with a variable number of input data, the proposed algorithm (ICAGNN) based on
genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks is distinguished by an improved rate of the average
of the iterations required for the convergence of the weight vectors associated with the recognized
independent signals, having a quality of the discovered signals similar to the performances of the
standard FastICA estimation algorithms based on the secant method or the Newton method.



Table 1: The convergence rate of algorithms for estimating independent components from 2 mixed
signals for all experimental tests
           Algorithm                               The convergence rate for 2 signals for each case I, II, III
           No. of Test                            tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt
             Newton                                3.0   2.5   3.5   2.5     3.0    3.0     4.0    3.5     3.5
             Secant                                2.5   2.5   4.0   3.0     2.5    3.0     4.5    3.0     4.5
            ICAGNN                                 2.5   2.0   3.0   2.5     2.5    3.0     2.5    3.0     3.0


                                                                                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   AFTER Mixing                    Marginal PDF2                           PDF COMUN                    Marginal PDF2
                            AFTER ICA(tanh)                Marginal PDF2
                                                                                                                                                              9                                 9
                                                                                     −35                                 −35
                2                                  2                                                                                                          8                                 8
                1                                  1                                 −40                                 −40
                                                                                                                                                              7                                 7
                0                                  0                                 −45                                 −45
                                                                                                                                                              6                                 6
               −1                                 −1                                 −50                                 −50                                  5                                 5
               −2                                 −2
                                                                                       −35           −30           −25         0    1        2            3          −12         −10       −8       0   1     2         3
                      −2    −1    0    1      2        0   1       2        3                                                                         −3                                                                       −3
                                                                                −3                                                                 x 10                                                                     x 10
                                                                           x 10               −3
                                                                                           x 10    Marginal PDF1                                                     −3
                                                                                                                                                                  x 10     Marginal PDF1
                       −3    Marginal PDF1
                    x 10                                                               3                                                                      3
                3
                                                                                       2                                                                      2
                2

                                                                                       1                                                                      1
                1

                0                                                                      0                                                                      0
                      −2    −1    0    1      2                                         −35          −30           −25                                               −12         −10       −8


Figure 3: Test II - 2 uniform signals (density function of Discovered signals, Mixed Signals and
Original Signals)


Figure 4: Test II - data density functions used in cases with 3, 5 and 7 signals with uniform
distribution



4.1   D ESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTAL TESTS IN THE CASE OF UNIDIMENSIONAL
      SIGNALS


For the unidimensional case, two experimental tests are established by using signals generated with
a normal, respectively uniform, distribution.
Test I. For this experimental test, the input signals are generated according to the normal distribution
with implementation in the Matlab language. For this category of input data, a number of 2, 3, 5,
respectively, 7 mixed signals is used, and the performances in discovering the original independent
signals is determined, both for the proposed algorithm and for the algorithms used in the comparative
study. The signals used as input data for establishing mixed signals and determining independent
signals by the proposed algorithm are represented in figures 1 - 2 for each case of the number of
mixed input data.
Test II. For this experimental test, the input signals are generated according to the uniform distribu-
tion with implementation in the Matlab language. For this category of input data, a number of 2,
3, 5, respectively, 7 mixed signals is used, and the performances in discovering the original inde-
pendent signals is determined, both for the proposed algorithm and for the algorithms used in the
comparative study. The signals used as input data for establishing mixed signals and determining
independent signals by the proposed algorithm are represented in figures 3 - 4 for each case of the
number of mixed input data.


      Figure 5: Test III - 2 images of faces (Discovered faces, Mixed faces and Original faces)


                                                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Test III - images of faces used in cases with 3 (first 3 faces), 5 (first 5 faces) and 7 faces
from Yale database with with 11 associated images each


Table 2: The convergence rate of algorithms for estimating independent components from 3 mixed
signals for all experimental tests
          Algorithm         The convergence rate for 3 signals for each case I, II, III
          No. of Test    tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt
            Newton        4.0   3.66 4.33 3.66        3.0 3.66       4.0    4.33 5.33
            Secant        4.0   3.33 4.66 4.00 3.66 3.66 4.33 4.00 4.66
           ICAGNN        3.00    3.0 3.66 2.66 3.00 3.33 2.66                3.0 2.66


4.2   D ESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTAL TESTS IN THE CASE OF BIDIMENSIONAL SIGNALS

Test III. For this experimental test, the input signals are represented by the images of faces. For this
category of input data, a number of 2, 3, 5, respectively, 7 mixed faces is used, and the performances
in discovering the original independent faces is determined, both for the proposed algorithm and for
the standard algorithms used in the comparative study. Thus, by using a different number of two-
dimensional image signals, the mixed images are established, and the proposed algorithm is applied
versus the FastICA algorithm for the identification of independent image sources. The faces signals
used as input data for establishing mixed faces and determining independent faces by the proposed
algorithm are represented in figures 5 - 6 for each case of the number of mixed input data.

4.3   T HE RESULTS OF THE COMPARATIVE STUDY ON THE CONVERGENCE RATE

In this part, the performance results in the detection of hidden signals are presented for the proposed
algorithm based on genetic algorithms and neural networks (ICAGNN) in comparison with standard
algorithms for estimating independent components. If in terms of the quality of the discovered
signals evaluated by the absolute error function it shows similar values for all the algorithms used,
in the analysis of the convergence rates, the proposed algorithm ICAGNN stands out for improved
values relative to the number of iterations required to establish the weight vectors associated with the
independent signals recognized by each algorithm from the comparative study. The results obtained
for the estimation of the independent components by applying the proposed ICAGNN algorithm
compared to the FastICA algorithms, are shown in tables I-IV corresponding to 2, 3, 5, 7 respectively
mixed signals. Also, the mean values for the number of iterations required for the convergence of
the weight vectors are presented for the three choices of the function g (versions g1 , g2 and g3 ) in
the approximation of the negentropy objective function used in the estimation of the independent
components.

5     S UMMARY AND C ONCLUSIONS
In the work carried out, a new version of the FastICA-type independent components estimation al-
gorithm was developed by optimizing the negentropy objective function by using genetic algorithms
in an updated form by using appropriate weights in the crossover stage resulting from the application
of a neural network of multilayer backpropagation type. The performance of the proposed algorithm
was determined in a study compared to the standard version of the estimation algorithm based on the


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The convergence rate of algorithms for estimating independent components from 5 mixed
signals for all experimental tests
          Algorithm         The convergence rate for 5 signals for each case I, II, III
          No. of Test    tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt tanh exp kurt
            Newton       8.40 7.20 8.40 4.60 5.00 5.40 7.80 8.40 7.80
            Secant       7.80 7.23 8.40 4.80 5.40 5.80 7.40 7.20 8.00
           ICAGNN        6.20 6.00 7.20 3.40 3.80 4.80 4.80 5.00 4.80


Table 4: The convergence rate of algorithms for estimating independent components from 7 mixed
signals for all experimental tests
         Algorithm         The convergence rate for 7 signals for each case I, II, III
         No. of Test    tanh exp kurt tanh exp              kurt    tanh exp kurt
           Newton       8.42 8.14 8.85 5.28 6.28 5.57               8.57 8.42 8.28
           Secant       8.14 8.42 8.85 5.28 5.57 6.85 ) 8.14 8.42 8.85
          ICAGNN        5.28 5.57 6.85 3.85 4.28 5.57               4.28 5.14 5.28


Newton method, as well as to the version developed based on the secant method. The experimental
stability results for several types of signals and for several cases regarding the volume of input data,
showed good performance in the estimation of independent signals both from the point of view of
the quality of the original sources, and especially from the point of view of the convergence rate
improved for the proposed algorithm.

R EFERENCES
 C. Aggarwal, C. Reddy, Data Clustering: Algorithms and Applications, CRC Press, 2013.
 C.M. Bishop, Neural Network for Pattern Recognition, Clarendon Press, 1995.
 C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2007.
 A. Cichocki, R. Unbehauen, Neural Networks for Signal Processing and Optimization, Wiley,
  1994.
 T.M. Cover, J.A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, Wiley, 1991.
 K.I. Diamantaras, S.Y. Kung, Principal Component Neural Networks: Theory and Applications,
  Wiley, 1996.
 R. Duda, P. Hart, and D. Stork, Pattern Classification, Wiley, 2001.
 M. Gabbay, C.J. Hogger, J.A. Robinson, Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic
  Programming, Oxford University Press, 1998.
 W. Gardner, Introduction to Random Processes with Applications to Signal and Systems,
  Macmillan, 1986.
 M. Girolami, Self-Organising Neural Networks - Independent Component Analysis and Blind
  Source Separation, Springer Verlag, 1999.
 R. Gonzalez, P. Wintz, Digital Image Processing, Addison-Wisley, 1987.
 J.M. Gorriz, C.G. Puntonet, A genetic algorithm for solving BSS-ICA, Applied Soft Computing
   Technologies: The Challenge of Complexity, Proceedings of the 9th Online World Conference
   on Soft Computing in Industrial Applications (WSC9), 2004.
 I. Guyon, A. Elisseeff, An introduction to variable and feature selection, The Journal of Ma-
   chine Learning Research, 3:1157–1182, 2003.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 S. Haykin, Neural Networks and Learning Machines, Prentice Hall, 2008.
 T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
   Inference, and Prediction, Springer, 2013.
 E. Hidayat, A.K. Muda, C.Y. Huoy, S. Ahmad, A Comparative Study of Feature Extraction
  Using PCA and LDA for Face Recognition, International Conference on Information Assurance
  and Security (IAS), 2011.
 I. Houben, L. Wehenkel, M. Pavella, GENETIC ALGORITHM BASED k NEAREST NEIGH-
   BORS, IFAC Control of Industrial Systems, Belfon, France, 1997.
 A. Hyvärinen, J. Karhunen, E. Oja, Independent Component Analysis, John Wiley, 2001.
 I.T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis, Springer-Verlag New York, 2002.
 S. Kay, Modern Spectral Estimation: Theory and Application, Prentince Hall, 1988.
 S. Katoch, S. Singh Chauhan, V. Kumar, A review on genetic algorithm: past, present, and
  future, Multimedia Tools and Applications, 8091-8126, Springer Science Business Media, 2021.
 H.B. Kekre, T.K. Sarode, J.K. Save, Classification of Image Database Using Independent
  Principal Component Analysis, International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Ap-
  plications (IJACSA), 2013.
 T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps, Springer, 1995.
 T.W. Lee, Independent Component Analysis - Theory and Applications, Kluwer, 1998.
 G. J. McLachlan, Discriminant analysis and statistical pattern recognition, Wiley-
  Interscience, Vol. 544, 2004.
 T. Mitchell, Machine Learning, McGraw Hill, 1997.
 A. Oppenheim, R. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing, Prentince Hall, 1989.
 H. Peng, F. Long, C. Ding. Feature selection based on mutual information: Criteria of maxde-
  pendency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
  chine Intelligence, 27(8):1226–1238, 2005.
 J.C. Platt, Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for training support vector ma-
   chines, In Advances in Kernel Methods - Suport Vector Learning, 1998.
 S. Russell, P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence. A Modern Approach, Prentice Hall, 1995.
 H. Shahamat, A.A. Pouyan, Feature selection using genetic algorithm for classification of
  schizophrenia using fMRI data, Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Data Mining, vol. 3, Issue 1,
  2015.
 M. Zhang, Z. H. Zhou, ML-kNN: A lazy learning approach to multi-label learning, Pattern
  Recognition, 40(7) : 2038–2045, 2007.
 V. Vapnik, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory, Springer, New York, 1995.
 L.D. Whitley, M.D. Vose, Foundations of Genetic Algorithms, Morgan Kaufmann, 1985.
 H. White, Learning in artificial neural networks: A statistical perspective, Neural Computa-
  tion, 1(4) : 425–464, 1989.
 H. Yaping, L. Siwei, Genetic algorithm applied to ICA feature selection, Proceedings of the
  International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 1098-7576, IEEE, 2003.]


                                                10
