O FFLINE RL WITH O BSERVATION H ISTORIES :
A NALYZING AND I MPROVING S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY
 Joey Hong Anca Dragan Sergey Levine
 UC Berkeley
 {joey hong,anca,sergey.levine}@berkeley.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Offline reinforcement learning (RL) can in principle synthesize more optimal
         behavior from a dataset consisting only of suboptimal trials. One way that this can
         happen is by “stitching” together the best parts of otherwise suboptimal trajectories
         that overlap on similar states, to create new behaviors where each individual state is
         in-distribution, but the overall returns are higher. However, in many interesting and
         complex applications, such as autonomous navigation and dialogue systems, the
         state is partially observed. Even worse, the state representation is unknown or not
         easy to define. In such cases, policies and value functions are often conditioned on
         observation histories instead of states. In these cases, it is not clear if the same kind
         of “stitching” is feasible at the level of observation histories, since two different
         trajectories would always have different histories, and thus “similar states” that
         might lead to effective stitching cannot be leveraged. Theoretically, we show that
         standard offline RL algorithms conditioned on observation histories suffer from
         poor sample complexity, in accordance with the above intuition. We then identify
         sufficient conditions under which offline RL can still be efficient – intuitively, it
         needs to learn a compact representation of history comprising only features relevant
         for action selection. We introduce a bisimulation loss that captures the extent to
         which this happens, and propose that offline RL can explicitly optimize this loss
         to aid worst-case sample complexity. Empirically, we show that across a variety
         of tasks either our proposed loss improves performance, or the value of this loss
         is already minimized as a consequence of standard offline RL, indicating that it
         correlates well with good performance.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in games (Mnih et al.,
2013; Silver et al., 2017; AlphaStar, 2019), robotic locomotion (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017), and
control (Todorov et al., 2012; Haarnoja et al., 2018). A key challenge in the widespread adoption
of RL algorithms is the need for deploying a suboptimal policy in the environment to collect online
interactions, which can be detrimental in many applications such as recommender systems (Afsar
et al., 2021), healthcare (Shortreed et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2018), and robotics (Kalashnikov et al.,
2018). Offline RL aims to learn effective policies entirely from an offline dataset of previously
collected demonstrations (Levine et al., 2020), which makes it a promising approach for applications
where exploring online from scratch is unsafe or costly. A major reason for the success of offline RL
algorithms is their ability to combine components of suboptimal trajectories in the offline dataset
using common states, a phenomenon called “trajectory stitching” (Fu et al., 2019a; 2020).
Most offline RL methods are formulated in a Markov decision process (MDP) where the state is fully
observed (Sutton and Barto, 2018). However, in many real-world tasks, the state is only partially
observed, corresponding to a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Spaan). For
example, in autonomous driving, the robot is limited to information measured by sensors, and does
not directly perceive the positions of every car on the road, much less the intentions of every driver.
As another example, in dialogue systems, the conversational agent can only observe (potentially noisy
and redundant) utterances of the other agents, while their underlying preferences and mental state
are hidden. In fact, there is often not even a clear representation or parameterization of “state” (e.g.,
what is the space of human intentions or preferences?). Therefore, in such applications, policies must


                                                    1
instead be conditioned on all observations thus far – the observation history. Naı̈vely, this leads to
concerns on the efficiency of existing offline RL algorithms. Offline RL is much less likely to utilize
suboptimal behaviors if stitching them requires shared observation histories among them, as histories
are much less likely to repeat in datasets that are not prohibitively large.
In this work, we aim to answer the following question: When and how can we improve the sample
efficiency of offline RL algorithms when policies are conditioned on entire observation histories?
Given that observation histories make naı̈ve stitching very inefficient, we study this question from the
lens of when and how we can enable history-conditioned offline RL to efficiently leverage trajectory
stitching. Our focus is on a theoretic analysis of this question, though we also provide simple
empirical evaluations to confirm our findings. Theoretically, we first show that in the worst case,
naı̈ve offline RL using observation histories can lead to very poor sample complexity bounds. We
show that prior pessimistic offline RL algorithms with near-optimal sample complexity guarantees
in fully observed MDPs (Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021a) fail to learn efficiently with
observation histories. We also propose a remedy to this, by learning a compact representation of
histories that contains only the relevant information for action selection. When these representations
induce a bisimulation metric over the POMDP, we prove that offline RL algorithms achieve greatly
improved sample complexity. Furthermore, when existing offline RL algorithms fail to learn such
representations, we propose a novel modification that explicitly does so, by optimizing an auxiliary
bisimulation loss on top of standard offline RL objective. Empirically, we show – in simple navigation
and language model tasks – that when naı̈ve offline RL algorithms fail, using our proposed loss in
conjunction with these algorithms improves performance; furthermore, we also show that in tasks
where existing offline RL approaches already succeed, our loss is implicitly being minimized. Our
work provides, to our knowledge, the first theoretical treatment of representation learning in partially
observed offline RL, and offers a step toward provably efficient RL in such settings.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Offline RL. Offline RL (Lange et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020) has shown promise in a range of
domains. To handle distribution shift (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2019), many modern offline
RL algorithms adopt a pessimistic formulation, learning a lower-bound estimate of the value function
or Q-function (Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020;
2021). When they work properly, offline RL algorithms should benefit from “trajectory stitching,” or
combining components of suboptimal trajectories in the data to make more optimal ones (Fu et al.,
2019a; 2020). From a theoretical perspective, multiple prior works show that pessimistic offline
RL algorithms have near-optimal sample complexity, under assumptions on the affinity between
the optimal and behavior policies (Liu et al., 2020; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Jin
et al., 2021b). Notably, Xie et al. (2021) show that pessimistic offline RL algorithms can attain the
information-theoretic lower-bound in tabular MDPs, and Jin et al. (2021b) show a similar result for
linear MDPs. In our work, we consider offline RL where policies condition on observation histories.
POMDPs. Our work studies offline RL in POMDPs. A number of prior works on RL in POMDPs
have proposed designing models, such as RNNs, that can process observation histories (Zhang et al.,
2015; Heess et al., 2015). Other methods instead aim to learn a model of the environment, for example
via spectral methods (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016) or Bayesian approaches that maintains a belief
state over the environment parameters (Ross et al., 2011; Katt et al., 2018). However, such approaches
can struggle to scale to large state and observation spaces. Igl et al. (2018) propose approximately
learning the belief state using variational inference, which scales to high-dimensional domains but
does not have any theoretical guarantees. To our knowledge, provably efficient offline RL methods
for POMDPs are still relatively sparse in the literature. Recently, Jin et al. (2020) propose estimating
the parameters of a tabular POMDP efficiently using the induced observable operator model (Jaeger,
2000), under an undercompleteness assumption between the observations and hidden state. Guo
et al. (2022) propose and analyze a similar approach for linear POMDPs. However, these approaches
share the same weaknesses as prior methods that rely on spectral methods in that they do not scale
beyond linear domains. In our work, we analyze practical offline RL algorithms that work on general
POMDPs, and show sufficient conditions on how they can be provably efficient, as well as propose a
new algorithm that satisfies these conditions.
Representation learning in RL. Motivated by our theoretical analysis of the efficiency of naı̈ve
history-based policies, we propose an approach for learning compact representations of observations
histories to improve the efficiency of offline RL in POMDPs. Multiple prior works consider state


                                                   2
abstraction in MDPs, often by learning low-dimensional representations using reconstruction (Hafner
et al., 2019; Watter et al., 2015) or a contrastive loss (van den Oord et al., 2018). Specifically, our
work builds on bisimulation metrics (Ferns et al., 2012; Castro, 2019), which identify equivalence
classes over states based on rewards and transition probabilities. Recently, Zhang et al. (2021)
propose learning representations that follow bisimulation-derived state aggregation to improve deep
RL algorithms, and Kemertas and Aumentado-Armstrong (2021) propose extensions that improve
robustness. The main objective of our work is not to propose a new representation learning algorithm,
but to identify when offline RL with observation histories can achieve efficient sample complexity in
POMDPs. To our knowledge, we are the first to provably show efficient offline RL in POMDPs using
theoretical guarantees derived from representation learning.

3    P RELIMINARIES
The goal in our problem setting is to learn a policy π that maximizes the expected cumu-
lative reward in a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), given by a tuple
M = (S, A, O, T , r, E, µ1 , H), where S is the state space, A is the action space, O is the ob-
servation space, µ1 is the initial state distribution, and H is the horizon. When action a ∈ A is
executed at state s ∈ S, the next state is generated according to s′ ∼ T (·|s, a), and the agent
receives stochastic reward with mean r(s, a) ∈ [0, 1]. Subsequently, the agent receives an observation
o′ ∼ E(·|s′ ).
Typically, POMDPs are defined with a state space representation; in practice though, these are
notoriously difficult to define, and so instead we transform POMDPs into MDPs over observation
histories – henceforth called observation-history-MDPs (Timmer, 2010). At timestep h ∈ [H], we
define the observation history τh as the sequence of observations and actions τh = [o1 , a1 , o2 , . . . , oh ].
Then, an observation-history-MDP is given by tuple M = (H, A, P, r, ρ1 , H), where H is the space
of observation histories, and A is the action space, ρ1 is the initial observation distribution, and
H is the horizon. When action a ∈ A is executed at h ∈ H, the agent observes h′ = h ⊕ o′ via
o′ ∼ P (·|τ, a), where ⊕ denotes concatenation, and receives reward with mean r(τ, a).
The Q-function Qπ (τ, a) for a policy π(·|τ ) represents the discounted long-term reward attained
by executing a given observation history τ and then following policy π thereafter. Qπ satisfies the
Bellman recurrence: Qπ (τ, a) = Bπ Qπ (τ, a) = r(τ, a) + Eh′ ∼T (·|τ,a),a′ ∼π(·|τ ′ ) [Qh+1 (τ ′ , a′ )].
The value function V π considers the expectation of the Q-function over the policy V π (h) =
Ea∼π(·|τ ) [Qπ (τ, a)]. Meanwhile, the Q-function of the optimal policy Q∗ satisfies: Q∗ (τ, a) =
r(τ, a) + Eh′ ∼T (·|τ,a) [maxa′ Q∗ (τ ′ , a′ )], and the optimal value function is V ∗ (τ ) = maxa Q∗ (τ, a).
Finally, the expected cumulative reward is given by J(π) = Eo1 ∼ρ1 [V π (τ1 )]. Note that we do not
condition the Q-values nor policy on timestep h because it is implicit in the length of τ .
In offline RL, we are provided with
a dataset D = {(τi , ai , ri , o′i )}N
                                     i=1 of
size |D| = N . We assume that the
dataset D is generated i.i.d. from a
distribution µ(τ, a) that specifies the
effectiveP behavior policy πβ (a|τ ) :=
µ(τ, a)/ a µ(τ, a). In our analysis,
we will use n(τ, a) to denote the num-
ber of times (τ, a) appears in D, and
Pb(·|τ, a) and rb(τ, a) to denote the em-
pirical dynamics and reward distribu-
tions in D, which may be different
from P and r due to stochasticity and Figure 1: Illustrative example of trajectory stitching. Here, Q-
sampling error. Finally, as in prior learning is able to learn that though the grey trajectory τ was unsuc-
                                            cessful, a prefix τt of the trajectory is still optimal when stitched
work (Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Ku- with the suffix of blue        trajectory τ ′ .
mar et al., 2022), we define the subop-
timality of learned policy π b as SubOpt(b  π ) = ED∼µ [J(π ∗ ) − J(b     π )] .
Trajectory stitching. Much of how offline RL can learn efficiently lies in its capability to combine
components of suboptimal trajectories to deduce better ones, which is called “trajectory stitching”. We
illustrate this in Figure 1, where a trajectory τ through state st−1 does not end in positive reward, but
does share a common state st with trajectory τ ′ that does. In MDPs, offline RL using value iteration


                                                       3
                      b t−1 , at−1 ) = P ′ P (s′ |st−1 , at−1 )Vb (s′ ). Because Vb (st ) is known to be
will learn Q-values: Q(s                   s
positive from observing τ ′ , offline RL can deduce that taking action at−1 at st−1 also has positive
value, without explicitly observing it in the dataset. This becomes complicated in an observation
history MDP, as offline RL will now learn Q(τb t−1 , at−1 ) = P ′ P (s′ |st−1 , at−1 )Vb (τt ). But Vb (τt )
                                                                  s
is not known to be positive because τt has not been observed in the data. This means that, naı̈vely,
offline RL on observation history MDPs does not seem to benefit from trajectory stitching, which may
negatively effect how efficiently it can learn from data. We formalize this in Section 4 by proving
that offline RL can have poor worst-case sample complexity in POMDPs.
Notation. Let n ∧ 1 = max{n, 1}. Denote ι = polylog(|O|, |A|, H, N ). We let ι be a polylogarith-
mic quantity, changing
                 P with context.PFor d-dimensional vectors x, y, x(i) denotes its i-th entry, and
define V(x, y) = i x(i)y(i)2 − ( i x(i)y(i))2 .

4    S HOWING I NEFFICIENCY OF O FFLINE RL IN O BSERVATION -H ISTORY-MDP S
In this section, we show that existing offline RL algorithms with state-of-the-art sample complexity
guarantees in standard MDPs have significantly worse guarantees in observation history MDPs. We
consider a class of offline RL algorithms that learn pessimistic value functions such that the estimated
value lower-bounds the true one, i.e., Vb π ≤ V π for policy π. Practical implementations achieve this
by subtracting a penalty from the reward, either explicitly (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020) or
implicitly (Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021). We only analyze one such algorithm that does
the former, though our findings can likely be extended to general pessimistic offline RL methods.
We consider a meta-algorithm called pessimistic value iteration (PEVI), originally introduced by Jin
et al. (2021a). This algorithm relies on the construction of confidence intervals c : H × A → R that
are high-probability bounds on the estimation error of Pb, rb. Then, pessimistic Q-values are obtained
                                      b a) ← rb(τ, a)−c(τ, a)+ P ′ Pb(o′ |τ, a)Vb (τ ′ ), where values
by solving the Bellman recurrence: Q(τ,
              P                                                        o            P b
are Vb (τ ) ← a Q(τ,
                  b a)b                                        b(·|τ ) ← arg maxπ a Q(τ,
                          π (a|τ ). The learned policy is then π                             a)π(a|τ ).
We give a full pseudocode of the algorithm in Algorithm 2 in Appendix A.1.
Prior work has shown that in tabular MDPs, instantiations of PEVI achieve state-of-the-art sample
complexity (Rashidinejad et al., 2021). We choose one such instantiation, where confidence intervals
c(τ, a) are derived using Bernstein’s inequality:
                       s                                s
                          HV(Pb(·|τ, a), Vb (τ ⊕ ·))ι      Hbr(τ, a)ι          Hι
            c(τ, a) ←                                 +                +                .        (1)
                                (n(τ, a) ∧ 1)             (n(τ, a) ∧ 1) (n(τ, a) ∧ 1)
The same instantiation was considered by Kumar et al. (2022), and shown to achieve sample com-
plexity approaching the information-theoretic lower-bound. The additional dependence on H is due
to log |H| = H polylog(|O|, |A|). However, we can show that in an observation history MDP, the
same algorithm has much worse sample complexity bounds.
We first characterizes the distribution shift between the offline dataset distribution µ(τ, a) and the
distribution induced by π ∗ , given by d∗ (τ, a), via a concentrability coefficient C ∗ .
Definition 4.1 (Concentrability of the data distribution). Define C ∗ to be the smallest finite constant
that satisfies d∗ (τ, a)/µ(τ, a) ≤ C ∗ ∀τ ∈ H, a ∈ A.

Intuitively, the coefficient C ∗ formalizes how well the data distribution µ(τ, a) covers the tuples
(τ, a) visited under the optimal π ∗ , where C ∗ = 1 corresponds to data from π ∗ and increases with
distribution shift. C ∗ was first introduced by Rashidinejad et al. (2021) but for standard MDPs. Using
C ∗ , we can derive the following sample-complexity bound for PEVI in an observation history MDP:
                                                                                      b∗
Theorem 4.1 (Suboptimality of PEVI in Tabular POMDPs). In a tabular POMDP, the policy π
found by PEVI satisfies
                                      r
                                         C ∗ |H|H 3 ι C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                        SubOpt(b π) ≲                +             .
                                              N            N
We defer our proof, which follows from adapting existing analysis from standard MDPs to observation
history MDPs, to Appendix A. Note that dependence on |H| makes the bound exponential in the
horizon because the space of observation histories satisfies |H| > |O|H . This term arises due to


                                                     4
encountering observation histories that do not appear in the dataset; without additional assumptions
on the ability to generalize to unseen histories, any offline RL algorithm must incur this suboptimality
(as it can only take actions randomly given such histories), making the above bound tight.

5    A NALYZING W HEN S AMPLE -E FFICIENCY C AN B E I MPROVED
In this section, we show how the efficiency of offline RL algorithms can be improved by learning
representations of observation histories, containing features of the history that sufficiently capture
what is necessary for action selection. We then provide one method for learning such representations
based on bisimulation metrics that, when used alongside existing offline RL algorithms, is sufficient
to greatly improve their sample complexity guarantees in observation-hisotory MDPs.
Intuitively, consider that observation histories likely contains mostly irrelevant or redundant infor-
mation. This means that it is possible to learn summarizations, such that instead of solving the
observation history MDP, it is sufficient to solve a summarized MDP where the states are summa-
rizations, actions are unchanged, and the dynamics and reward function are parameterized by the
summarizations rather than observation histories. We formalize our intuition into the following:
Assumption 5.1. There exists a set Z where |Z| ≪ |H|, and ε > 0, such that the summarized MDP
(Z, A, P, r, ρ1 , H) satisfies: for every τ ∈ H there exists a z ∈ Z satisfying |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (z)| ≤ ε .
The implication of Assumption 5.1 is that we can abstract the space of observation histories into a
much more compact space of summarizations, containing only features of the history relevant for
action selection. If the state space was known, then summarizations could be constructed as beliefs
over the true state. In our case, one practical way of creating summarizations is by aggregating
observation histories using the distances between their learned representations. Note that these
representations may be implicitly learned by optimizing the standard offline RL objective, or they
can be explicitly learned via an auxiliary representation learning objective. We describe one possible
objective in the following section, which enjoys strong theoretical guarantees.
5.1 A BSTRACTING O BSERVATION H ISTORIES USING B ISIMULATION M ETRICS
Bisimulation metrics offer one avenue for learning abstractions of the observation history (Ferns
et al., 2012; Castro, 2019). While they are not the only way of learning useful representations, these
metrics offer strong guarantees for improving the efficiency of learning in standard MDPs, and are
also empirically shown to work well with popular off-policy RL algorithms (Zhang et al., 2021). In
contrast, we leverage learning bisimulation metrics and show that they can similarly improve the
theoretical and empirical performance of offline RL algorithms in observation-history MDPs.
Formally, we define the on-policy bisimulation metric for policy π on an observation-history-MDP as
                   dπ (τ, τ ′ ) = |rπ (τ ) − rπ (τ ′ )| + W1 (P π (· | τ ), P π (· | τ ′ )) ,     (2)
where we superscript the reward and transition function by π to indicate taking an expectation over π.
                                   ∗
To simplify notation, let d∗ = dπ be shorthand for the π ∗ -bisimulation metric.
Rather than using the true bisimulation metric, Zhang et al. (2021) showed that it can be more practical
to learn an approximation of it in the embedding space. Similarly, we propose learning an encoder
ϕ : H → Rd such that distances dbϕ (τ, τ ′ ) = ||ϕ(τ ) − ϕ(τ ′ )||22 approximate the distance under the π ∗ -
bisimulation metric d∗ (τ, τ ′ ). Such an encoder can be learned implicitly by minimizing the standard
offline RL objective, or explicitly by via an auxilliary MSE objective: ϕ = arg min ||dbϕ − d∗ ||22 .
Then, the encoder can be used to compact the space of observation histories H into a space of
summarizations Z by introducing an aggregator Φ : H → Z that maps observation histories to
summarizations. Specifically, the aggregator will cluster observation histories that are predicted to
be similar under our learned bisimulation metric, i.e., Φ(τ ) = Φ(τ ′ ) for τ, τ ′ ∈ H if dbϕ (τ, τ ′ ) ≤ ε.
This means that we can approximate the current observation history MDP with a summarized MDP
(Z, A, P, r, ρ1 , H). Any practical offline RL algorithm can be used to solve for the policy π   b on the
summarized MDP, and the policy can be easily evaluated on the original POMDP by selecting actions
according to πb(· | Φ(τ )). In the following section, we show that doing so yields greatly improved
sampled complexity guarantees in the original POMDP.
5.2 T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In Section 4, we showed that applying a naı̈ve pessimistic offline RL algorithm (PEVI), which has
optimal sample complexity in standard MDPs, to observation-history-MDPs can incur suboptimality


                                                     5
that scales very poorly (potentially exponentially) with horizon H. Here, we show that applying the
same algorithm to a summarized MDP, which aggregates observation histories based on how similar
their learned representations are, can achieve greatly improved sample-complexity guarantees in the
original observation-history-MDP, if the representations induce a bisimulation metric.
The first result we show relates the value functions under the original observation-history-MDP and a
summarized MDP induced via the summarization function Φ:
Lemma 5.1. Let Φ : H → Z be a learned aggregator that clusters observation histories such that
Φ(τ ) = Φ(τ ′ ) ⇒ dbϕ (τ, τ ′ ) ≤ ε. Then, the induced summarized MDP (Z, A, P, r, ρ1 , H) satisfies

                               |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))| ≤ H ε + dbϕ − d∗             .
                                                                             ∞

Next, we show an improved sample complexity bound than Theorem 4.1 in a tabular MDP. We
consider the same instantiation of PEVI as in Section 4. However, rather than operating on the raw
observation history τ , we use the summarization function Φ(τ ) obtained by learning a bisimulation
metric over the space of histories H. We can show that operating on the space of summarizations Z
instead of the observation histories H leads to the following greatly improved bound:
Theorem 5.1 (Suboptimality of PEVI augmented with Φ in Tabular POMDPs). In a tabular POMDP,
           b found by PEVI on the summarized MDP (Z, A, P, r, ρ1 , H) satisfies
the policy π
                                  r
                                      C ∗ |Z|H 3 ι   C ∗ |Z|H 2 ι
                   SubOpt(b
                          π) ≲                     +              + 2H ε + dbϕ − d∗     .
                                           N              N                         ∞

Again, we defer full proofs to Appendix A. Here, we see that rather than exponential scaling in
horizon H, offline RL now enjoys near optimal scaling, particularly if |Z| ≪ |H|.

6    P RACTICAL A PPROACH TO I MPROVING O FFLINE RL A LGORITHMS
As described in Section 5, the key component that enables sample-efficient offline RL is the
existence of an encoder ϕ : H → Rd that learns compact representations of observation his-
tories. Specifically, we showed that if the distances between representations under the encoder
dbϕ (τ, τ ′ ) = ||ϕ(τ ) − ϕ(τ ′ )||22 match the π ∗ -bisimulation metric, offline RL algorithms that leverage
these representations enjoy better efficiency when required to condition on observation histories.
Note that the bound in Theorem 4.1 is a worst-case result. In the general case, even naı̈ve offline RL
algorithms might still naturally learn encoders ϕ as part of the standard training process that produce
useful representations. In Section 5, we show that one way of measuring the effectiveness of the
representations is by how well they induce a bisimulation metric. Though this is not a necessary
condition, we do show that it is sufficient for sample-efficient learning. Therefore, in this section, we
propose a practical way to train an encoder ϕ to induce a bisimulation metric.
                                                              Note that in practice, we cannot naı̈vely
Algorithm 1 Offline RL with Bisimulation Learning             fit dbϕ to the π ∗ -bisimulation metric d∗ , be-
Require: Offline dataset D                                    cause it assumes knowledge of: (1) the true
 1: Initialize encoders ϕ, ϕ̄                                 reward function r and observation dynam-
 2: for i = 1, 2, . . . do                                    ics P of the environment, and (2) the opti-
 3:    Train encoder ϕ: J(ϕ)                                  mal policy π ∗ . To remedy this, we propose
 4:    Train dynamics rbϕ , Pbϕ : J(b
                                    r, ϕ) , J(Pb, ϕ)          a practical algorithm similar to the one pro-
 5:    Train policy π  bϕ                                     posed by Zhang et al. (2021), where an
 6:    Update target encoder: ϕ̄ ← (1 − α)ϕ̄ + αϕ             encoder ϕ and policy π    bϕ , operating on the
 7: Return π bϕ
                                                              embeddings, are trained jointly. To resolve
(1), we fit a reward and dynamics model rbϕ , Pbϕ using dataset D. Then, to resolve (2), we use the
learned policy π bϕ rather than optimal π ∗ , which intuitively should converge to π ∗ .
Formally, given the current learned policy πbϕ with encoder ϕ, we train ϕ with the bisimulation loss
on top of the regular offline RL objective, using the following loss function:
                                                                                                               2
J(ϕ) = Eτ,τ ′ ∼D,a∼bπ(·|z) ∥ϕ(τ ) − ϕ(τ ′ )∥ − |br(z, a) − rb(z ′ , a′ )| − D(Pb(· | z, a), Pb(· | z ′ , a′ )      ,
              a′ ∼b
                  π (·|z ′ )

where z = ϕ̄(τ ), z ′ = ϕ̄(τ ′ ) are the representations from a target network. We choose D to be an
approximation of the 1-Wasserstein distance; in discrete observation settings, we use total variation


                                                        6
                     10
                                          Filtered BC State-Action Visitations             10
                                                                                                            CQL State-Action Visitations                10
                                                                                                                                                                     CQL + Bisim State-Action Visitations
                     9                                                                     9                                                            9

                     8                                                                     8                                                            8

                     7                                                                     7                                                            7

                     6                                                                     6                                                            6

                     5                                                                     5                                                            5

                     4                                                                     4                                                            4

                     3                                                                     3                                                            3

                     2                                                                     2                                                            2

                     1                                                                     1                                                            1

                     0                                                                     0                                                            0

                      1                                                                     1                                                            1
                          1       0       1       2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10        1   0   1    2    3    4   5    6    7     8   9   10        1   0    1   2    3    4   5    6    7    8    9   10


                     Method                                       Filtered BC                                         CQL                                                 CQL + Bisimulation
                Mean Reward                                       0.28                                                0.19                                                0.68

Figure 2: In our gridworld environment, Filtered BC takes the path towards the unsafe goal, CQL tries to take
the path towards the safe goal but often incorrectly (by going down instead of right), and CQL with bisimulation
loss always takes the correct path towards the safe goal.
||Pb(·|z, a) − Pb(·|z ′ , a′ )||1 , and in continuous settings, we use W2 (Pb(·|z, a), Pb(·|z ′ , a′ )) on Gaussian
distributions. Then, we use ϕ to train our dynamics model of the environment via the following:
                                h                     i                           h                         i
                                                    2
      J(br, ϕ) = Eτ,a,r∼D (r − rb(ϕ(τ ), a)) , J(Pb, ϕ) = Eτ,a,τ ′ ∼D d z ′ , Pb(ϕ(τ ), a) ,

where again z ′ = ϕ̄(τ ′ ). Here, d is either log-likelihood or mean-squared error if observations are
discrete or continuous, respectively. Finally, we perform policy improvement on π b, which conditions
on representations generated by ϕ. Note that this can be any existing offline RL algorithm. We detail
pseudocode for the meta-algorithm in Algorithm 1.

7           E XPERIMENTS
Our experimental evaluation aims to empirically analyze the relationship between the performance
of offline RL in partially observed settings and the bisimulation loss we discussed in Section 6.
Our hypothesis is that, if naı̈ve offline RL performs poorly on a given POMDP, then adding the
bisimulation loss should improve performance, and if offline RL already does well, then the learned
representations should already induce a bisimulation metric, and thus a low value of this loss. Note
that our theory does not state that naı̈ve offline RL will always perform poorly, just that it has a
poor worst-case bound, so we would not expect an explicit bisimulation loss to always be necessary,
though we hypothesize that successful offline RL runs might still minimize loss as a byproduct of
successful learning when they work well. We describe the main elements of each evaluation in the
main paper, and defer implementation details to Appendix B.
7.1 TABULAR NAVIGATION
    9
                              We first evaluate our hypothesis in a task involving navigation in a 10×10
    8                         tabular environment similar to gridworld (Fu et al., 2019b). Like grid-
    7


    6
                              world, the environment we consider contains a start (blue) and goal (green)
    5
                              state, and walls (grey) and lava (red) placed in between. We consider
    4
                              a sparse reward where the agent earns a reward of 1 upon reaching the
                              goal state; however, if the agent reaches a lava state, then its reward is
    3


    2


    1
                              0 for the rest of the trajectory. The agent is able to move in either of
    0


        0   1    2    3       the four directions (or choose to stay still). To introduce stochasticity in
                              4       5       6       7   8   9


                              the transition dynamics, there is a 20% chance that the agent travels in a
different direction (that is uniformly sampled) than commanded. Finally, the horizon of each episode
is H = 50. Unlike conventional gridworld, the location of the goal state in our environment changes
depending on what states the agent visits earlier in the trajectory. The specific layout is shown on the
left. If the agent takes downwards path from the start state, they will trip a switch that turns the goal
into the state in the lower right surrounded by lava; otherwise, the goal is the state in the lower left.
Because the location of the goal state is unknown and depends on past behavior, it must be inferred
from the observation history of the agent. Because the goal state in the lower left is “safe” (i.e. not
surrounded by lava), an optimal agent should intentionally trip the switch by going right.
We construct a dataset of size |D| = 5, 000 where 50% of trajectories come from a policy that moves
randomly, and 50% from a policy that primarily takes the path towards the “unsafe” goal state in


                                                                                                                       7
                  Method           Mean Reward (Base Task)        Mean Reward (Hard Task)
                    BC                     0.05 ± 0.02                    0.01 ± 0.01
               Filtered BC                 0.41 ± 0.12                    0.12 ± 0.05
                   CQL                     0.64 ± 0.17                    0.43 ± 0.08
            CQL + Bisimulation             0.71 ± 0.14                    0.58 ± 0.09
                   IQL                     0.63 ± 0.15                    0.48 ± 0.07
            IQL + Bisimulation             0.70 ± 0.15                    0.61 ± 0.11
                 MOPO                      0.55 ± 0.18                    0.41 ± 0.12

           Table 1: Mean and standard deviation of scores achieved on ViZDoom navigation task.
the lower right. We train three algorithms on this dataset, all of which use an RNN to process the
observation histories: (1) filtered behavior cloning (BC) on the 25% of trajectories in the data with
highest reward, (2) conservative Q-learning (CQL) (Kumar et al., 2020), which is a strong offline RL
baseline, and (3) CQL augmented with our proposed bisimulation loss.
In Figure 2, we show the state-action visitations of policies learned under each algorithm. As expected,
the policy learned by filtered BC primarily takes the path towards the unsafe goal state. However, an
optimal policy should take the path rightwards that turns the goal into the “safe” one. Both offline RL
algorithms attempt to learn such a policy. However, the policy learned by naı̈ve CQL sometimes fails
to realize that it must take the rightward path from the start state in order to do so, resulting in a high
proportion of failed trajectories. This is likely due to the policy failing to infer the correct goal state
due to improperly discarding relevant information in its observation history (as RNNs are known to
“forget” states that occur far in the past). As we hypothesized, adding a bisimulation loss remedied
this issue, and the learned policy successfully takes the optimal path towards the “safe” goal state.
7.2 V ISUAL NAVIGATION
Next, we consider a much more complex task with image observations. We aim to show that our
proposed approach improves offline RL performance even when the observation space is large.
The task we consider involves navigating a maze from first-
person pixel observations, namely the “My Way Home” sce-
nario in the ViZDoom environment (Kempka et al., 2016). In
the task, the agent starts in a random room (among 8 total
rooms) at a random orientation, and is tasked to search for a
piece of armor that is in a specific room. At each step, the
agent observes a 320 × 240 rendering of its first-person view
of the maze, which we cropped and resized to be 80 × 80 in
our experiments. The agent has three available actions: {turn
left, turn right, and move forward}. The figure on
the left shows the layout and one possible observation by the agent. The reward at each state is
−0.0001 except at the location of the armor, where it is +1, and the agent has H = 2, 100 timesteps
to find the armor. The starting location of the agent is unknown and must be inferred from history.
We construct a dataset of |D| = 5 × 107 frames, where 50% of trajectories come from a policy that
moves randomly, and 50% from a policy trained via A2C (Mnih et al., 2016) on roughly 5 × 106
frames. The policy performs better than random, but still only successfully solves the task 60%
of the time. However, we posit that both the random and A2C policies will occasionally behave
optimally on different subsets of the maze, trajectory stiching will enable the learning of a policy that
drastically improves upon both of them. We consider the following baselines, all of which use the
same CNN and RNN to process the observation histories: (1) behavioral cloning (BC) on the full
dataset, (2) filtered BC on the 40% of trajectories in the data with highest reward, (3) conservative
Q-learning (CQL) (Kumar et al., 2020), (4) CQL augmented with our proposed bisimulation loss, (5)
implicit Q-learning (IQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2021), (6) IQL with bisimulation loss, and (7) offline
model-based policy optimization (MOPO) (Yu et al., 2020). CQL are IQL are both state-of-the-art
offline algorithms; meanwhile, MOPO is a model-based offline algorithm where an ensemble of
models is used to generate synthetic rollouts, whereas in our proposed approach, a model is also
learned but solely used in a contrastive loss.
In Table 1, we show the cumulative rewards achieved by each algorithm across 100 independent
evaluations. In the “base” task, the agent spawns in a random location, and in the “hard” task, the
agent always spawns in the room farthest from the goal (blue in above figure). We see that offline
RL greatly outperforms imitation learning in each environment, and that adding our bisimulation


                                                    8
loss noticeably improves performance. We also see that the improvement is greater in the “hard”
task, likely because trajectories are longer and learning compact representations is more important.
Finally, we observe that using a learned model in a bisimulation loss is much more effective than in
traditional model-based optimization, which are likely more sensitive to model bias.
7.3 NATURAL L ANGUAGE G AME
Our final task is a challenging benchmark to test the capabilities of offline RL on a natural language
task. In particular, we aim to learn agents that successfully play the popular game Wordle. We adopt
the details from this task from Snell et al. (2023), but provide a summary below. Although this is
a relatively simple task, we use real transformer-based language models to address it, providing an
initial evaluation of our hypothesis at a scale similar to modern deep networks.
In the game, the agent tries to guess a 5-letter word randomly selected from a vocabulary of 400
words. Here, the state is the word and is completely unknown to the agent, and actions consists of
a sequence of 5 letter tokens. After each action, the agent observes a sequence of 5 color tokens,
each with one of three “colors” for each letter in the guessed word: “black” means the guessed letter
is not in the underlying word, “yellow” means the guessed letter is in the word but not in the right
location, and “green” means the guessed letter is in the right location. We give a reward of -1 for
each incorrect guess and a reward of 0 for a correct guess, at which point environment interaction
ends. The agent gets a maximum of H = 6 guesses to figure out the word.
We use a dataset of Wordle games played by
real humans and scraped from tweets, which
                                                                  Method            Wordle Score
was originally compiled and processed by Snell
et al. (2023). We train four algorithms that use                 Fine-tuning        −2.83 ± 0.05
GPT-2 (with randomly initialized parameters)                Filtered Fine-tuning    −3.02 ± 0.06
as a backbone transformer that encodes observa-                     ILQL            −2.21 ± 0.03
                                                           ILQL + Bisimulation −2.19 ± 0.03
tion histories. The supervised methods predict
actions via imitation learning as an additional
head from the transformer: (1) fine-tuning (FT) Table 2: Mean and standard deviation of scores
uses the entire data, and (2) filtered FT uses top- achieved after training on human Wordle dataset.
25% of trajectories. The offline RL methods are: (3) Implicit Language Q-learning (ILQL) (Snell
et al., 2023), and (4) ILQL with bisimulation loss.
                                       We report mean and standard deviation of scores of all method
                    4.0
                                       across 200 independent evaluations in Table 2. We see that
                                    ILQL
   3.5
                                       ILQL with bisimulation learning outperforms all other consid-
                                    ILQL+bisim
Bisimulation Loss


   3.0                                 ered approaches, but only marginally over base ILQL. We hy-
   2.5                                 pothesize that the reason why base ILQL already performs well
   2.0
                                       on the Wordle task is because standard training is already learn-
                                       ing useful representations that induce a bisimulation metric.
   1.5
                                       We assess whether this is true by measuring our bisimulation
   1.0                                 loss for ILQL both with and without explicit minimization of
      0  10    20    30    40    50 60
          Gradient Updates (x62.5k)    the loss in Figure 3 across 5 random runs of each algorithm.
                                       We notice that ILQL already implicitly minimizes the proposed
 Figure 3: Bisimulation training loss. loss during standard training. This is in line with our hypothesis,
though is somewhat surprising, as ILQL has no awareness of yet still reduces the loss during training.

8                     D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we study the effectiveness of offline RL algorithms in POMDPs with unknown state
spaces, where policies must utilize observation histories. We prove that because offline RL cannot in
the worst case benefit from “trajectory stitching” to learn efficiently in POMDPs, it suffers from poor
worst-case sample complexity. However, we also identify that offline RL can actually be provably
efficient with suitable representations. Such representations discard features irrelevant for action
selection. We show a sufficient condition for this when the representations induce a bisimulation
metric. In addition, we show how to improve existing offline RL algorithms by adding a bisimulation
loss to enforce the learning of such representations. While we show that learning representations that
induce a bisimulation metric is sufficient to improve the effectiveness of offline RL with observation
histories, it is by no means necessary. A direction for future work is deriving a more nuanced
characterization of when useful representations are learned just by standard offline RL training.


                                                    9
R EFERENCES
Mohammad Mehdi Afsar, Trafford Crump, and Behrouz H. Far. Reinforcement learning based
 recommender systems: A survey. CoRR, abs/2101.06286, 2021.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, and Lin F Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a generative
  model is minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 67–83. PMLR, 2020.
DeepMind AlphaStar. Mastering the real-time strategy game starcraft ii. URL: https://deepmind.
  com/blog/alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii, 2019.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Alessandro Lazaric, and Animashree Anandkumar. Reinforcement learning
  of pomdps using spectral methods. In 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR, 2016.
Pablo Samuel Castro. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov
  decision processes. CoRR, abs/1911.09291, 2019.
Norman Ferns, Prakash Panangaden, and Doina Precup. Metrics for finite markov decision processes.
  CoRR, abs/1207.4114, 2012.
J. Fu, A. Kumar, O. Nachum, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep data-driven
   reinforcement learning. In arXiv, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.07219.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Matthew Soh, and Sergey Levine. Diagnosing bottlenecks in deep q-learning
  algorithms. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2019a.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Matthew Soh, and Sergey Levine. Diagnosing bottlenecks in deep Q-learning
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10250, 2019b.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02900, 2018.
Hongyi Guo, Qi Cai, Yufeng Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient offline
  reinforcement learning for partially observable Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the
 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep
   reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In arXiv, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
   pdf/1801.01290.pdf.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. International conference on machine learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2019.
Nicolas Heess, Jonathan J. Hunt, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and David Silver. Memory-based control with
  recurrent neural networks. CoRR, abs/1512.04455, 2015.
Maximilian Igl, Luisa M. Zintgraf, Tuan Anh Le, Frank Wood, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep
 variational reinforcement learning for pomdps. 2018.
Herbert Jaeger. Observable operator models for discrete stochastic time series. Neural Computation,
  2000.
Chi Jin, Sham M. Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete pomdps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume abs/2006.12484, 2020.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021a.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021b.


                                                10
Niels Justesen and Sebastian Risi. Automated curriculum learning by rewarding temporally rare
  events. CoRR, abs/1803.07131, 2018.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 651–673,
 2018.
Sammie Katt, Frans A. Oliehoek, and Christopher Amato. Learning in pomdps with monte carlo tree
  search. CoRR, abs/1806.05631, 2018.
Mete Kemertas and Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong. Towards robust bisimulation metric learning. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek, and Wojciech Jaśkowski. ViZ-
 Doom: A Doom-based AI research platform for visual reinforcement learning. In IEEE Conference
 on Computational Intelligence and Games, pages 341–348, Santorini, Greece, Sep 2016. IEEE.
 doi: 10.1109/CIG.2016.7860433. The Best Paper Award.
Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05951, 2020.
Ilya Kostrikov, Jonathan Tompson, Rob Fergus, and Ofir Nachum. Offline reinforcement learning
   with fisher divergence critic regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08050, 2021.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pages 11761–11771, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04779, 2020.
Aviral Kumar, Joey Hong, Anikait Singh, and Sergey Levine. When should we prefer offline
  reinforcement learning over behavioral cloning?, 2022.
Sascha Lange, Thomas Gabel, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Batch reinforcement learning. In Reinforce-
  ment Learning, volume 12. Springer, 2012.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Yao Liu, Adith Swaminathan, Alekh Agarwal, and Emma Brunskill. Provably good batch reinforce-
  ment learning without great exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08202, 2020.
Andreas Maurer and Massimiliano Pontil. Empirical bernstein bounds and sample variance penaliza-
  tion. arxiv preprint arxiv:0907.3740, 2009.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1928–1937, 2016.
Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline rein-
  forcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12021,
  2021.
Tongzheng Ren, Jialian Li, Bo Dai, Simon S Du, and Sujay Sanghavi. Nearly horizon-free offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14077, 2021.
Stéphane Ross, Joelle Pineau, Brahim Chaib-draa, and Pierre Kreitmann. A bayesian approach for
   learning and planning in partially observable markov decision processes. Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 2011.


                                                11
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889–1897, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Susan M Shortreed, Eric Laber, Daniel J Lizotte, T Scott Stroup, Joelle Pineau, and Susan A Murphy.
  Informing sequential clinical decision-making through reinforcement learning: an empirical study.
  Machine learning, 84(1-2):109–136, 2011.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Matthijs T. J. Spaan. Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes, pages 387–414. Springer
 Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-27645-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-27645-3 12.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press, second
  edition, 2018.
Stephan Timmer. Reinforcement Learning with History Lists. PhD thesis, Universitat Osnabruck,
  2010.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. CoRR, abs/1807.03748, 2018.
L. Wang, Wei Zhang, Xiaofeng He, and H. Zha. Supervised reinforcement learning with recurrent
   neural network for dynamic treatment recommendation. Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2018.
Manuel Watter, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Embed
 to control: A locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridging
  sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and
  Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13239,
  2020.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08363,
  2021.
Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning invariant
 representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Marvin Zhang, Sergey Levine, Zoe McCarthy, Chelsea Finn, and Pieter Abbeel. Policy learning with
 continuous memory states for partially observed robotic control. CoRR, abs/1507.01273, 2015.
Yufeng Zhang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Yongxin Chen, and Zhaoran Wang. Can temporal-difference
  and q-learning learn representation? a mean-field theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04761, 2020.


                                                 12
A     P ROOFS
In this section, we show the full proofs for the lemmas and theorems described in the main paper.

A.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

In this section, we proof the performance guarantee for PEVI given by the pseudocode in Algorithm 2.
We follow the proof of Theorem 4.2 in Kumar et al. (2022), but adapt it for our setting of observation-
history-MDPs.

Algorithm 2 PEVI
Require: Offline dataset D, confidence level δ
 1: Compute n(τ, a) from D, and estimate rb(τ, a), Pb(·|τ, a), ∀(τ, a) ∈ H × A
               b a) ← 0, Vb (τ ) ← 0, ∀(τ, a)
 2: Initialize Q(τ,
 3: for h = 1, 2, . . . , H do
 4:    Construct c(τ, a), ∀(τ, a) ∈ H × A based on D.
 5:         b a) ← rb(τ, a) − c(τ, a) + P ′ Pb(o′ | τ, a) · Vb (τ ⊕ o′ ), ∀(τ, a) ∈ H × A.
       Set Q(τ,                                o
 6:    Set πb(· | τ ) ← arg maxπ Q(τ,
                                    b ·) · π(· | τ ), ∀τ ∈ H.
 7:    Set Vb (τ ) ← Q(τ,
                       b ·) · πb(· | τ ), ∀τ ∈ H.
 8: Return π b


Recall from Section 4, that in a tabular POMDP, confidence intervals c(τ, a), ∀(τ, a) ∈ H × A can
be constructed as in Equation 1.

A.1.1    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma A.1 (Bernstein’s inequality). Let X, {Xi }ni=1 be i.i.d random variables with values in [0, 1],
and let δ > 0. Then we have
                               n
                                        r                                  !
                            1X             2Var(X) log(2/δ) log(2/δ)
               P E [X] −          Xi >                           +            ≤ δ.
                            n i=1                   n                 n

Lemma A.2 (Theorem 4, Maurer and Pontil (2009)). Let X, {Xi }ni=1 with n ≥ 2 be i.i.d random
                                                Pn                      Pn
variables with values in [0, 1]. Define X̄ = n1 i=1 Xi and Var(X)
                                                            d      = n1 i=1 (Xi − X̄)2 . Let
δ > 0. Then we have
                                         s                             
                                n
                             1 X            2 Var(
                                              d X̄) log(2/δ) 7 log(2/δ)
              P  E [X] −         Xi >                      +            ≤ δ.
                            n i=1                  n−1         3(n − 1)


Lemma A.3 (Lemma 4, Ren et al. (2021)). Let λ1 , λ2 > 0 be constants. Let f : Z≥0 → R be a
function such that f (i) ≤ H, ∀i and f (i) satisfies the recursion
                                      p
                              f (i) ≤ λ1 f (i + 1) + λ1 + 2i+1 λ2 .
Then, we have that f (0) ≤ 6(λ1 + λ2 ).

A.1.2    P ESSIMISM G UARANTEE
The first thing we want to show is that with high probability, the algorithm provides pessimistic value
estimates, namely that Vbh (τ ) ≤ V ∗ (τ ) for all h ∈ [H] and τ ∈ H. To do so, we introduce a notion
of a “good” event, which occurs when our empirical estimates of the MDP are not far from the true
MDP. We define E1 to be the event where
                                                  s
                                                     HV(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh (τ ⊕ ·))ι         ι
    (Pb(· | τ, a) − P (· | τ, a)) · Vbh (τ ⊕ ·) ≤                                   +               (3)
                                                            (n(τ, a) ∧ 1)             (n(τ, a) ∧ 1)


                                                    13
holds for all i ∈ [m] and (τ, a) ∈ H × A. With abuse of notation, we let Vbh (τ ⊕ ·) be a vector of
values of histories of the form τ ⊕ o′ for o′ ∈ O. We also define E2 to be the event where
                                              s
                                                   rb(τ, a)ι           ι
                        |b
                         r(τ, a) − r(τ, a)| ≤                +                                  (4)
                                                (n(τ, a) ∧ 1) (n(τ, a) ∧ 1)
holds for all (τ, a).
We want to show that the good event E = E1 ∩ E2 occurs with high probability. The proof mostly
follows from Bernstein’s inequality in Lemma A.1 . Note that because Pb(· | τ, a), Vbi are not
independent, we cannot straightforwardly apply Bernstein’s inequality. We instead use the approach
of Agarwal et al. (2020) who, for each state s, partition the range of Vbi (τ ) within a modified s-
absorbing MDP to create independence from Pb. The following lemma from Agarwal et al. (2020) is
a result of such analysis:
Lemma A.4 (Lemma 9, Agarwal et al. (2020)). For any h ∈ [H], (τ, a) ∈ H × A such that
n(τ, a) ≥ 1, and δ > 0, we have
                                                   s                                         
                                                      HV(P (· | τ, a), Vh (τ ⊕ ·))ι
                                                         b             b                 ι 
  P  (Pb(· | τ, a) − P (· | τ, a)) · Vbh (τ ⊕ ·) >                                 +           ≤ δ.
                                                                n(τ, a)               n(τ, a)


Using this, we can show that E occurs with high probability:
Lemma A.5. P (E) ≥ 1 − 2|H||A|Hδ.

Proof. For each i and (τ, a), if n(τ, a) ≤ 1, then equation 3 and equation 4 hold trivially. For
n(τ, a) ≥ 2, we have from Lemma A.4 that
                                                  s                                          
                                                     HV(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh (τ ⊕ ·))ι      ι
 P  (Pb(· | τ, a) − P (· | τ, a)) · Vbh (τ ⊕ ·) >                                  +          ≤ δ.
                                                               n(τ, a)                n(τ, a)
Similarly, we can use Lemma A.2 to derive
                                       s                     !
                                         rb(τ, a)ι      ι
             P |b r(τ, a) − r(τ, a)| >             +
                                          n(τ, a)    n(τ, a)
                                          s                               
                                              Var(b
                                              d r(τ, a))ι          ι
              ≤ P |br(τ, a) − r(τ, a)| >                    +              ≤ δ,
                                             2(n(τ, a) − 1) 2(n(τ, a) − 1)
                    d r(τ, a)) ≤ rb(τ, a) for [0, 1] rewards, and with slight abuse of notation, let ι
where we use that Var(b
capture all constant factors. Taking the union bound over all i and (τ, a) yields the desired result.

Now, we can prove that our value estimates are indeed pessimistic.
Lemma A.6 (Pessimism Guarantee). On event E, we have that Vbh (τ ) ≤ V πb (τ ) ≤ V ∗ (τ ) for any
step h ∈ [H] and state τ ∈ H.

Proof. We aim to prove the following for any h and τ : Vbh−1 (τ ) ≤ Vbh (τ ) ≤ V πb (τ ) ≤ V ∗ (τ ). We
prove the claims one by one.
Vbh−1 (τ ) ≤ Vbh (τ ): This is directly implied by the monotonic update of our algorithm.
Vbh (τ ) ≤ V πb (τ ): We will prove this via induction. We have that this holds for Vb0 trivially. Assume it
holds for h − 1, then we hhave                                      i
      V πb (τ ) ≥ Ea∼bπ(·|τ ) r(τ, a) + P (· | τ, a) · Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)
                      h                                                 i
                ≥ Ea rb(τ, a) − ch (τ, a) + Pb(· | τ, a) · Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·) +
                        h                                                                              i
                    Ea ch (τ, a) − (br(s, a) − r(τ, a)) − (Pb(· | τ, a) − P (· | τ, a)) · Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)

             ≥ Vbh (τ ) ,


                                                    14
where we use that
               ch (τ, a) ≥ (b
                            r(s, a) − r(τ, a)) + (Pb(· | τ, a) − P (· | τ, a)) · Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)
under event E.
Finally, the claim of V πb (τ ) ≤ V ∗ (τ ) is trivial, which completes the proof of our pessimism
guarantee.

A.1.3    P ERFORMANCE G UARANTEE
Now, we are ready to derive the performance guarantee from Theorem 4.1. We start with the following
value difference lemma for pessimistic offline RL:
Lemma A.7 (Theorem 4.2, Jin et al. (2021a)). On event E, at any step h ∈ [H], we have
                                                                H X
                                                                X
                              J(π ∗ ) − J(b
                                          π) ≤ 2                          d∗h (τ, a)ch (τ, a) ,                              (5)
                                                              h=1 (τ,a)

where d∗h (τ, a) = P (τh = τ, ah = a; π ∗ ) for τh = (o1 , a1 , . . . , oh ).

Proof. The proof follows straightforwardly from Jin et al. (2021a) for standard MDPs by simply
replacing states with observation histories.

Now, we are ready to bound the desired quantity SubOpt(b       π ∗ ) = ED [J(π ∗ ) − J(b
                                                                                       π )]. We have
                            "                                 #
                             X
ED [J(π ∗ ) − J(b
                π ∗ )] = ED     ρ1 (τ )(V ∗ (τ ) − V πb (τ ))                                        (6)
                                   τ
                               "                                                   #
                                           X
                                                                ∗           π
                        = ED I{Ē}                     ρ1 (τ )(V (τ ) − V (τ ))
                                                                            b

                                               τ
                                                         :=∆1
                                       "                                                                               #
                                                                                       X
                                                                     ∗                                ∗          π
                             + ED I{∃τ ∈ H, n(τ, π (τ )) = 0}                              ρ1 (τ )(V (τ ) − V (τ ))
                                                                                                                 b

                                                                                       τ
                                                                                :=∆2
                                       "                                                                                     #
                                                                                           X
                             + ED I{∀τ ∈ H, n(τ, π ∗ (τ )) > 0}I{E}                               ρ1 (τ )(V ∗ (τ ) − V πb (τ )) .
                                                                                             τ
                                                                                  :=∆3

We bound each term individually. The first is bounded as ∆1 ≤ P Ē ≤ 2|H||A|Hδ ≤ Hι

                                                                                 N for
                   1
choice of δ = 2|H||A|HN .

Bound on ∆2 . For the second term, we have
                           X
                     ∆2 ≤      ρ1 (τ )ED [I{n(τ, π ∗ (τ )) = 0]}
                                       τ
                                           X
                               ≤H                  d∗ (τ, π ∗ (τ ))ED [I{n(τ, π ∗ (τ )) = 0}]
                                           τ
                                               X
                                       ∗
                               ≤C H                     µ(τ, π ∗ (τ ))(1 − µ(τ, π ∗ (τ )))N
                                                   τ
                                 4C ∗ |O|
                               ≤          ,
                                  9N
where we use that ρ1 (τ ) = d∗ (τ, π ∗ (τ )) as τ = o1 , and that maxp∈[0,1] p(1 − p)N ≤ 9N
                                                                                          4
                                                                                            .


                                                                15
Bound on ∆3 . What remains is bounding the last term, which we know from Lemma A.7 is
bounded by
                                                                            
                                                   H X
                                                   X
           ∆3 ≤ 2ED I{∀τ ∈ H, n(τ, π ∗ (τ )) > 0}        d∗h (τ, a)ch (τ, a) ,
                                                                    h=1 (τ,a)

Recall that ch (τ, a) is given by
                            s                                    s
                               HV(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)ι     Hbr(τ, a)ι    Hι
               bh (τ, a) =                                     +              +
                                         n(τ, a)                    n(τ, a)     n(τ, a)

We can bound the summation of each term separately. For the third term we have,
                                      
               H X                         H X
              X
                      ∗         Hι         X
                                                     ∗               Hι
         ED         dh (τ, a)          ≤          dh (τ, a)ED
                               n(τ, a)                             n(τ, a)
                 h=1 (τ,a)                              h=1 (τ,a)
                                                         H
                                                        XX                  Hι
                                                    ≤           d∗h (τ, π ∗ (τ ))
                                                      τ h=1
                                                                      N µ(τ, π ∗ (τ ))
                                                            H
                                                                             !
                                                      Hι X X ∗        ∗               H
                                                    ≤         dh (τ, π (τ ))
                                                      N τ                       µ(τ, πh∗ (τ ))
                                                                    h=1
                                                   C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                                                ≤               .
                                                        N
                                             PH
Here we use Jensen’s inequality and that h=1 d∗h (τ, a) ≤ C ∗ µ(τ, a) for any (τ, a). For the second
term, we similarly have
                                          s               
                       H X
                      X                          r (τ, a)ι
                                d∗h (τ, a) H
                                                 b
                 ED                                       
                                                 n(τ, a)
                      h=1 (τ,a)
                        v                                  v
                          uH X                               uH X
                          uX                                 uX
                                          ∗          Hι
                  ≤ ED   t              dh (τ, a)          t              d∗h (τ, a)b
                                                                                      r(τ, a)
                                                   n(τ, a)
                             h=1 (τ,a)                            h=1 (τ,a)
                    r
                       C ∗ |H|H 3 ι
                  ≤                  ,
                            N
where we use Cauchy-Schwarz. Finally, we consider the first term of bh (τ, a)
                               s                                     
           H X                            b(· | τ, a), Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)ι
           X                          V( P
     ED            d∗h (τ, a) H                                      
                                                  n(τ, a)
          h=1 (τ,a)
             v                                   v
               uH X                                     H X
               uX                                  uX
                                          Hι  u
       ≤ ED t               d∗h (τ, a)            t            d∗h (τ, a)V(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·))
                                        n(τ, a)
                  h=1 (τ,a)                           h=1 (τ,a)
                          v
                               H X
         r
            C ∗ |H|H 2 ι u
                          uX
       ≤                  t             d∗h (τ, a)V(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)) .
                 N
                              h=1 (τ,a)

Similar to what was done in Zhang et al. (2020); Ren et al. (2021) for finite-horizon MDPs, we can
bound this term using variance recursion for finite-horizon observation-history-MDPs. Define
                                  H X
                                  X                                                     i
                       f (i) :=               d∗h (τ, a)V(Pb(· | τ, a), (Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·))2 ) .               (7)
                                  h=1 (τ,a)



                                                          16
Using Lemma 3 of Ren et al. (2021), we have the following recursion:
                        r
                            C ∗ |H|H 2 ι              C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                f (i) ≤                  f (i + 1) +                 + 2i+1 (Φ + 1) ,
                                 N                         N
where
                           v
                                H X
            r
                 ∗                                                                  C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                        2
                           uX
              C |H|H ι u
       Φ :=                t             d∗h (τ, a)V(Pb(· | τ, a), Vbh−1 (τ ⊕ ·)) +                (8)
                   N                                                                     N
                                  h=1 (τ,a)
                                             ∗
Using Lemma A.3, we can bound f (0) = O C |H|HιN     +   Φ + 1  . Using that for constant c,
                     r
                        C ∗ |H|H 2 ι         C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                Φ=                   f (0) +
                             N                    N
                     s
                          ∗                                        C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                                 2
                                       ∗          2

                        C |H|H ι cC |H|H ι
                  ≤                                 + cΦ + c +
                             N              N                           N
                           cΦ 2cC ∗ |H|H 2 ι c
                       ≤      +             +
                            2       N         2
we have that
                                                  4cC ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                                          Φ≤c+                   .
                                                        N
Substituting this back into the inequality for Φ yields,
                                         r                            !
                                            C ∗ |H|H 2 ι C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                               Φ=O                       +
                                                 N               N

Finally, we can bound
                                          r
                                       C ∗ |H|H 2 ι C ∗ |H|H 2 ι
                                  ∆3 ≤              +               .
                                            N              N
Combining the bounds for the three terms yields the desired result.

A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 5.1

Recall that the on-policy bisimulation metric for policy π on an observation-history-MDP is given by:
                    dπ (τ, τ ′ ) = |rπ (τ ) − rπ (τ ′ )| + W1 (P π (· | τ ), P π (· | τ ′ )) ,     (9)
                                                   π
We use the following lemma that states that d satisfies the following:
Lemma A.8 (Theorem 3, Castro (2019)). Given any two observation histories τ, τ ′ ∈ H in an
observation-history-MDP, and policy π,
                                     |V π (τ ) − V π (τ ′ )| ≤ dπ (τ, τ ′ ) .

Proof. The proof follows straightforwardly from Castro (2019); Ferns et al. (2012) for standard
MDPs by simply replacing states with observation histories.

Furthermore, recall that we have a summarized MDP (Z, A, P, r, ρ1 , H) where observation histories
are clustered using aggregator Φ. Let us define the reward function and transition probabilities for
policy π in the summarized-MDP as
                                                    Z
                                               1
                             rπ (Φ(τ )) =                    rπ (ζ)dξ(ζ) ,
                                            ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )
                                                    Z
                                               1
                    P π (Φ(τ ′ ) | Φ(τ )) =                  P π (Φ(τ ′ ) | ζ)dξ(ζ) ,
                                            ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )


                                                       17
where ξ is a measure on H.
We have,
                                                     Z                                    Z
   ∗          ∗               ∗         ∗                     ∗   ′     ∗        ′    ′
|V (τ ) − V (Φ(τ ))| = r (τ ) − r (Φ(τ )) +          P (o | τ )V (τ ⊕ o )do −                P ∗ (z ′ | Φ(τ ))V ∗ (z ′ )dz
                                                  o′                                     z′
                 Z                              Z
           1
     ≤                     π         π
                         |r (τ ) − r (ζ)| +          P π (τ ′ | τ ) − P π (τ ′ | ζ)V π (τ ′ )dτ ′ dξ(ζ)
        ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )                         τ′
            H −1
          +        sup |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))|
               H     τ

Using Lemma A.2 and the dual formulation of the W1 metric yields
                Z
          1
     ≤                  |rπ (τ ) − rπ (ζ)| + W1 (P π (· | τ ), P π (· | ζ))dξ(ζ)
       ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )
           H −1
         +        sup |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))|
              H
                Z τ
          1                                H −1
     ≤                  dπ (τ, ζ)dξ(ζ) +            sup |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))|
       ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )                       H      τ
                                                              H −1
                Z
          1
     ≤                  dbϕ (τ, ζ)dξ(ζ) + dbϕ − d∗        +            sup |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))|
       ξ(Φ(τ )) ζ∈Φ(τ )                                ∞         H       τ
                             H −1
     ≤ 2ε + dbϕ − d∗      +          sup |V ∗ (τ ) − V ∗ (Φ(τ ))| ,
                      ∞         H      τ

Taking the suprenum of the LHS and solving yields the desired result.

A.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

The proof follows straightforwardly from noting that
                      h                    i     h                          i
J(π ∗ ) − J(b
            π ) = Eρ1 V ∗ (τ ). − V πb (τ ) ≤ Eρ1 V ∗ (Φ(τ )) − V πb (Φ(τ )) + 2H ε + dbϕ − d∗                           ,
                                                                                                                 ∞

where the inequality follows from applying Lemma 5.1.
Bounding the first term simply follows from using the same proof as in Section A.1, except where
the space of observation histories H is now replaced by the space of summarizations Z. This yields
the desired result.


                                                         18
B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
In this section, we provide implementation details of each evaluated algorithm in each of our
experimental domains.

B.1   G RIDWORLD E XPERIMENTS

Network architecture. We use a single-layer RNN with hidden dimension 128 to encode observa-
tion histories, which consist of all the previously visited states (encoded as one-hot vectors). The
output of the RNN is fed through a single-layer MLP of hidden dimension 256, whose output is the
representation used to generate the next action (as a softmax distribution), as well as train on using
the bisimulation loss.

Training details. We use the hyperparameters reported in Table 3.

                             Hyperparameter                        Setting
                             CQL α                                    0.1
                             Bisimulation η                         0.05
                             Discount factor                        0.99
                             Batch size                               32
                             Number of updates per iteration         200
                             Number of iterations                    100
                             Optimizer                           AdamW
                             Learning rate                          3e-5

                           Table 3: Hyperparameters used during training.


B.2   V I ZD OOM E XPERIMENTS

Network architecture. We use the same convolutional architecture as in Justesen and Risi (2018).
Specifically, we use a three-layer CNN with filter sizes of [32, 64, 32] and strides [4, 2, 1], which
produces 32 feature maps of size 7 × 7. Then, the flattened input size is fed to a dense layer size
of hidden size 512, then into a three-layer RNN with hidden dimension 512 to encode observation
histories. Finally, the output of the RNN is fed through a single-layer MLP of hidden dimension 512,
whose output is the representation used to generate the next action (as a softmax distribution), as well
as train on using the bisimulation loss.

Training details. We use the hyperparameters reported in Table 4.

                             Hyperparameter                        Setting
                             CQL α                                  0.05
                             Bisimulation η                         0.02
                             Discount factor                        0.99
                             Batch size                               64
                             Number of updates per iteration         700
                             Number of iterations                    200
                             Optimizer                           AdamW
                             Learning rate                          7e-4

                           Table 4: Hyperparameters used during training.


B.3   W ORDLE E XPERIMENTS

Network architecture. We use the GPT-2 small transformer architecture, with the weights ini-
tialized randomly. One head of the transformer is used to generate the next action (as a softmax


                                                  19
distribution over the set of 26 characters). All heads are two-layer MLPs with hidden dimension
twice that of the transformer’s embedding dimension.

Training details. We use the hyperparameters reported in Table 5. All algorithms were trained on a
single V100 GPU until convergence, which took less than 3 days.

                            Hyperparameter                     Setting
                            ILQL τ                                0.8
                            ILQL α                              0.001
                            Bisimulation η                       0.02
                            Discount factor                      0.99
                            Batch size                          1024
                            Target network update α             0.005
                            Number of updates per iteration        60
                            Number of iterations                   60
                            Optimizer                         AdamW
                            Learning rate                        1e-4

                         Table 5: Hyperparameters used during training.


                                                 20
