Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONSISTENCY R EGULARIZATION FOR D OMAIN G EN -
ERALIZATION WITH L OGIT ATTRIBUTION M ATCHING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Domain generalization (DG) is about training models that generalize well to un-
         seen domains with different data distributions than the training domains. It has
         recently been shown that an effective way to achieve good out-of-distribution
         (OOD) performance is targeted data augmentation, which randomizes spurious
         factors while preserving robustly predictive factors in training examples. Data
         augmentation (DA) naturally leads to paired training examples that share the same
         semantic contents, which can be utilized via consistency regularization (CR). In
         this paper, we show that CR can further boost OOD performance on top of tar-
         geted DA. We also propose a novel CR-based DG method called Logit Attribution
         Matching (LAM). In comparison with previous CR-based DG methods, a key ad-
         vantage of LAM is that it leverages class labels often associated with semantic
         sharing pairs. Empirically we find that LAM consistently outperforms previous
         CR-based DG methods on benchmarks with multiple classes. It is the only one
         that can consistently improve over the targeted DA on all the datasets tested in our
         experiments. To justify the CR-based approach to DG theoretically, we establish
         conditions for optimal DG in a causal framework and explain how CR is related
         to those conditions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning models are successful under the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) as-
sumption that test data are drawn from the same distribution as that of training data. However,
models that generalize well in-distribution (ID) may be generalizing in unintended ways out-of-
distribution (OOD) (Szegedy et al., 2013; Shah et al., 2020; Geirhos et al., 2020; Di Langosco
et al., 2022). Some image classifiers with great ID performance, in fact, rely on background cues
to predict the class of foreground objects, leading to poor OOD performance (Beery et al., 2018;
Zech et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2020). Such reliance on spurious correlations is subject to various
kinds of domain shift, affecting many real-world applications where the i.i.d. assumption cannot be
guaranteed (Michaelis et al., 2019; Alcorn et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2022).
Domain generalization (DG) deals with the conundrum of generalizing under domain shift. It is
difficult because actual test domains may vary from the training domains in numerous ways. Multi-
source DG methods tackle this issue by utilizing data from multiple training domains, however, as
Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021) has shown, these methods are not generally better than the classic
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1998). The stagnation of algorithmic improvement
under the multi-source setting suggests that we may need to rethink what kind of data to use and
how to use them to improve OOD performance.
A promising alternative to multi-source DG is data augmentation (DA). By generating more data
from existing ones, DA exposes a model to more feature variations during training and thereby
enhances its capability in dealing with novel domains. Generic DA methods such as Mixup (Zhang
et al., 2017) and RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020) have been shown to improve OOD performance
in many cases, although the improvement is inconsistent across datasets. The limitation of these
methods is that their efficacy largely depends on how well the induced variation aligns with the
domain shift (Wiles et al., 2022). To address this, Gao et al. (2023) proposed targeted augmentation
(or targeted DA) which promotes the idea of designing specific data augmentation tailored for each
individual task. In essence, targeted DA serves as a medium for transferring vital domain knowledge


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from human to machine that is practically infeasible or inefficient through generic DA and multiple
training domains. Empirical evidence shows targeted DA outperforming previous generic DA and
multi-source baselines significantly on two real-world datasets in WILDS (Gao et al., 2023).
In this paper, we further investigate the potential of DA by studying its synergy with consistency
regularization (CR), a widely used technique in machine learning that encourages a model to make
similar predictions on similar inputs (Bachman et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020;
Caron et al., 2021). The rationale behind this synergy is that DA naturally leads to paired training
examples that share the same semantic content, which can be further utilized via CR to enhance DG.
Currently, there is a small number of DG methods that are based on CR (Hendrycks et al., 2019;
Mitrovic et al., 2021; Heinze-Deml & Meinshausen, 2021; Mahajan et al., 2021; Robey et al., 2021;
Ouyang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). Those methods involve several ways to create pairs (or
groups) of semantic sharing examples and various ways to enforce CR between the examples.
We make three contributions in this paper. First, we provide a systematic empirical evaluation of
multiple CR-based DG methods on a range of tasks. This is the first time they are evaluated together
on such a scale and rigor under the same fair setting. We concretely show that CR, if done properly,
can improve OOD performance when combined with DA, especially with targeted DA, in addition
to the performance gains already achieved by DA itself. Second, we provide theoretical insights on
the performance gains. We start by establishing a set of sufficient conditions for optimal DG in a
causal framework, and then show that CR can be viewed as natural way to achieve a key condition
for optimal DG using semantic sharing (SS) pairs, namely causal-invariant prediction.
Third, we propose a novel CR method called logit attribution matching (LAM). When a training
example is augmented, it is usually done in a way to preserve the information for a target class, re-
sulting in a labeled SS pair. Previous CR-based DG methods ignore the class label and aim to match
the entire feature/logit/probability vectors of the pair. This might adversely affect the latent features
of other classes. LAM alleviates this problem by focusing only on the target class, encouraging
equal latent features for both examples in a SS pair. Empirical results show that LAM consistently
outperforms other CR-based DG methods and other representative DG methods on benchmarks with
multiple classes. It is the only one that can consistently improve over targeted DA on all datasets
tested in our experiments. The previous best reported OOD performances of targeted DA on two of
the datasets, IWILDCAM2020-WILDS and CAMELYON17-WILDS, are 36.5% and 90.5% (Gao
et al., 2023) respectively. With LAM, we achieved 41.2% and 93.5% using the same architectures.


2   R ELATED W ORK

DOMAIN GENERALIZATION: Domain generalization (DG) is a fundamental problem in ma-
chine learning and has attracted much attention in recent years. A large number of methods have
been proposed. In this section, we briefly review several representative methods that are frequently
used as baselines in the literature. They are also used in our experiments as baselines. Most DG
methods assume multiple training domains. Among those multi-source methods, Group Distribu-
tionally Robust Optimization (GDRO) (Sagawa et al., 2020) seeks to minimize the worst-case risk
across all possible training domains. Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019)
regularizes ERM with a penalty that enforces cross-domain optimality on the classifier. Variance
Risk Extrapolation (V-REx) (Krueger et al., 2020) penalizes the variance of risks in different train-
ing domains. Domain-Adversarial Neural Networks (DANN) (Ganin et al., 2016) aims at mapping
inputs from each training domain to an invariant distribution in the feature space from which the
original domain is indistinguishable. Single-source DG does not assume access to multiple train-
ing domains. One of the main approaches to single-source DG is to discover predictive features
that are more sophisticated than simple cues spuriously correlated with labels. Representation Self-
Challenging (RSC) (Huang et al., 2020) and Spectral Decoupling (SD) (Pezeshki et al., 2021) are
two prominent methods in this direction. SD suppresses strong dependencies of output on dominant
features by regularizing the logits. RSC aims to achieve the same goal in a heuristic manner. At
each iteration of training, it mutes the feature units associated with the highest gradients, such that
the network is forced to predict the labels through other less salient features.
CONSISTENCY REGULARIZATION: Consistency regularization (CR) encourages a model to
make similar predictions on similar inputs. The idea originated from the semi-supervised learning
literature (Bachman et al., 2014; Sohn et al., 2020). It is also used in contrastive learning (Chen


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2020) and non-contrastive self-supervised learning (Caron et al., 2021). There is a small
number of DG methods based on CR (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Mitrovic et al., 2021; Heinze-Deml
& Meinshausen, 2021; Mahajan et al., 2021; Robey et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). They differ in
their ways to create and use SS pairs.
A straightforward way to create SS pairs is to use generic DA methods such as CutMix (Yun et al.,
2019) and RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020), or Targeted Augmentations (Gao et al., 2023) that
are specifically designed for DG. An input image x and an augmentation x̃ form an SS pair. SS
pairs can also be created/obtained in ways other than conventional DA. When analyzing the CelebA
dataset (Liu et al., 2015), Heinze-Deml & Meinshausen (2021) pair up photos of the same person.
When analyzing medical images, Ouyang et al. (2022) create pairs by performing image transfor-
mations to simulate different possible acquisition processes. In the case of multiple source domains,
SS pairs can be learned. Robey et al. (2021) and Wang et al. (2022) build image-to-image translation
networks between domains and use them to create pairs. Mahajan et al. (2021) propose an iterative
algorithm that uses contrastive learning to map images to a latent space, and then match up images
from different domains that have the same class label and are close to each other in the latent space.
Let x and x̃ be two training examples with the same semantic content. There are a number of
ways to use them to regularize a model: Probability matching minimizes the divergence between
the output distributions P (Ŷ |x) and P (Ŷ |x̃) (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Mitrovic et al., 2021); logit
matching minimizes the difference between the logit vectors logit(x) and logit(x̃) (Heinze-Deml
& Meinshausen, 2021); and feature matching minimizes the difference between the feature vectors
f (x) and f (x̃) (Mahajan et al., 2021).

3       A C AUSAL T HEORY OF D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION
In DG, a domain d is defined by a distribution P d (X, Y ) over the space of input-label pairs (X, Y ).
We assume the pairs are generated by the casual model shown in Figure 1 (a): (1) the input of a train-
ing example X is generated from two latent variables X c and X n , (2) X c and X n are statistically
correlated, and (3) the label Y is generated from only X c . The causal mechanisms that generate
X and Y are assumed to be invariant across domains. The corresponding conditional distributions
are denoted as P ∗ (X|X c , X n ) and P ∗ (Y |X c ). The joint distribution P d (X n , X c ) of the two latent
variables may change across domains. The variable X c denotes the essential information in an im-
age X that a human relies on to assign a label Y to the image. In contrast, the variable X n denotes
the other aspects of X that are not essential to label assignment. Similar models are also proposed
by Liu et al. (2021); Heinze-Deml & Meinshausen (2021); Mahajan et al. (2021); Mitrovic et al.
(2021); Ye et al. (2022), where X c /X n are referred to as semantic/variation factors, causal/non-
causal factors, content/style, etc. In this paper we will call them core factors and non-core factors
respectively. Moreover, we refer to the model as the causal latent decomposition (CLD) model.
To ground the CLD model, we need to specify three distributions: P d (X c , X n ), P ∗ (X|X c , X n )
and P ∗ (Y |X c ). Together, the three distributions define a joint distribution over the four variables:
                    P d (X c , X n , X, Y ) = P d (X c , X n )P ∗ (X|X c , X n )P ∗ (Y |X c ).
This joint distribution defines a domain in the CLD framework. We refer to the collection of all such
domains for some fixed P ∗ (X|X c , X n ) and P ∗ (Y |X c ) as a CLD family.
Let X c and X n be the sets of all possible values of the latent variables X c and X n respectively.
Consider an example x generated by P ∗ (X|xc , xn ) from a pair of values (xc , xn ) ∈ X c × X n of
X c and X n . 1 Let x̃ be another example sampled from the same xc and a different x̃n . Formally,

                                  x ∼ P ∗ (X|xc , xn ), x̃ ∼ P ∗ (X|xc , x̃n ).                           (1)

The two examples x and x̃ contain the same semantic contents and hence should be classified into
the same class. In this sense, x and x̃ make up a semantic sharing (SS) pair. Let P̂θ (Ŷ |X) be a
prediction model with parameters θ. It is said to be causal-invariant if
                                            P̂θ (Ŷ |x) = P̂θ (Ŷ |x̃),                                   (2)
    1
        We use upper case letters to denote variables and lower case letters to denote their values.


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 1: A causal model for DG (a) and an illustration of conditions for optimal DG (b).

for any x and x̃ sampled via (1) from any xc ∈ X c , xn ∈ X n and x̃n ∈ X n . In other words, the
prediction output does not change in response to variations in the non-core factors X n as long as the
core factors X c remain fixed.
The concept of causal-invariant prediction (CIP), as defined above, is not a new one and frequently
appears in the DG literature in various forms (Mitrovic et al., 2021; Mahajan et al., 2021). It is
closely related to a notion described in Peters et al. (2016) that has a very similar name, invariant
causal prediction (ICP). One difference between the two is that we are concerned with the invariance
of prediction with respect to a latent variable X n , which is entangled with another latent variable
X c to yield the observed input X. Our objective is to make the prediction model invariant to X n ,
although we cannot observe it. In contrast, ICP is concerned with the invariance of prediction with
respect to observed variables and does not address the problem of entanglement.
Theorem 1 (Conditions for Optimal DG) Let P̂θ be a prediction model for a CLD family, and P s
and P t be a source and a target domains from the family respectively. Suppose: 1). P̂θ minimizes
the in-distribution (ID) cross entropy loss ℓP s (P̂θ ) = E(x,y)∼P s (X,Y ) [− log P̂θ (Ŷ = y|x)]; 2). P̂θ is
causal-invariant; and 3). supp[P t (X c )] ⊆ supp[P s (X c )]. Then, the prediction model P̂θ also min-
imizes the out-of-distribution (OOD) cross entropy loss ℓP t (P̂θ ) = E(x,y)∼P t (X,Y ) [− log P̂θ (Ŷ =
y|x)]. In other words, it generalizes optimally to the target domain.
The proof of this theorem can be found in Appendix A. Note that the first condition requires ℓP s (P̂θ )
be minimized not only with respect to the parameters of the prediction model P̂θ , but also its archi-
tecture. The support supp[P d (X c )] := {xc |P d (xc ) > 0} of P d (X c ) consists of all core factors
that appear in a domain P d . To gain an intuitive understanding of Theorem 1, take a look at Figure
1 (b). Training examples x are sampled from a latent space spanned by the values xc and xn of
the latent variables X c and X n , which we depict as a two-dimensional box. A prediction model is
causal-invariant if it makes the same prediction for examples sampled from the same “vertical line”
in the latent space. If such a causal-invariant model also minimizes the cross-entropy loss of a source
domain, then it makes optimal prediction on all examples x̃ sampled from supp[P s (X c )]×X n (the
inner rectangle), not only those sampled from supp[P s (X c , X n )]. This enables optimal generaliza-
tion to any target domain P t such that supp[P t (X c )] ⊆ supp[P s (X c )].
Theorem 1 is similar in spirit to the theoretical findings of several previous works (Mahajan et al.,
2021; Mitrovic et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). However, there is a crucial distinction in that
the prior results are linked to particular methods for achieving the conditions of optimal domain
generalization. In contrast, our theorem solely concentrates on why these conditions result in optimal
domain generalization. This allows us to use it to motivate the consistency regularization approach
to DG, which will be shown in the next section.

4    C ONSISTENCY R EGULARIZATION FOR D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION
Suppose we have a collection of SS pairs Π = {(xk , x̃k )}K
                                                          k=1 . To achieve the first two conditions for
optimal DG, a straightforward approach is to solve the following constrained optimization problem:
                        min       E(x,y)∼P s [− log P̂θ (Ŷ = y|X = x)]
                          θ

                  subject to      P̂θ (Ŷ |X = xk ) = P̂θ (Ŷ |X = x̃k ) ∀(xk , x̃k ) ∈ Π.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If we turn the equality constraints into a consistency regularization term, the problem becomes:
                                                                            K
                                                                       1 X
                  min E(x,y)∼P s [− log P̂θ (Ŷ = y|X = x)] + λ            rθ (xk , x̃k ),             (3)
                    θ                                                  K
                                                                           k=1

where λ is a balancing parameter.

4.1      P REVIOUS CR- BASED DG METHODS

Suppose P̂θ consists of a feature extractor fϕ with parameters ϕ and a linear classification head gw
with parameters w. Hence, θ = (ϕ, w). For an input x, let fϕu (x) be the component of the feature
vector fϕ (x) that is associated with a feature unit u. Let wuy be the weight
                                                                           P between the feature unit
u and the output unit for a class y. The logit for the class y is zθy (x) = u wuy fϕu (x). 2
For each SS pair, the regularization term rθ (xk , x̃k ) can be defined in several ways:

          • Probability Matching (KL): rθ (xk , x̃k ) = KL(P̂θ (Ŷ |xk )||P̂θ (Ŷ |x̃k )),
          • Probability Matching (JS): rθ (xk , x̃k ) = JS(P̂θ (Ŷ |xk )||P̂θ (Ŷ |x̃k )),
          • Logit Matching: rθ (xk , x̃k ) = y (zθy (xk ) − zθy (x̃k ))2 ,
                                             P

          • Feature Matching: rθ (xk , x̃k ) = u (fϕu (xk ) − fϕu (x̃k ))2 .
                                              P

Probability matching (KL) is used in Representation Learning via Invariant Causal Mechanisms
(ReLIC) (Mitrovic et al., 2021); probability matching (JS) is used in AugMix (Hendrycks et al.,
2019); logit matching is used in Conditional Variance Regularization (CoRE) (Heinze-Deml &
Meinshausen, 2021); and feature matching is used in MatchDG (Mahajan et al., 2021). It is worth
noting that while we focus on pairs for simplicity, logit and feature matching can also be applied to
the case with groups of multiple examples that share the same semantic contents. To achieve this,
we can simply replace the sum of squared differences with the sum of variances. This is done in
CoRE and MatchDG.
An SS pair (xk , x̃k ) is usually obtained by changing an original training example xk . The seman-
tic information for the ground-truth label yk is typically preserved. The simplest way to use the
augmented example (x̃k , yk ) is to add it to the training set. As a method to improve OOD perfor-
mance, this is known as data augmentation (DA). The effect is to push both Pθ (ŷ = yk |xk ) and
Pθ (ŷ = yk |x̃k ) toward 1.0. When Pθ (ŷ = yk |xk ) and Pθ (ŷ = yk |x̃k ) differ significantly from each
other, CR places additional regularization force on the model. This is why CR can further improve
OOD performance on top of DA.
Among the aforementioned CR-based DG methods, probability matching aims to directly enforce
the equality (2) on the SS pairs. This makes the model more causal-invariant, which is conducive to
good OOD performance according to Theorem 1. Feature matching aims to make the feature vectors
of xk and x̃k identical, which is a stronger condition than the equality (2). The same can be said
about logit matching. Enforcing a condition stronger than necessary can hurt OOD performance.

4.2      L OGIT ATTRIBUTION M ATCHING

As mentioned above, the semantic information for the ground-truth label yk is typically preserved
when an training example xk is changed to produce an augmented example x̃k . This means that
our SS pair is actually labelled and can be written as (xk , x̃k : yk ). The crucial difference between
labeled and unlabeled SS pairs, used in most prior CR-based DG methods, lies in the information
they carry: while unlabelled pairs imply that xk and x̃k hold identical information about all classes,
labelled pairs signify that they contain the same information about one specific class yk . This dis-
tinction matters because, in practice, it is much harder to ensure that xk and x̃k hold identical
information about all classes of interest than a single class yk , especially when the total number of
classes is large. For instance, images labeled with class yk may have small objects of other classes in
the background, a type of label noise common in machine learning datasets (Northcutt et al., 2021).

   2
       Assume the bias is represented by a dummy unit.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, in real-world scenarios, rather than matching the probability/logit distributions over all
classes or the entire feature vectors, it is more logical to match only the features pertinent to the yk
class. The narrowed focus on the yk reduces the theoretical requirement from Theorem 1 for pairs
to perfectly share the same features across all classes of interest. With this perspective, we propose
a new regularization term to better leverage the information in the labelled SS pairs (xk , x̃k : yk ):
                                           X
                                                2
                          rθ (xk , x̃k ) =    wuy k
                                                    (fϕu (xk ) − fϕu (x̃k ))2 ,                       (4)
                                           u

where the wuyk is the weight in the classification layer (assumed to be linear, so effectively the
last layer) between the feature unit u and the logit of class yk . To understand the underlying idea
of the proposed regularization term, imagine the ideal case where the feature extractor f cleanly
disentangles xck and xnk , in the sense that the feature vector fϕ (xk ) is divided into two parts H1 (xk )
and H2 (xk ) that depend only on xck and xnk respectively, with H1 (xk ) = H1 (x̃k ) and H2 (xk ) ̸=
H2 (x̃k ). A causal-invariant predictor should predict yk based only on H1 (xk ). Hence the weights
wuyk for the feature units u in H2 should be 0, such that the features from the non-core factors
xnk are ignored. In practice, it is difficult to cleanly disentangle xck and xnk . In such a case, our
regularization term has the following effects:

      1) It encourages gw to put high weights wuyk on the units u where fϕu (xk ) ≈ fϕu (x̃k ), and
      2) It encourages fϕ to make fθu (xk ) ≈ fϕu (x̃k ) for units u with high weights wuyk .
           P 2
                       (fϕu (xk ) − fϕu (x̃k ))2 = u (wuyk fϕu (xk ) − wuyk fϕu (x̃k ))2 . The regularization
                                                  P
Note that u wuy     k
term essentially matches the contributions wuyk fϕu (xk ) and wuyk fϕu (x̃k ) from the feature units u to
the logit zθyk of yk . As such, we call the new regularization term logit attribution matching (LAM).
It encourages the logits of yk for xk and x̃k be computed from the same latent features and using
the same weights. This is a more fine-grained regularization force than equation (2), prompting the
model to concentrate on the specific features that are directly associated with the specific class yk .


5     E XPERIMENTS

There are four objectives in our empirical studies. First, we determine the effectiveness of previous
CR-based DG methods in improving OOD performance on top of targeted DA, and their relative
merits. Those methods were proposed and evaluated separately and with different SS pair creation
methods (see Section 2). This is the first time they are evaluated together on the same data, with
SS pairs created by targeted DA. Second, we compare LAM with previous CR-based DG methods.
Third, we compare LAM with other representative DG methods. Finally, we investigate the impact
of the quality and quantity of SS pairs on the performance of LAM, and demonstrate that LAM helps
models focus on core factors for prediction.

5.1   DATASETS

Our experiments involve five datasets, three with background shifts and two with style shifts.
IWILDCAM2020-WILDS (iWildCam) (Koh et al., 2020) consists of camera trap photos of ani-
mals taken at different locations. There are totally 217,640 images and 182 classes. The training
domain of iWildCam comprises images from 200 locations, while the test domain contains images
from a separate set of locations. A validation domain with images from additional locations is also
provided for model selection and hyperparameter tuning. For generating the augmented examples
for iWildCam, we cut-and-paste the animals in the training image to another image without animals
taken at a different location where the same animals sometimes appear. This is believed to random-
ize the spurious low-level background factors while preserving the robustly predictive species and
habitat factors in the training examples.
ImageNet-9 (Xiao et al., 2020) consists of about 50,000 images from ImageNet, and it involves
nine coarse-grain classes. Several synthetic variations are created by segmenting the foreground of
each image and place it onto a different background. In our main experiments, we use the variations
where the segmentation is done using GrabCut (Rother et al., 2004). The synthetic images with a


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


black background are used as augmented examples. The test domain mixed-rand consists of samples
where the foreground of an original image is placed onto the background of a random image.
NICO (He et al., 2020) includes around 25,000 images across 19 classes of animals or vehicles
captured in different contexts such as “at home” or “on the beach”. Each class encompasses 9 or
10 different contexts. As there is no predefined train-test split, we randomly select one context per
class for testing and use the remaining contexts for training. Similar to ImageNet-9, we perform
augmentation on NICO using the GrabCut segmentation. We place the foreground segmentation
onto the background of a random image.
CAMELYON17-WILDS (Camelyon) contains histopathology images from multiple hospitals for
binary tumor classification. Images from three hospitals are used for training, while images from a
fourth and fifth hospital are used for testing and validation respectively. There are stylistic variations
among images from different hospitals. One key stylistic difference often observed is the stain color.
Therefore, the stain color jitter (Tellez et al., 2018) is applied to training images to create augmented
examples. The jitter can effectively randomize the average stain level of images.
PACS (Li et al., 2017) contains images of objects and creatures depicted in four different style
domains: photo, art, cartoon and sketch. In total, it includes 9,991 images of 7 classes. Following
the common practice (Li et al., 2017; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021), we train three separate models,
using the art, cartoon and sketch domain respectively as the test domain, while the remaining three
domains are used for training in each model. We report the average accuracy of the three models
for each DG method. The photo domain is excluded from being the test domain, since we perform
augmentation on images from it. Specifically, we employ StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)
to transform the style of images from the photo domain, guided by the text prompt “a minimalist
drawing of a class name, outline only, no texture” (more details in Appendix B).
For the iWildCam and Camelyon, whose shifts arise naturally from the real-world application, we
use all training images including animals for iWildCam, and all training images for Camelyon to
create the augmented examples. To assess the performance of CR-based DG methods when only
a relatively small proportion of augmented examples is available, we only apply augmentation on
approximately 5% of the training data for ImageNet-9 and NICO, and about 10% of the training data
for PACS. All CR-based methods have a balancing parameter λ, which is tuned on the validation
domain for iWildCam and Camelyon, and tuned on the training domain for the other three datasets.

5.2   P RETRAINED M ODELS

In our experiments, we started with pretrained models and finetuned them on the aforementioned
datasets. Different pretained models are used for different datasets so as to be consistent with pre-
vious work (Gao et al., 2023). Specifically, we used the ImageNet pretrained ResNet-50 model
on iWildCam, and a randomly initialized DenseNet-121 model (Huang et al., 2017) on Camelyon.
We used the CLIP-pretrained (Radford et al., 2021) ViT-B/16 model (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) on
ImageNet-9 and NICO, and the CLIP-pretrained ResNet-50 model on the PACS experiment. See
Appendix D for more details.

5.3   P ERFORMANCES OF P REVIOUS CR-BASED DG M ETHODS

Our main results are summarized in Table 1. The first row shows the OOD performances of the
models obtained by minimizing the empirical cross entropy (ERM). The second row shows the
performance of the models obtained via ERM with the target-augmented data added to the training
set (ERM+DA). We see that targeted DA improves OOD performances drastically on iWildCam and
Camelyon. Those results are consistent with what were reported in Gao et al. (2023). Targeted DA
also boosts OOD performances on ImageNet-9, NICO and PACS albeit to lesser extents.
The four rows in the middle show the results for previous CR-based DG methods. We see that
the best of them improves over ERM+DA significantly on iWildCam and Camelyon, and slightly
on ImageNet-9 and PACS. Those indicate that CR, if done properly, can indeed improve OOD
preformance when combined with targeted DA.
None of the four methods dominates the others across the board. Probability matching generally
outperforms logit and feature matching, particularly on iWildCam. We conjecture that this is because


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: OOD performances of models trained using ERM, ERM+DA, previous CR-Based DG
methods, and LAM. The OOD performance of a model is assessed on held-out test domain(s) using
Macro F1 score on iWildCam or classification accuracy on all other datasets. Each model is trained
three times, with the standard deviation reported. The best result is in bold and second best is
underlined. Arrows indicate changes relative to ERM+DA. The Count ↓ represents the number of
datasets on which the CR-based DG method is worse than ERM+DA: a lower count indicates better
performance relative to ERM+DA.

              ImageNet-9     NICO         PACS            iWildCam     Camelyon    iWildCam-N   Count ↓

 ERM           83.3±1.1     95.3±0.1     82.8±0.5         30.2±0.3     65.2±2.6     15.8±2.1      —-
 ERM+DA        86.0±1.0     95.9±0.3     84.5±0.5         36.5±0.4     90.5±0.9     28.2±0.5      —-

 Prob. (JS)   86.0±0.4 −   95.0±0.3 ↓   84.3±0.3 ↓       37.1±0.4 ↑   94.8±1.2 ↑   25.5±0.6 ↓      3
 Prob. (KL)   86.9±0.2 ↑   95.4±0.2 ↓   85.0±1.0 ↑       40.3±0.3 ↑   92.8±1.5 ↑   26.3±0.7 ↓      2
 Logit        86.8±0.6 ↑   95.3±0.2 ↓   83.1±0.8 ↓       34.3±0.5 ↓   93.4±0.3 ↑   23.9±0.5 ↓      4
 Feature      87.6±0.1 ↑   95.5±0.2 ↓   81.7±0.2 ↓       36.0±0.3 ↓   94.3±0.6 ↑   25.3±0.7 ↓      4

 LAM          88.1±0.2 ↑   96.5±0.3 ↑   86.0±0.3 ↑       41.2±0.2 ↑   93.5±1.8 ↑   29.8±0.3 ↑      0


probability matching faithfully enforces the causal-invariant constraints on SS pairs, while logit and
feature matchings enforce stronger conditions.
5.4      P ERFORMANCES OF LAM
The results for LAM are shown at the bottom row of Table 1. On the first four datasets, it achieves
the best OOD performance among all the five CR-based methods. As indicated by the arrows, it is
the only CR-based method that consistently improves over ERM+DA on all the four datasets.
In LAM, a labelled SS pair (xk , x̃k : yk ) is used only to regularize the contributions from feature
units to the logit of the ground-truth class yk . It does not impact other classes as should be. In the
previous CR-based DG methods, on the other hand, the pair is used to regularize the entire feature,
logit or probability vector for xk . It affects other classes as well as yk . This is a problem when
a training example xk contains multiple objects of interest. Some objects that appear in the back-
ground of the main object in xk might be removed during data augmentation. In such a case, the
features for those minor objects would be suppressed. To demonstrate the adverse consequences,
we created a new version of the iWildCam dataset by adding a small image of another animal to the
background of each image. The new dataset is named iWildCam-N (examples of this dataset are
given in Appendix C). On this dataset, LAM still improves over ERM+DA. However, the perfor-
mances of all the previous CR-based DG methods are substantially worse than that of ERM+DA.
In binary classification problems, there is essentially only one class (since the two classes are mu-
tually exclusive). Here, the aforementioned advantage of LAM no longer exists. This explains why
LAM is inferior to two previous methods on the binary classification dataset Camelyon. Nonethe-
less, it still significantly outperforms ERM+DA.
The results in Table 1 are based on targeted DA. In Table 8 (Appendix E), we provide results for
iWildCam, iWildCam-N, and Camelyon using RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020), a more generic
DA technique, to create augmented examples. Despite the change in DA, LAM consistently im-
proves OOD performance and outperforms other CR-based DG methods.

5.5      C OMPARISON OF LAM AND OTHER DG M ETHODS
Table 2 compares the OOD performances of LAM with those of the six representative other DG
methods reviewed in Section 2. For the single-source methods RSC and SD, the augmented exam-
ples are simply added to the training set. For the multi-sources methods DANN, GDRO, IRM and
V-REx, the augmented examples are treated as an additional training domain.
On the first four datasets, LAM outperforms all the six other DG methods. It beats them by large
margins on iWildCam. As indicated by the arrows, the other DG methods are not as good as
ERM+DA in the majority of the cases while LAM improves over ERM+DA on all the first four


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: OOD performances of models trained using ERM, ERM+DA, LAM and other represen-
tative DG methods. Each model is trained three times and the standard deviation across runs is
reported as ±. Arrows indicate changes relative to ERM+DA.
                           ImageNet-9       NICO              PACS            iWildCam        Camelyon

               ERM          83.3±1.1       95.3±0.1          82.8±0.5         30.2±0.3        65.2±2.6
             ERM+DA         86.0±1.0       95.9±0.3          84.5±0.5         36.5±0.4        90.5±0.9

               RSC         86.4±0.2 ↑     94.0±1.8 ↓        84.3±0.6 ↓       32.7±0.9 ↓      91.6±0.3 ↑
               SD          86.7±0.3 ↑     96.0±0.2 ↑        85.0±0.4 ↑       32.7±0.8 ↓      93.5±0.5 ↑

              DANN         86.5±0.7 ↑     95.4±0.7 ↓        77.9±1.1 ↓       26.0±2.9 ↓      90.1±0.9 ↓
              GDRO         83.7±0.8 ↓     91.8±1.2 ↓        83.5±0.5 ↓       37.0±1.0 ↑      92.2±0.9 ↑
               IRM         87.1±0.2 ↑     93.5±0.2 ↓        83.2±0.4 ↓       31.7±0.1 ↓      90.8±2.6 ↑
              V-REx        83.6±1.4 ↓     94.0±0.9 ↓        84.4±0.2 ↓       35.6±1.6 ↓      90.4±4.1 ↓

               LAM         88.1±0.2 ↑     96.5±0.3 ↑        86.0±0.3 ↑       41.2±0.2 ↑      93.5±1.8 ↑

                     Table 3: The impact of the quality and quantity of SS pairs on LAM.
    Seg.                   GrabCut                     Seg.          Box            Auto          GrabCut
    # Pairs 0% 5% 10% 20% 50% 100%                             ERM+DA LAM ERM+DA LAM ERM+DA LAM

    Acc.     83.3 88.1 88.5 88.6 89.7 90.4             Acc.     85.2       85.9   83.9     86.6   86.0    88.1


datasets. On the binary classification dataset Camelyon, however, LAM is on par with SD method,
and still outperforms ERM+DA.

5.6        E XTENDED E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS OF LAM
In our main experiments with ImageNet-9, only 5% of the training data was used to create SS pairs.
To determine how the OOD performance of LAM is influenced by the number of SS pairs, we ran
additional experiments with different amounts of SS pairs (in percentages of training data). The
results are shown in Table 3 (left). It is clear that the increase in the quantity of SS pairs benefits and
the availability of small proportion of SS pairs can significantly improve OOD performance already.
In our main experiments with ImageNet-9, the SS pairs were created with GrabCut (Rother et al.,
2004). To determine how the OOD performance of LAM is influenced by the quality of SS pairs, we
ran additional experiments where the SS pairs were created in less ideal ways, one with bounding
boxes that come with ImageNet-9 (Box) and another using a semantic segmentation method (Long
et al., 2015) (Auto). The results are shown in Table 3 (right). We see that LAM improves over
ERM+DA in all cases. See Appendix B for more details and Appendix E for additional results.
We have argued that CR-based DG methods, particularly LAM, can help models focus more on
core factors for prediction. To verify the claim, we examine the GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)
saliency maps of the top predicted class by models trained using those methods. Examples are
shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10. Those examples indicate that the CR-based DG methods are
indeed effective in making model focus on core factors and LAM is the most effective among them.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the use of consistency regularization (CR) for domain general-
ization (DG). Theoretically, we argue that CR-based methods can boost the OOD performance of
models because they make models more causal-invariant using semantic sharing (SS) pairs. Em-
pirically, we find previous CR-based DG methods often improve over targeted data augmentation,
but not consistently. We propose a novel CR-based DG method, LAM, that leverages class labels
naturally associated with SS pairs. LAM improves over targeted data augmentation on all datasets
tested in our experiments. The improvements increase with the quantity and quality of SS pairs.
It outperforms previous CR-based methods on datasets with multiple classes, but may trail behind
some of them on binary classification problems. A promising future direction is to develop more
effective methods for creating SS pairs and apply LAM on them.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The methodologies of both previous CR-based DG methods and our proposed CR-based DG
method, Logit Attribution Matching (LAM), are thoroughly discussed in Section 4. Detailed in-
formation regarding the use of targeted data augmentation to create augmented examples for each
dataset is provided in Section 5.1 and Appendix B .We implemented the targeted DA on iWildCam
and Camelyon using the code provided by Gao et al. (2023).
Section 5.2 and Appendix D present the pre-trained models and other implementation specifics,
including the selection of hyperparameters for various models. The implementation of other DG
methods listed in Table 2 is based on the DomainBed (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021).
All datasets used in our experiments are publicly accessible, except for iWildCam-N. The creation
of the iWildCam-N are detailed in Section 5.4 and Appendix C. Upon paper acceptance, all related
codes and the iWildCam-N dataset will be available online.

R EFERENCES
Michael A Alcorn, Qi Li, Zhitao Gong, Chengfei Wang, Long Mai, Wei-Shinn Ku, and Anh Nguyen.
 Strike (with) a pose: Neural networks are easily fooled by strange poses of familiar objects. In
 CVPR, 2019.
Sharib Ali, Noha Ghatwary, Debesh Jha, Ece Isik-Polat, Gorkem Polat, Chen Yang, Wuyang Li,
  Adrian Galdran, Miguel-Ángel González Ballester, Vajira Thambawita, et al. Assessing gener-
  alisability of deep learning-based polyp detection and segmentation methods through a computer
  vision challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12031, 2022.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Philip Bachman, Ouais Alsharif, and Doina Precup. Learning with pseudo-ensembles. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In ECCV, 2018.
Sara Beery, Arushi Agarwal, Elijah Cole, and Vighnesh Birodkar. The iwildcam 2021 competition
  dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03494, 2021.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations
  for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wort-
  man Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79:151–175,
  2010.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V Le. Autoaugment:
  Learning augmentation strategies from data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 113–123, 2019.
Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Randaugment: Practical automated
  data augmentation with a reduced search space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 702–703, 2020.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lauro Langosco Di Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal mis-
  generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12004–12019. PMLR, 2022.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In ICLR, 2020.

Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. JMLR, 2016.

Irena Gao, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Out-of-domain
   robustness via targeted augmentations. In ICML, 2023.

Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2020.

Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In ICLR, 2021.

Yue He, Zheyan Shen, and Peng Cui. Towards non-iid image classification: A dataset and baselines.
  Pattern Recognition, 2020.

Christina Heinze-Deml and Nicolai Meinshausen. Conditional variance penalties and domain shift
  robustness. Machine Learning, 110(2):303–348, 2021.

Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lakshmi-
  narayanan. Augmix: A simple data processing method to improve robustness and uncertainty.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02781, 2019.

Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4700–4708, 2017.

Zeyi Huang, Haohan Wang, Eric P Xing, and Dong Huang. Self-challenging improves cross-domain
  generalization. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK,
  August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 124–140. Springer, 2020.

Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Sara Beery, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. arXiv:2012.07421, 2020.

David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Remi Le
  Priol, and Aaron Courville. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapolation (rex).
  arXiv:2003.00688, 2020.

Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10054, 2022.

D. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Song, and T. M. Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain generalization.
  In ICCV, 2017.

Sungbin Lim, Ildoo Kim, Taesup Kim, Chiheon Kim, and Sungwoong Kim. Fast autoaugment.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Chang Liu, Xinwei Sun, Jindong Wang, Haoyue Tang, Tao Li, Tao Qin, Wei Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu.
  Learning causal semantic representation for out-of-distribution prediction. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In ICCV, 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 3431–3440, 2015.
Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Conditional adversarial
 domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Divyat Mahajan, Shruti Tople, and Amit Sharma. Domain generalization using causal matching. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7313–7324. PMLR, 2021.
Claudio Michaelis, Benjamin Mitzkus, Robert Geirhos, Evgenia Rusak, Oliver Bringmann, Alexan-
  der S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Benchmarking robustness in object detec-
  tion: Autonomous driving when winter is coming. arXiv:1907.07484, 2019.
Jovana Mitrovic, Brian McWilliams, Jacob C Walker, Lars Holger Buesing, and Charles Blundell.
  Representation learning via invariant causal mechanisms. In ICLR, 2021.
Curtis G Northcutt, Anish Athalye, and Jonas Mueller. Pervasive label errors in test sets destabi-
  lize machine learning benchmarks. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
Cheng Ouyang, Chen Chen, Surui Li, Zeju Li, Chen Qin, Wenjia Bai, and Daniel Rueck-
  ert. Causality-inspired single-source domain generalization for medical image segmentation.
  arXiv:2111.12525, 2021.
Cheng Ouyang, Chen Chen, Surui Li, Zeju Li, Chen Qin, Wenjia Bai, and Daniel Rueckert.
  Causality-inspired single-source domain generalization for medical image segmentation. IEEE
  Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2022.
Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal inference by using invariant pre-
  diction: identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
  (Statistical Methodology), 78(5):947–1012, 2016.
Mohammad Pezeshki, Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, Doina Precup, and Guil-
 laume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:1256–1272, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Alexander Robey, George Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Model-based domain generalization. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Carsten Rother, Vladimir Kolmogorov, and Andrew Blake. “grabcut” interactive foreground extrac-
  tion using iterated graph cuts. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 23(3):309–314, 2004.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In ICLR, 2020.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573–9585, 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Zizhao Zhang, Han Zhang, Colin A Raffel,
  Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Alexey Kurakin, and Chun-Liang Li. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised
  learning with consistency and confidence. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:596–608, 2020.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
David Tellez, Maschenka Balkenhol, Irene Otte-Höller, Rob van de Loo, Rob Vogels, Peter Bult,
  Carla Wauters, Willem Vreuls, Suzanne Mol, Nico Karssemeijer, et al. Whole-slide mitosis de-
  tection in h&e breast histology using phh3 as a reference to train distilled stain-invariant convo-
  lutional networks. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 37(9):2126–2136, 2018.
Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley, 1998.
Ruoyu Wang, Mingyang Yi, Zhitang Chen, and Shengyu Zhu. Out-of-distribution generalization
  with causal invariant transformations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 375–385, 2022.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In ICLR, 2022.
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of
  image backgrounds in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020.
Nanyang Ye, Kaican Li, Haoyue Bai, Runpeng Yu, Lanqing Hong, Fengwei Zhou, Zhenguo Li,
  and Jun Zhu. Ood-bench: Quantifying and understanding two dimensions of out-of-distribution
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 7947–7958, 2022.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 6023–6032, 2019.
John R Zech, Marcus A Badgeley, Manway Liu, Anthony B Costa, Joseph J Titano, and Eric Karl
  Oermann. Variable generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in
  chest radiographs: a cross-sectional study. PLoS medicine, 15(11):e1002683, 2018.
Han Zhang, Zizhao Zhang, Augustus Odena, and Honglak Lee. Consistency regularization for
  generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
Yuchen Zhang, Tianle Liu, Mingsheng Long, and Michael Jordan. Bridging theory and algorithm
  for domain adaptation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7404–7413. PMLR,
  2019.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDICES

A     P ROOFS

Proof of Theorem 1: Let us start with the ID cross entropy loss:

       ℓP s (P̂θ )   = E(x,y)∼P s (X,Y ) [− log P̂θ (Ŷ = y|x)]
                     = E(xc ,xn )∼P s (X c ,X n ),x∼P ∗ (X|xc ,xn ),y∼P ∗ (Y |xc ) [− log P̂θ (Ŷ = y|x)]
                     = E(xc ,xn )∼P s (X c ,X n ),x∼P ∗ (X|xc ,xn ),y∼P ∗ (Y |xc ) [− log Qθ (Ŷ = y|xc )],

where the last equality holds for some distribution Qθ (Y |X c ) because P̂θ is causal-invariant. By
removing irrelevant variables and re-arranging terms, we get:

                     ℓP s (P̂θ ) = −Exc ∼P s (X c ) [Ey∼P ∗ (Y |xc ) [log Qθ (Ŷ = y|xc )].

As the ID ℓP s (P̂θ ) loss is minimized (over all model parameters and all model architectures), the
inner expectation is maximized for any xc such that P s (xc ) > 0.
Now, consider the OOD cross entropy loss of the target domain P t ℓP t (P̂θ ). By symmetry, we have:

                     ℓP t (P̂θ ) = −Exc ∼P t (X c ) [Ey∼P ∗ (Y |xc ) [log Qθ (Ŷ = y|xc )].

We know from above that the inner expectation is maximized for all xc such that P s (xc ) > 0. It is
also maximized for any xc such that P t (xc ) > 0, because
                                       supp[P t (X c )] ⊆ supp[P s (X c )].

Therefore, the OOD loss ℓP t (P̂θ ) is minimized. □



B     M ORE DETAILS OF SS PAIR CREATION USING TARGETED DA

A SS pair is formed by a training example and an augmented example. The SS pair creation using
targeted DA for each dataset has been introduced in Section 5.1. We provide more details and sample
augmented examples here.

B.1   I W ILD C AM

For iWildCam, we utilized a targeted DA technique named Copy-Paste (same-y) from Gao et al.
(2023). This DA method pastes the animal foreground onto a background image sampled from
the same habitat where the same animal species has been observed. There is a category of images
labeled “empty” in the iWildCam dataset. These images do not contain any animals and were
used as background images when creating augmented examples. We used the segmentation for the
animal foregrounds provided by Beery et al. (2021) to apply this DA. Sample augmented examples
produced by this DA approach are provided in Figure 2.

B.2   I MAGE N ET-9

In our main experiments, the synthetic images with a black background were used as augmented
data for ImageNet-9. Those augmented examples were created based on the GrabCut segmentation.
As also described in Section 5.6, to assess the performance of LAM under augmented examples in
various qualities, we also considered the augmented examples created based on the bounding boxes
and semantic segmentation. Specifically, we used the bounding boxes provided by the ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) and semantic segmentation produced via FCN (Long et al., 2015), a semantic
segmentation method. Sample augmented examples in various qualities are given in Figure 3.


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: SS pairs created via Copy-Paste (same-y) DA for iWildCam. This DA method involves
pasting the animal onto another image without animals sampled from the location where the same
animal species has been observed.


            Figure 3: Augmented examples in various quality created for ImageNet-9.


B.3   NICO

For creating the augmented examples for NICO, we placed the foreground segmentation onto the
background of a random image. We used GrabCut (Rother et al., 2004) to identify the foreground
segmentation for 20 images in each class of NICO, which constituted about 5% of its training data.
On average, the segmentation of an image took us around three seconds.
Since NICO does not have “empty” background images like iWildCam, we had to create synthetic
background images. To do this, we removed the foreground in the image by coloring the image
region corresponding to the foreground segmentation in black. We created the synthetic background
images for all images with the foreground segmentation. When creating the augmented example,
the foreground segmentation in the training example is pasted onto a randomly selected synthetic
background image. See Figure 4 for some sample NICO augmented examples.

B.4   C AMELYON

In dealing with the Camelyon dataset, we adopted the strategy outlined in Gao et al. (2023) to use
the stain color jitter (Tellez et al., 2018) as the targeted DA to create the augmented examples.
This technique transforms images by jittering their color in the hematoxylin and eosin staining
color space. This DA addresses the style shift associated with the stain color resulting from diverse
staining techniques used across different hospitals. It randomizes the average stain level in each
image while maintaining all other information as predictive features. Sample augmented examples
are shown in Figure 5.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: SS pairs created for NICO by placing the foreground segmentation onto a randomly se-
lected synthetic background image.


Figure 5: SS pairs created by stain color jitter for Camelyon dataset. This DA randomizes the
average stain level in the image.


Figure 6: SS pairs created via StableDiffusion that generates augmented example from the training
examples of the photo domain in PACS dataset. The prompt we use is “a minimalist drawing of a
class name, outline only, no texture” where class name is the name of the true class label.


B.5   PACS

To create SS pairs for PACS, we used StableDiffusion v2 (Rombach et al., 2022) to translate images
from the photo domain of PACS into a different style. Given a training example xk , we added a
mild level of Gaussian noise to the latent representation of xk , and then removed the noise under the
guidance of a text prompt. The prompt we used is “a minimalist drawing of a class name, outline


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


only, no texture” where class name is the name of yk . We chose this prompt because it produces
the best visual quality among what we have explored. Finally, we decoded the generated noise-free
latent representation, producing the corresponding augmented example x̃k . See Figure 6 for some
examples.

B.6     I MPLEMENTATION SUMMARY OF DIFFERENT DATASETS

We summarize setting of each dataset in model training, which includes how many training examples
used to create augmented pairs and corresponding methods.


Table 4: Dataset details of shifts, pair quantity and methods to create aug. examples. We use “aug.”
as a shorthand for “augmentation”.

                                     Pair quantity.
       Dataset        Shift                                  Method to create aug. examples
                                 (% of training examples)
                                                             Only preserve foreground objects,
      ImageNet-9   Background              5%
                                                             remove background as black
                                                             Only preserve foreground objects,
        NICO       Background              5%                background replaced with one
                                                             sampled from other images
                                                             The animals are cut-and-paste to
                                        All images           another image without animals taken
       iWildCam    Background
                                       with animals          at a different location where the same
                                                             animals sometimes appear
                                                             The animals are cut-and-paste to
                                        All images           another image without animals taken
      iWildCam-N   Background
                                       with animals          at a different location where the same
                                                             animals sometimes appear
                                                             Employ StableDiffusion to transform the
                                 100 samples for each        image style using the text prompt “a
        PACS          Style
                                 class in Photo domain (P)   minimalist drawing of a class name,
                                                             outline only, no texture”
       Camelyon       Style               100%               Use augmentation of stain color jitter



C      D ETAILS OF I W ILD C AM -N DATASET
iWildCam-N dataset is an altered version of the iWildCam dataset, which includes extra background
noise in addition to the original background shift in the iWildCam. This additional noise was created
by inserting an animal foreground of a different animal species, sourced from a randomly selected
image, onto the background of the image. To ensure the main semantic context of the image is not
distorted due to the introduced noise, we limited the size of the introduced animal to be smaller than
the pre-existing animal foreground and took steps to prevent overlap between the newly incorporated
animal and the original animal foreground. We applied this operation on all images in the iWildCam
dataset except for the images in the “empty” category, which do not contain any animals. The
“empty” category was also excluded from the iWildCam-N dataset.
In Figure 7. We provide some examples of the iWildCam-N and their original images in the iWild-
Cam to illustrate the background noise introduced in iWildCam-N.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             iWildCam               iWildCam-N             iWildCam                 iWildCam-N


Figure 7: Sample images in iWildCam-N. The background noise is created by adding to the back-
ground of each image a small image of another animal.


D     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
D.1     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF BASELINES

In Section 4.1, we introduce the formulation of previous CR-based methods. And in Section 2,
we introduce other representative DG methods. According to their categories, the training data are
organized differently to meet the assumption of each individual method. For datasets of ImageNet-9
and NICO, the setting is shown in Table 5. And for datasets of iWildCam, PACS and Camelyon, the
setting is displayed in Table 6.


Table 5: Implementation details of LAM and the baselines on ImageNet-9 and NICO under back-
ground shift. The category of the methods is explained in section 5 of our paper. According to
their categories, the training data are organized differently to meet the assumption of each individual
method. On the other hand, the test data is the same for all methods: mixed-rand for ImageNet-9,
and one unseen context per class for NICO. We use “aug.” as a shorthand for “augmentation”.

      Category        Method          Training data                         Remark
      Baseline          ERM          training examples                          -
     Data Aug.        ERM-DA
                                     training examples   As additional training data, aug. examples are
          &             RSC
                                     + aug. examples†    mixed with training examples to train the model.
    Single-source       SD
                        LAM
                                                         Only 5% training examples are paired with
                     Prob. Match     training examples
      CR-based                                           aug. examples, which are also as additional
                     Logit Match     + aug. examples†
                                                         training data
                    Feature Match
                       DANN          domain #1:
                       GDRO          training examples   Training examples are regarded as one domain.
    Multi-source
                        IRM          domain #2:          Aug. examples form another.
                       VREx          aug. examples


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Implementation details of LAM and the baselines on iWildCam, PACS and Camelyon. The
category of the methods is explained in section 5 of our paper. According to their categories, the
training data are organized differently to meet the assumption of each individual method. On the
other hand, the test data is the same for all methods: unseen domains. We use “aug.” as a shorthand
for “augmentation”.

   Category        Method          Training data                          Remark
   Baseline          ERM         training examples                            -
  Data Aug.        ERM-DA
                                 training examples     As additional training data, aug. examples are
       &             RSC
                                 + aug. examples†      mixed with training examples to train the model.
 Single-source       SD
                                                       For PACS, only 100 training examples in
                     LAM
                                                       Photo (P) domain are paired with aug. examples.
                  Prob. Match    training examples
   CR-based                                            For other datasets, each training example is
                  Logit Match    + aug. examples†
                                                       paired with an aug. example.
                 Feature Match
                                                       They are all also as additional training data.
                                 domain #1:
                                 training examples-1
                    DANN
                    GDRO         +aug. examples† -1    aug. examples are put in the domain having
 Multi-source                    ...
                    IRM                                corresponding training examples.
                    VREx         domain #m:
                                 training examples-m
                                 aug. examples† -m



D.2   H YPERPARAMETER S ETTING AND OTHER DETAILS

Each experiment is conducted on a single Nvidia V100 GPU. For datasets of ImageNet-9, NICO
and PACS, we take LP-FT training scheme following (Kumar et al., 2022), while for other datasets
we just take general fine-tuning. During LP, we take learning rate of 0.003 uniformly. And during
FT, we take learning rate 3e-5 for ImageNet-9, NICO, PACS, and 3.49e-5 for iWildCam, 3.07e-3 for
Camelyon. During LP, it trains models for 10 epochs. For FT, it trains 20 epochs for ImageNet-9,
NICO, iWildCam, 40 epochs for PACS, and 10 epochs for Camelyon. The summary of hyperpa-
rameter setting is shown in Table 7.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Hyperparameter setting for all the main experiments. SS-pair transformation refers to the
transformation applied to training examples and corresponding augmented examples while training.
If not specified otherwise, for other DG methods, the method-specific hyperparameters follow the
default setting in DomainBed (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). For general training hyperparameters,
if the ones are the same as CR-based methods, they will not be listed again. “bs” is the abbreviation
of batchsize. For ImageNet-9, NICO, and PACS datasets, we take the linear probing (LP) and Fine-
tuning (FT) scheme from (Kumar et al., 2022), while other datasets just take FT.
      Dataset     ImageNet-9&NICO                PACS             iWildCam                Camelyon
       Model          CLIP ViT             CLIP ResNet-50         ResNet-50              DenseNet-121
     Pretrained                         ImageNet Pretrained                                  False
    Image Size                     [224,224]                      [448,448]                 [96,96]
                    LP epochs: 10           LP epochs: 10
                                                                 epochs: 20               epochs: 10
                    FT epochs: 20           FT epochs: 40
      LAM/
                            LP learning rate: 0.003             learning rate:           learning rate:
      Logit
                             FT learning rate: 3e-5                3.49e-5                  3.07e-3
      Match/
                  LP training bs: 128    LP training bs: 48
       KL
                  LP ss-pair bs: 256     LP ss-pair bs: 32    training bs: 10        training bs: 128
                  FT training bs: 64     FT training bs: 48   ss-pair bs: 10         ss-pair bs: 128
                  FT ss-pair bs: 64      FT ss-pair bs: 32
                                                              λ = 5 (LAM, KL)        λ = 10 (LAM)
                  λ = 10     λ = 0.5         λ = 0.2
                                                              λ = 0.05 (Logit)       λ = 1 (Logit, KL)
                                        ss-pair transform:
                  ss-pair transform:    RandCrop
                  RandCrop              RandHorizontalFlip    ss-pair transform:     ss-pair transform:
                  RandHorizontalFlip    ColorJitter           Normalize              Normalize
                  Normalize             RandGrayscale
                                        Normalize
                           N/A                p = 0.9                              N/A
    Feature
                                  λ = 0.01                        λ = 0.05                 λ = 0.1
    Matching
                   FT training bs: 32    FT training bs: 48   FT training bs:10      FT training bs: 128
        JS
                   FT ss-pair bs: 48     FT ss-pair bs: 48    FT ss-pair bs: 20      FT ss-pair bs: 128
      Other       LP training bs: 128   LP training bs: 48
                                                              training bs: 24        training bs: 128
     Methods      FT training bs: 64    FT training bs: 48


E    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS WITH GENERIC - AUGMENTED EXAMPLES

For our main experiments reported in the Section 5, we used the targeted DA to create the aug-
mented examples and evaluate the performance of CR-based DG methods under those augmented
examples. Here we show some additional experiment results of those CR-based DG methods under
the augmented examples produced by a generic DA method.
There are some popular generic DA methods such as Autoaugment (Cubuk et al., 2019), Fast Au-
toaugment (Lim et al., 2019), and RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020). They apply a sequence of
PIL operations (such as rotation, shearing, autocontrast, RGB color jitter, etc.) onto images to gen-
erate a more diverse set of augmented examples. We select RandAugment Cubuk et al. (2020) as a
representative of generic DA to generate the augmented examples for iWildCam, iWildCam-N and
Camelyon, and then apply different CR-based DG methods based on those augmented examples.
The results are reported in Table 8.
The results show that RandAugment can also improve model OOD performance on the three
datasets, but the improvement is smaller compared to targeted DA. Similar to when augmented
examples from targeted DA are used, when using augmented examples from RandAugment, the
probability matching methods improve OOD performance on iWildCam over ERM+DA. However,
the stronger conditions of logit matching and feature matching fail to make this improvement. LAM
also produces significantly better performance than other CR methods when using RandAugment
examples. For the iWildCam-N dataset, with RandAugment, only LAM can improve OOD per-
formance over ERM+DA while other CR-based DG methods cannot, similar to when targeted data


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


augmentation is used. This again demonstrates the advantage of LAM in that it does not suppress
features of other classes in the image.
The results on the Camelyon dataset again shows that LAM can effectively improve the model OOD
performance even when the more generic data augmentation is used. The improvement of LAM over
the ERM+DA baseline (which simply treats the augmented examples as additional training data) in
fact larger when RandAugment is used (improve from 84.3 to 89.0) than when targeted DA is used
(improve from 90.5 to 93.5).


Table 8: OOD performances of models trained using ERM, ERM+DA, previous CR-Based DG
Methods, and LAM under different augmented data. The OOD performance of a model is assessed
on held-out test domain(s) using Marcro F1 score of retrieval for iWildCam(-N) and accuracy for
Camelyon. We do the following for models trained with the same augmented data: The best result
is in bold and second best is underlined; Arrows indicate changes relative to ERM+DA.
                                      iWildCam         iWildCam-N               Camelyon
       ERM              No DA         30.2                 15.3                  62.5
       ERM+DA                         34.2                 27.7                  84.3
       Prob. (JS)                     34.7 ↑               26.4 ↓                83.4 ↓
       Prob. (KL)                     34.6 ↑               27.1 ↓                86.7 ↑
       Logit         RandAugment      29.3 ↓               26.3 ↓                88.0 ↑
       Feature                        31.5 ↓               26.0 ↓                81.7 ↓
       LAM                            36.6 ↑               28.4 ↑                89.0 ↑
       ERM+DA                         36.5                 28.2                  90.5
       Prob. (JS)                     37.1 ↑               25.5 ↓                94.8 ↑
       Prob. (KL)                     40.3 ↑               26.3 ↓                92.8 ↑
       Logit         Targeted DA      34.3 ↓               23.9 ↓                93.4 ↑
       Feature                        36.0 ↓               25.3 ↓                94.3 ↑
       LAM                            41.2 ↑               29.8 ↑                93.5 ↑



F     W EIGHT A NALYSIS AND M ORE V ISUALIZATION R ESULTS
F.1   W EIGHT A NALYIS

We visualize the distribution of weight in model classifiers with Histograms in Figure 8. From it
we can see that compared with probability matching, the weight distribution finetuned with LAM
becomes sharper. It means that only a small proportion of weight units have large values while
others are all near zero, which matches the target that only regularizes a subset of features.



F.2   M ORE V ISUALIZATION R ESULTS

We provide examples of saliency maps visualized by GradCAM. The examples in Figure 9 and
Figure 10 are all randomly sampled from mixed-rand of ImageNet-9, which is our OOD test set for
ImageNet-9.


                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Initial weight          (b) Weight of Prob. Match (JS)       (c) Weight of LAM


Figure 8: Distribution of weight in model classifiers with Histograms. The model is CLIP-pretrained
ViT finetuned on ImageNet-9 dataset.


Figure 9: GradCAM saliency maps for the top predicted class by models trained using various
methods. The examples are from the test domain of ImageNet-9.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: More GradCAM heatmaps of LAM compared with those of ERM-DA, Feature Matching
and Probability Matching.


                                             23
