Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O PEN R EVIEWER : M ITIGATING C HALLENGES IN LLM
R EVIEWING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Human reviews of research papers are slow and of variable quality. Hence there is
         increasing interest in using large language models (LLMs) such as GPT to review
         research papers. This paper develops a proof-of-concept LLM review process that
         shows LLMs offer consistently high-quality reviews almost instantly. However,
         many challenges and limitations remain: risk of misuse, inflated review scores,
         overconfident ratings, skewed score distributions, and limited prompt length. We
         mitigate these issues without prompt engineering by using LLM watermarking to
         mark LLM-generated reviews; classifying and detection errors and shortcomings
         of papers; and using long-context windows that include the review form, entire
         paper, reviewer guidelines, code of ethics and conduct, area chair guidelies, and
         previous year statistics; and a blind human evaluation of reviews. We aim to
         use OpenReviewer to review and revise research papers, improving their quality.
         This work identifies and addresses drawbacks associated with GPT as a reviewer
         and enhances the quality of the reviewing process based on a randomized human
         blind evaluation. Making OpenReviewer available as an open online service that
         generates reviews will allow the use of scalable human feedback to learn and
         improve.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reviewing research papers is a fundamental aspect of scientific research; however, it entails lengthy
waiting months for human experts to complete reviews of variable quality. Large language models
(LLMs) such as OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) have the potential to augment traditional reviews
by providing instant reviews that are high-quality in several aspects and have lower variance com-
pared to human reviews. However, applying LLMs in this context has challenges, including risk of
misuse, inflated review scores, overconfident ratings, skewed score distributions, and limited prompt
length. This paper presents approaches to address these challenges and a proof-of-concept LLM re-
view tool that demonstrates the potential of LLMs to provide immediate, high-quality feedback on
many aspects of research papers.
We provide the acceptance and rejection rates, scores, and content analysis of ICLR papers sub-
mitted to OpenReview.net, both with and without concurrent arXiv.org submissions. This analysis
also informs the LLM reviewer about the acceptance rates of papers, enabling it to generate more
informed and contextually appropriate reviews. We introduce an LLM watermarking procedure for
closed-source LLMs to identify reviews generated by an LLM. While previous watermarking ef-
forts have focused on open-source LLMs, our approach allows us to work with closed models. We
explore using extended context windows in the review process, incorporating, in addition to the re-
view forms, the reviewer guidelines, codes of ethics, and conduct. An ablation study identifies the
impact of including these elements on LLM review quality, providing insights into how to improve
the reviews.
We categorize various types of errors found in ICLR papers and subsequently introduce these errors
into papers. OpenReviewer then reviews these papers, both in their original and error-introduced
forms. We compare the reviews of the unaltered papers with those of the error-introduced papers.
Finally, we identify the errors in the review text of the papers with the errors and their correspond-
ing scores. We further sub-categorize theoretical and technical errors into more specific types and
differentiate between errors that can and cannot be detected.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: An author or reviewer (or area chair) who receives an LLM review may improve their
paper or review quality. The author or reviewer submits the paper to OpenReviewer, automatically
receives a review, learns, and improves the paper or their review (or meta-review) before actual
submission or review (or meta-review).


We conduct a blind human evaluation, comparing reviews generated by three humans and three
LLM variants. This paper also identifies valid and invalid uses of LLM reviews. While LLMs
effectively improve review presentation quality, they could be more adept at judging the correctness
of mathematical content. We propose a test procedure to identify improvements as LLMs evolve.
Finally, we introduce an open online service, OpenReviewer 1 , to which users upload papers and
receive back reviews within minutes. This service enables continuous improvements and provides
a platform for scalable human feedback on the quality and usefulness of LLM reviews. Figures 1
and 2 illustrate a high-level learn and improve loop and the OpenReviewer architecture, highlighting
contributions in green.

Related work. LLMs demonstrate surprising capabilities evaluating texts, though generate hard-
to-detect errors such as hallucinations and, show a remarkable power to persuade humans even
when inaccurate (Spitale et al., 2023). This makes controlling the quality and appropriateness of
LLM-augmented reviewing highly challenging. The academic community acknowlegdes the acute
need for LLM-augmented reviewing (Liu & Shah, 2023; Robertson, 2023; Petrescu & Krishen,
2022; Schulz et al., 2022; Checco et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2021; Vesper, 2018), along with the risks
(Kaddour et al., 2023; Spitale et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023). Previous work questions LLMs ability
to perform reviewing sub-tasks Liu & Shah (2023).


2       M ETHODS

2.1      DATASET

We curated a dataset of 4,956 papers with 18,565 reviews from ICLR 2023 publicly available on
OpenReview.net OpenReview (2023). Of the papers publicly available on OpenReview.net, 2,040
(53.3%) are also available on arXiv.org arXiv (2023) with a total of 7,698 reviews (41.5%) as shown
in Figure 6. We extracted the directories of each arXiv paper, detected their main text file, removed
text before the paper title, and replaced any imported input text with the text itself, curating 2,040
full papers. In addition to the papers and their reviews, we collected the statistics of the decisions
and scores of ICLR 2022, the ICLR 2023 reviewer guide, code of ethics, code of conduct, and review
form. Appendix A provides paper and review statistics.

2.2      LLM R EVIEWING

In our efforts to understand the capabilities of LLMs in the peer review process, we conducted a
series of ablation studies, each introducing more context and information to the LLM. These ablation
studies were done on a random sample of papers representing 10% of our dataset. This subset of
data maintained the same distribution of accepted types and rejected papers as the broader dataset.
    1
        openreviewer.com


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           OpenReviewer



                                                                            modify paper

                                          paper
                                                                      statistics of previous year
                                                  human                  reviewer guidelines
         openreviewer.com                         review                    code of ethics
                                                                           code of conduct
            upload paper                                                       paper text
                                                                              review form
          conference name                  blind human meta-eval
                                           LLM meta-evaluations
           feedback 0-5


                                                                    LLM            LLM review
                                      watermark review             review        modiﬁed paper
                                                                    comparison: error matrix


Figure 2: OpenReviewer architecture: During inference (solid lines), the authors upload a paper with
the conference name. The paper is reviewed by OpenReviewer using GPT-4 with the conference
statistics of the previous year, reviewer guidelines, code of ethics, code of conduct, full paper text,
and review form. The LLM review is then watermarked and returned to the author, who provides
feedback about the review. The paper is deleted from the system. Offline (dashed lines) conference
papers and reviews are downloaded from OpenReview.net and arXiv.org. Conference statistics of
the previous year, reviewer guidelines, code of ethics, code of conduct, full paper text, and review
form are curated. GPT-4 is used to review the papers. A blind meta-evaluation is performed on a
sample of human and LLM reviews by human experts who are senior/area chairs of the conference
and used to evaluate the LLM review quality. The papers are modified by introducing errors or
shortcomings, and the LLM reviews the original and modified papers. The original paper reviews
are compared with the modified paper reviews for score, and the content is analyzed by detecting
the modifications. This identifies which types of errors and shortcomings the LLM is sensitive to in
its review and which types it cannot reliably review, defining the review limitations.


We ablate context by increasing the documents used as shown in Table 1. Context P1 includes the
full paper text (P) and conference review form (RF). P2 adds the reviewer guide (RG). P3 adds the
code of ethics (CE) and code of conduct (CC). P4 adds guidelines for the area chairs (AC). P5 adds
the statistics of the previous years conference. Appendix B provides example paper LLM reviews.
To ensure the reliability of LLM’s review quality it is crucial to conduct a thorough evaluation by
human experts. We perform review evaluator-review writer evaluations for human-human, human-
LLM, LLM-human, and LLM-LLM evaluations, as well as meta-evaluations of humans of the LLM-
LLM evaluations.

2.3   E VALUATING R EVIEWS

Evaluating LLMs is challenging. We tackle this challenge by having the LLM evaluate reviews of
humans and LLMs and using blind human evaluation of the human and LLM reviews. The human
evaluation of the human and LLM reviews is performed by three experts in the field, including
researchers who have served as area and senior area chairs. Human expert evaluation of LLM and
human reviews is performed by:

       • Randomly shuffling the papers and choosing 10% of the papers randomly.
       • Randomly permuting each of the reviews for each paper, which consists of three human
         reviews and three LLM reviews.
       • Blindly evaluating the reviews by human experts. The experts do not know whether the
         review being evaluated was written by a human or an LLM, and each expert answers four
         meta-questions about each review.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Document                    Description
 Statistics (S)              Histogram and statistics of reviewer scores and recommendations for papers in
                             previous year (ICLR 2022).
 Area Chair (AC)             Aiming for a percentage range of papers acceptance rate and range of paper scores
 Guidelines                  that generally meet this rate. Papers can be accepted or rejected outside this range,
                             but reasons must be given.
 Reviewer Guide (RG)         Responsibilities and expectations for reviewers, step-by-step reviewing instruc-
                             tions, review examples, and FAQs.
 Code of Ethics (CE)         Promotes responsible research in machine learning and AI, emphasizing societal
                             contribution, scientific excellence, harm avoidance, honesty, fairness, respect for
                             work, privacy, and confidentiality.
 Code of Conduct (CC)        Promotes open exchange of ideas, respect, and freedom of expression. It prohibits
                             harassment, bullying, discrimination, and retaliation.
 Review Form (RF)            Sections for summarizing the paper, evaluating its strengths and weaknesses, cor-
                             rectness, rating its technical and empirical novelty, assessing any potential ethical
                             issues, overall recommendation, and confidence in that recommendation.
 Paper (P)                   Entire text including inputs

                       Table 1: Documents for review and their descriptions.


The four meta-questions answered by the three human experts for each review, along with instruc-
tions that ensure calibrated evaluations are:

      1. “How well does the review explain the score?”
         Instructions: On a scale of 0-5 (0 being the worst, 5 the best), evaluate how well does the
         review summary, strengths and weaknesses, questions, and limitations explain the overall
         number rating.
      2. “How well does the review guide the authors to improve the paper?”
         Instructions: On a scale of 0-5 (0 being the worst, 5 the best), evaluate how useful are the
         review strengths and weaknesses, especially questions and limitations for improving the
         paper.
      3. “Does the review contain content specific to the paper?”
         Instructions: On a scale of 0-5 (0 being the worst meaning content free, and 5 being the
         best meaning that the review is based on content), evaluate if review summary, strengths
         and weaknesses, questions, and limitations are based on content.
      4. “For each paper, which three of reviews R1,R2,R3,R4,R5,R6 do you think are generated
         by an LLM?”

To validate that the expert human evaluation is blind, we ask the human expert evaluator to guess
which three of the reviews, permuted in random order, are by an LLM. The human expert guessed
correctly 59.8% of the time (random is 50%), which validates that the evaluation process is blind.
By conducting these evaluations, we gain a deeper understanding of the LLM’s performance and
ensure that its reviews meet the required standards of quality and accuracy.

2.4   WATERMARKING

We use an LLM watermark Kirchenbauer et al. (2023) that is easy to detect. We watermark the
review summary by rephrasing it using a set of words from the vocabulary, which modifies the
distribution of words while maintaining the summary quality. We are aware that this watermark may
be tampered with by applying the reverse process of rephrasing the watermarked summary again
using a closed LLM.

2.5   E RROR AND S HORTCOMING D ETECTION

We modify the papers by introducing errors or shortcomings, and an LLM reviews the original and
modified papers. The original paper reviews are compared with the modified paper reviews for
score, and the content is analyzed by detecting the modifications. This identifies which types of


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


errors and shortcomings the LLM is sensitive to in its review and which types it cannot reliably
review, defining the review limitations.

 Error or Shortcoming                    Description
 Theoretical Mistakes                    These can range from incorrect mathematical derivations to making un-
                                         founded assumptions about a model or algorithm.
 Metrics                                 Not reporting important metrics or details about experiments.
 Related Work                            Not comparing with the state-of-the-art or relevant baselines.
 Overclaiming                            Making exaggerated claims about the novelty or impact of the work
                                         without substantial evidence can be problematic.
 Insufficient Ablation Studies           Ablation studies help demonstrate which components of a proposed sys-
                                         tem contribute to its performance. Without these, it can be hard to un-
                                         derstand the significance of the introduced changes.
 Lack of Baseline Comparisons            Not comparing with standard or widely-accepted baseline methods can
                                         contribute to seeming less grounded.
 Ethical Concerns                        Not addressing potential ethical implications of the work, especially if
                                         the work touches on sensitive areas like facial recognition, can be a red
                                         flag.
 Lack of Discussion on Limitations       Every approach has limitations. Not discussing them or addressing po-
                                         tential criticisms can show a lack of thoroughness.
 Citation Issues                         This includes not citing relevant prior work, which can make it seem
                                         like the authors are unaware of the literature or over-citing one’s previ-
                                         ous work without reason.
 Technical Errors                        These can range from coding mistakes in the provided implementation
                                         to incorrect use of statistical tests.

Table 2: We classify different types of errors in papers and then introduce these errors into papers.
OpenReviewer reviews the papers without and with the errors. We compare the reviews of the
original papers and the reviews of papers with the errors, and finally, we detect the errors in the text
of the review of the papers with the errors and their scores. Theoretical mistakes and technical errors
are further classified into sub-types.


2.6   M ITIGATING M ISUSE

During this work we devised preventive actions that are particularly urgent for LLM reviewing
summarized in Table 3.

 Action                                  Description
 Declaration                             Authors and reviewers should declare when using an LLM to ensure trans-
                                         parency.
 Self-regulation                         The LLM should self-prompt to check for harmful, biased, or unaligned content.
                                         This can be done through a two-step approach where the LLM evaluates its
                                         output before responding to the user.
 Gatekeeping checklist                   The same guidelines and regulations for human reviewers should be applied
                                         to machine reviews. This includes a mandatory checklist of questions for the
                                         human and machine reviewers flagging ethics, adhering to reviewer duties, and
                                         reviewer confidence.
 Adherence to the conference code of     Both human and machine reviewers should abide by the same code of conduct.
 conduct                                 This includes following the exact gate-keeping mechanisms, alerts when break-
                                         ing the rules, and regulations by editors and professional associations.
 Debiasing                               Identify bias by examining evaluations against unbiased benchmarks, identify
                                         non-representative reviewer characteristics, and regularize by fairness criteria.
 Explanations                            Deeper explanations are needed to validate LLM reviews. These can be so-
                                         licited, for example, using chain-of-thought prompting. Quality control should
                                         be done before running the machine and ensure correlation with benchmarks.
                                         This involves self-reflection of the LLM to help control delegation and mitigate
                                         misalignment of objectives and information asymmetry.

  Table 3: Preventive actions for ethical and transparent use of LLMs in the peer review process.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     R ESULTS

Initially this paper received a recommendation score of 5 by OpenReviewer. Subsequently, we
addressed the weaknesses, and improved, receiving a recommendation score of 7.

3.1   R EVIEW S CORES

Table 4 shows the average and standard deviation scores of the human reviewers and LLM review
for paper correctness, technical novelty and significance, empirical novelty and significance, overall
recommendation score, and confidence. P1, P2, P3, P4, P5 ablate the increasing documents used in
the GPT-4 context prompt. P1 includes the full paper text (P) and conference review form (RF). P2
adds the reviewer guide (RG). P3 adds the code of ethics (CE) and code of conduct (CC). P4 adds
guidelines for the area chair (AC). P5 adds the statistics of the previous year’s conference.
The human reviewers have an average recommendation score of 5.88, with a standard deviation
1.61. With the context of the entire paper text and the conference review form (P1), the LLM
has an average recommendation of 7.21, higher than the human reviewers. The standard deviation
of 1.03 is less than that of the human reviewers. Adding the reviewer guide to the context (P2)
slightly increases the recommendation score to 7.58. The standard deviation is reduced further,
with a more consistent scoring by the LLM. With the addition of the code of ethics and code of
conduct to the context (P3), the recommendation score slightly increases to 7.62, similar to P2,
and the standard deviation remains the same. After adding guidelines for the area chair (P4), the
recommendation score decreases to 4.61, indicating that this context makes the LLM more critical
or stringent in its evaluations due to the knowledge of expected outcomes. With the addition of
the previous year’s conference statistics (P5), the recommendation score improves and is near the
human reviewer’s score. The standard deviation also increases, indicating more variability in the
scoring. In summary, LLM contexts P1, P2, and P3 consistently give higher recommendation scores
than the human reviewers, suggesting a more positive or lenient view of the papers. P4 context, with
the area chair guidelines added, shows a significant decrease in recommendation scores, suggesting
these guidelines influence the LLM to be more critical in its evaluations. P5 reaches the same level
of recommendation as the human reviewers.

 Reviewer                        Correctness    Tech. Novelty    Emp. Novelty        Rec.      Confidence
 Human                            3.18±0.64      2.62±0.72        2.66±0.73       5.88±1.61    3.67±0.71
 P1: P+RF                         3.07±0.37      3.16±0.47        3.16±0.43       7.21±1.03    3.80±0.47
 P2: RG+P+RF                      3.06±0.24      3.16±0.36        3.17±0.40       7.58±0.65    3.84±0.41
 P3: RG+CE+CC+P+RF                3.03±0.20      3.15±0.37        3.13±0.36       7.62±0.65    3.86±0.44
 P4: AC+RG+CE+CC+P+RF             2.74±0.48      2.56±0.53        2.56±0.52       4.61±0.83    3.86±0.38
 P5: S+AC+RG+CE+CC+P+RF           2.81±0.57      2.84±0.66        2.84±0.60       5.56±1.43    3.84±0.44

Table 4: Ablation of in-context LLM review scores: Average and standard deviation scores of the
human reviewers and LLM review for paper correctness, technical novelty and significance, empir-
ical novelty and significance, overall recommendation score, and confidence. P1, P2, P3, P4, P5
ablate the increasing documents used in the GPT-4 context prompt. P1 includes the full paper text
(P) and conference review form (RF). P2 adds the reviewer guide (RG). P3 adds the code of ethics
(CE) and code of conduct (CC). P4 adds guidelines for the area chairs (AC). P5 adds the statistics
of the previous years conference.


3.2   E VALUATING R EVIEWS

The human review evaluator assesses reviews written by human reviewers and the LLM, GPT-4
with context P5. The human review writer is an ICLR 2023 reviewer. Table 5 shows the average
evaluation results on a randomized sample of 5% of the papers evaluated by human experts.
Considering the average human review rating as ground truth, we perform an analysis of false posi-
tives and negatives, considering the LLM’s two types of errors: accepting a paper rejected by human
reviewers and rejecting a paper that human reviewers accepted. One paper that the LLM accepted
with a score of at least 7 was rejected by the average of the human reviewers with a score of at
most 3. Four papers that the LLM rejected with a score of at most 3 were accepted by the human


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Review Evaluator:                                                   Human       Human        GPT-4         GPT-4
 Review Writer:                                                      Human          P5       Human            P5
 How well does the review explain the score?                        4.80±0.39   4.76±0.51   4.27±0.65     4.65±0.52
 How well does the review guide the authors to improve the paper?   4.66±0.51   4.79±0.71   4.14±0.50     4.27±0.45
 Does the review contain content specific to the paper?             4.53±0.79   4.68±0.82   4.97±0.16     4.95±0.22

Table 5: The human review evaluator evaluates human and P5 written reviews of papers. The human
review writer is an ICLR 2023 reviewer. The LLM is GPT-4 with context P5. The evaluation is on
a scale of 0-5 (0 being the worst, five the best). For the third question, a score of 0 indicates a
content-free review.


reviewers with a score of at least 7. Eight papers that the LLM accepted with a score of at least 6
were rejected by the average of the human reviewers with a score of at most 4. 22 papers that the
LLM rejected with a score of at most 4 were accepted by the human reviewers with a score of at
least 6.

3.3   WATERMARKING

Figure 3 shows a comparative analysis of token distribution and ”green list” token presence be-
tween original and watermarked summaries. The top-left histogram illustrates that watermarked
summaries, represented in red, consistently contain more tokens than the original ones. The top-
right histogram reinforces this by indicating that a greater fraction of ”green list” tokens is present
in the watermarked summaries. The box plots in the bottom row of Figure 3, show that watermarked
summaries consistently have a higher median token count and a greater fraction of green list to-
kens. Additionally, a wider interquartile range for both metrics in watermarked summaries suggests
greater variability.

3.4   E RRORS AND S HORTCOMINGS

Figure 4 shows the average scores for each error or shortcoming type: The human review average
score’ serves as a reference, while the error types are ranked. Figure 5 shows a heatmap of scores
of each error or shortcoming type. The color gradient, ranging from blue (low score) to red (high
score), indicates the score magnitude.

3.5   L IMITATIONS

We distinguish between the limitations of our research methodology and OpenReviewer, our appli-
cation of GPT-4 to reviewing papers in computer science. The closed nature of GPT-4 restricts our
choice of methodology, which includes an iterative design process coupled with a set of evaluation
methods. Unfortunately, there is no tested evaluation framework that we could apply a priori, and
we must resort to gradually refining the evaluation method. Designing OpenReviewer is an iterative
process that tests alternative information sources, such as conference guidelines and knowledge of
past editorial decisions, various reviewing criteria, such as novelty, correctness, and ethical consid-
erations, and the corresponding errors and shortcomings of the submission to be detected by the
reviewer. This highly work-intensive approach is a nuanced method that relies on trial-and-error
attempts to calibrate the tool. It would have to be repeated for conferences in other domains or other
ways of evaluating academic publications. Furthermore, as we learn to use LLM reviewing and as
LLMs develop further, we will have to reevaluate the application design continually. For this reason,
we make OpenReviewer available as a beta demonstration to collect user feedback on a larger scale,
to learn and improve.
The evaluation of GPT reviewing relied on evaluating the reviews rather than the process. We used
both LLM evaluations and human evaluations of the reviews, and both concluded that the quality of
the GPT-4 review matched that of humans but could not compare the processes other than to note the
reviewers’ confidence in their conclusions. Future research should extend our evaluation to examine
how authors, for example, use and trust OpenReviewer reviews.
The limitations of OpenReviewer are one of the contributions of our paper. Our analysis of its
capabilities by classifying and testing various reviewing criteria and types of errors and shortcomings


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Comparative analysis of original vs. watermarked summaries: Side-by-side comparison
of token distributions and the fraction of tokens appearing in a predefined ”green list” for original
and watermarked summaries. On the top left, the histogram illustrates the number of tokens in
summaries, with the original summaries shown in blue and the watermarked in red. The top right
histogram contrasts the fraction of tokens from the green list present in each summary type. The
bottom row’s box plots shows these metrics’ spread and central tendencies. Watermarked summaries
consistently have a higher token count and a greater fraction of tokens from the green list. We use
OpenAI’s GPT-4 to generate the original review summaries, and Meta’s OPT-7.6B to rephrase the
summaries and apply the LLM watermark.


Figure 4: Average scores for each error or shortcoming type: The human review average score’
serves as a reference, while the error types are ranked.



indicates the limits of our current application. These limitations are essential for knowing how to
use the application, particularly involving the human reviewer.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Heatmap of scores of each error or shortcoming type. The color gradient, ranging from
blue (low score) to red (high score), indicates the score magnitude.


4   C ONCLUSIONS


Following Bommasani et al. (2021), we examine the capabilities, opportunities, and risks of using
LLMs in reviewing academic papers. Our working assumption is that at this early stage of employing
LLM for reviewing, it is necessary to learn from doing about the opportunities and, all the more so,
risks of LLM reviewing. The rapid developments of LLM capabilities require continual monitoring
and reexamining of opportunities and risks that build on previous rounds. To our knowledge, we
are the first to report on a large empirical evaluation of LLM reviewing. The underlying evaluation
method may contribute to subsequent evaluations that will follow with the development of new LLM
capabilities. Moreover, at this stage, our goal is to design the application of LLM to reviewing to
match the quality of human reviewing. If and when LLMs performs better than human reviewing in
certain aspects or scientific domains, the evaluation methods will change.
Using human reviews as a base line, our goal was to evaluate the value alignment and the pro-
cess alignment of LLM reviews, i.e., to compare the quality of reviews and the adherence of the
reviewing process to conference guidelines and scientific norms of practice. In particular, confer-
ence reviewing has two goals: evaluating submissions to determine an accept or reject decision and
providing constructive feedback to the authors. Our evaluation of review quality addresses both
aspects. Furthermore, prior work on LLM academic capabilities suggests that LLMs are now ripe
for specific reviewing tasks and appear to be more effective for some academic domains and less
effective for others Liu & Shah (2023); Schulz et al. (2022); Checco et al. (2021). Therefore, we
conducted ablation studies to determine which information sources effectively detected errors and
shortcomings.
Only when supplied with information about previous editorial decisions did the LLM achieve good
alignment with human reviewers. Furthermore, the LLM performs well in detecting certain errors
and shortcomings but not others, such as detecting cases in which the authors needed to follow ex-
pected norms. Our conclusions regarding the evaluation method have longer-term implications. For
limited model transparency, iterative design and large-scale empirical evaluation proved essential to
calibrate the application of LLMs.
In summary, this work leverages LLMs in the review process, addressing challenges and offering a
proof-of-concept LLM review tool. We hope that our work paves the way for more efficient, consis-
tent, high-quality reviews, accelerating scientific progress while maintaining responsible conduct of
research.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
arXiv. https://arxiv.org, 2023.
Peng Bao, Weihui Hong, and Xuanya Li. Predicting paper acceptance via interpretable decision
  sets. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 461–467, 2021.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Alessandro Checco, Lorenzo Bracciale, Pierpaolo Loreti, Stephen Pinfield, and Giuseppe Bianchi.
  AI-assisted peer review. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 8(1):1–11, 2021.
Jean Kaddour, Joshua Harris, Maximilian Mozes, Herbie Bradley, Roberta Raileanu, and
  Robert McHardy. Challenges and applications of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.10169, 2023.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  watermark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10226, 2023.
Ryan Liu and Nihar B Shah. ReviewerGPT? An exploratory study on using large language models
  for paper reviewing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00622, 2023.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
OpenReview. https://openreview.net, 2023.
Maria Petrescu and Anjala S Krishen. The evolving crisis of the peer-review process. Journal of
 Marketing Analytics, 10(3):185–186, 2022.
Zachary Robertson. GPT4 is slightly helpful for peer-review assistance: A pilot study. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.05492, 2023.
Robert Schulz, Adrian Barnett, René Bernard, Nicholas JL Brown, Jennifer A Byrne, Peter Eck-
  mann, Małgorzata A Gazda, Halil Kilicoglu, Eric M Prager, Maia Salholz-Hillel, et al. Is the
  future of peer review automated? BMC Research Notes, 15(1):1–5, 2022.
Giovanni Spitale, Nikola Biller-Andorno, and Federico Germani. AI model GPT-3 (dis) informs us
  better than humans. Science Advances, 9(26), 2023.
Inga Vesper. Peer reviewers unmasked: Largest global survey reveals trends. Nature, pp. 7–8, 2018.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial
  attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

In developing and applying our LLM review process, we followed the ICLR Code of Ethics and
Conduct, prioritizing responsible research, transparency, and fairness. Using LLMs in the review
process could potentially lead to harmful insights or applications if misused. An over-reliance on
LLMs could marginalize human reviewers, leading to a loss of diverse perspectives in the review
process. To mitigate this, we emphasize that our LLM reviewer is intended to augment, not replace,
human reviewers, and we implemented a watermarking procedure to distinguish LLM-generated
reviews from human reviews. We are aware that the LLM watermark may be detected and removed
by rephrasing the review using another LLM, however we believe that making the methodology
open, rather than closed, improves usage safety in the long-term.
We are aware of potential discrimination, bias, or fairness concerns. LLMs, including our reviewer,
are trained on large datasets that may contain biased information. More importantly, we do not
recommend using our LLM reviewer to make important academic decisions, but rather view it as a
tool for authors to use to revise papers.
Privacy and security issues are important in our work. Our LLM reviewer 2 does not store the
papers it reviews, ensuring the confidentiality of authors’ work, however it does share the paper with
OpenAI under their terms of service. Our open online service is designed with security measures to
protect users’ information. We only retain uploaded papers and review data for the period necessary
to fulfill the service, after which the data is deleted. However, we cannot guarantee absolute security
and are not responsible for any unauthorized access or hacking events. Users are responsible for
ensuring they hold the copyright or permission for any material they upload to our service.
Finally, we uphold research integrity by being transparent about our methodologies and findings. We
have conducted an evaluation of our LLM reviewer, including a blind human evaluation, and have
reported our results honestly and accurately. We acknowledge the limitations of our work and are
committed to continuous improvement of research based on feedback from users and the machine
learning community. In conclusion, when used responsibly and ethically, our LLM reviewer can
contribute positively to the research community by providing instant, high-quality reviews in several
aspects of the review. We are committed to ongoing ethical reflection and adjustment as we develop
and refine this new reviewing tool.


A        PAPER AND R EVIEW S TATISTICS

Review Decisions. Percentages of papers accepted or rejected comparing papers on OpenRe-
view.net and papers also available on arXiv.org are shown in Figure 7. The distribution of the
different decisions for the papers is shown in Figure 8.

          • Acceptance Rates: Papers on OpenReview.net had varying acceptance tiers. Notably, 91
            papers (2.4%) were recognized as top 5% notable papers, while 280 (7.3%) were designated
            as top 25% notable. In contrast, for the subset of papers also on arXiv.org, 67 papers (3.3%)
            were considered top 5% notable, and 193 papers (9.5%) as top 25% notable. This indicates
            that papers on arXiv.org had a slightly higher representation in the notable categories.
          • Poster Acceptance: Of the total submissions on OpenReview.net, 1,202 (31.4%) were ac-
            cepted as posters. For papers also available on arXiv.org, 795 papers (39%) were accepted
            as posters, indicating that arXiv papers had a slightly higher acceptance rate for poster
            presentations.
          • Rejection Rates: A notable 2,235 papers (58.4%) on OpenReview.net were rejected, while
            this rejection rate dropped to 33.6% of 685 rejected papers also on arXiv.org. This stark
            difference implies that papers available on arXiv.org had a significantly lower rejection rate.
          • Desk Rejections/Withdrawals: On OpenReview.net, 1,148 (30%) of the submissions were
            either desk rejected or withdrawn, compared to a lower 14.7% of 300 papers also on
            arXiv.org.
    2
        openreviewer.com


                                                     11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Number of ICLR 2023 papers and reviews publicly available on OpenReview.net and also
available on arXiv.org.


Figure 7: Papers submitted to ICLR, NeurIPS, and ICML through OpenReview.net are publicly
available online. ICLR 2023 submission accepted less than a third of the papers submitted publicly
to OpenReview.net, and more than half of the papers that were also publicly available on arXiv.org.



Number of Reviews. The distribution of the number of reviews each paper received is shown in
Figure 9. The majority of papers on OpenReview.net received either 4 or 3 reviews, with 3,063


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Distribution of paper decisions for papers on OpenReview.net and for papers also available
on arXiv.org.


Figure 9: Distribution of the number of reviews for papers on OpenReview.net and for papers also
available on arXiv.org. Most papers received either 4 or 3 reviews.


(30.35%) and 1,504 (61.8%) papers falling into these categories, respectively. The distribution was
similar for papers also available on arXiv.org.

Review Scores. Figures 10, 11, and 12 present the distributions of review scores concerning the
correctness, technical novelty and significance, and empirical novelty and significance, respectively.
Generally, most papers received scores indicating some minor issues in claims or some overlap with


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Distribution of human review scores for correctness for papers publicly available Open-
Review.net and for papers also available on arXiv.org. A significant number of reviews indicate
minor issues in the paper’s claims.


Figure 11: Distribution of human review scores for technical novelty and significance on Open-
Review.net and for papers also available on arXiv.org. Many papers had contributions that were
significant but had some overlap with prior work.



prior work. However, many of the papers had their claims and contributions rated as well-supported
and significant.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Distribution of human review scores for empirical novelty and significance for papers
publicly available on OpenReview.net and for papers also available on arXiv.org. Many papers had
contributions that were significant with some aspects existing in prior work.


      • Review Correctness: On both platforms, most papers received scores indicating minor
        issues in their claims. However, a marginally higher proportion of papers on arXiv.org
        received scores indicating all claims were well-supported (59.1% on arXiv vs. 28% on
        OpenReview.net).

      • Technical Novelty and Significance: Most reviews on both platforms suggested that the
        contributions of papers were significant but had some overlap with prior work. Notably, a
        slightly higher percentage of papers on arXiv.org (18.3%) were scored as having significant
        contributions that did not exist in prior works compared to OpenReview.net (8.3%).

      • Empirical Novelty and Significance: Similar to technical novelty, many papers on both
        platforms had significant contributions, with some aspects existing in prior work. However,
        20.1% of papers on arXiv.org were scored as having significant empirical contributions that
        did not exist in prior works, versus 7.3% on OpenReview.net.


Review Recommendation and Confidence. The distribution of review recommendations is
shown in Figure 13. Most reviews fell into the categories of being marginally above or below the
acceptance threshold. Figure 14 shows the distribution of review confidence scores. Notably, many
reviewers were confident in their assessments but not certain.

      • Review Recommendation: Most reviews on both platforms fell into the categories of being
        marginally above or below the acceptance threshold. However, a slightly higher proportion
        of papers on arXiv.org (34.6%) were recommended for acceptance compared to OpenRe-
        view.net (19%).

      • Review Confidence: Many reviewers on both platforms were confident in their assessments,
        indicating a robust review process. For papers on arXiv.org, a slightly higher percentage
        of reviewers (12.3%) were absolutely certain about their assessments than OpenReview.net
        (10%).


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Distribution of human review recommendation scores for papers publicly available on
OpenReview.net and arXiv.org: Ranges are from 1 to 10, with 10 being a strong accept and 1 being
a strong reject.


Papers on OpenReview.net and arXiv.org are publicly available online. The data suggests that pa-
pers available on both OpenReview.net and arXiv.org generally receive more favorable reviews and
decisions than those only on OpenReview.net.
Figure 16 shows the distribution of the lengths of the full papers available on arXiv. The mean is
11,298 words, and the median is 9,995 words. GPT-4 accepts a maximum of 32,000 tokens, about
24,000 words. The ICLR 2023 reviewer guide consists of around 3,200 words, and the review form
is around 800 words, leaving 20,000 words for the paper and review. The mean human review
length is less than 500 words, as shown in Figure 17. This leaves about 19,500 words for the entire
paper. 147 of the papers (7.2%) are longer than this length. Including the ICLR code of ethics
(1,770 words) and code of conduct (663 words) leaves about 17,000 words for the paper. 237 papers
(11.6%) are longer than this length. GPT-4 has a context window of size 32k tokens that are suitable
for handling around 90% of the full papers, including all related documents.


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Distribution of human review confidence scores for papers publicly available on OpenRe-
view.net and arXiv.org: Ranges are from 1 to 5, with 5 indicating absolute certainty in the assessment
and 1 indicating an inability to assess the paper. A large number of reviewers were confident in their
assessments, but not absolutely certain.


        Figure 15: Distribution of the top ten .tex file names found for papers on arXiv.org


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Distribution of the number of words in the full papers on arXiv.org. The mean is 11,298
words and the median 9,995 words.


  Figure 17: Distribution of human review lengths in number of words. The mean is 495 words.


                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B   LLM R EVIEW E XAMPLES
Tables 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14 show the ICLR review form used to prompt GPT-4 and example GPT-4
answers for both accepted and rejected papers. Tables 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17 show example human
reviewer answers for both accepted and rejected papers.

 Category                Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary                 Prompt: Summarize what the paper claims to contribute. Be positive and constructive.
                         P5 Answer:
                         The paper introduces GeneFace, a high-fidelity and generalizable approach to synthesize 3D
                         talking faces from audio inputs using a Nerf-based method. The proposed framework aims
                         to enhance methods used in film-making and virtual reality, addressing limitations of previous
                         approaches that struggle with out-of-domain audio due to limited training data.
                         GeneFace is composed of three stages: an audio-to-motion converter, a motion domain adap-
                         tation stage, and finally, a motion-to-image model. The audio-to-motion stage employs a vari-
                         ational motion generator that learns from a large lip-reading corpus, handling the weak gener-
                         alizability problem. The system then focuses on the domain adaptation stage, introducing an
                         adversarial training pipeline that refines predictions, overcoming the gap between the generated
                         landmarks and the target person’s distribution. The final stage is the motion-to-image model,
                         which uses a Nerf-based renderer to generate high-fidelity images.
                         The primary contributions of this paper are a three-stage framework improving generalizability
                         to out-of-domain audio; a variational motion generator addressing the ”mean face” problem
                         and generating accurate facial landmarks, and experiments showing that GeneFace outperforms
                         other state-of-the-art GAN-based and NeRF-based methods.
 Correctness             Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the correctness of the
                         technical claims, experimental and research methodology and on whether the central claims
                         of the paper are adequately supported with evidence. 4: All of the claims and statements are
                         well-supported and correct. 3: Some of the paper’s claims have minor issues. A few statements
                         are not well-supported, or require small changes to be made correct. 2: Several of the paper’s
                         claims are incorrect or not well-supported. 1: The main claims of the paper are incorrect or not
                         at all supported by theory or empirical results.
                         P5 Answer: 3
 Technical Novelty and   Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the technical novelty and
 Significance            significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                         3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                         prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                         are neither significant nor novel.
                         P5 Answer: 4
 Empirical Novelty and   Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the empirical novelty and
 Significance            significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                         3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                         prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                         are neither significant nor novel. NA: Not applicable.
                         P5 Answer: 3

Table 6: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers: Summary,
correctness, technical novelty and significance, and empirical novelty and significance.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                  Prompt and P5 Answer
 Strengths/Weaknesses      Prompt: List strong and weak points of the paper. Be as comprehensive as possible.
                           P5 Answer:
                           Strong Points: 1. The approach of the GeneFace system is novel and innovative. It addresses a
                           current issue in the field of audio-to-visual synthesis in a fresh and unique way.
                           2. The three-stage framework proposed in the paper offers significant improvements to over-
                           come the generalizability problems faced by current approaches for out-of-domain audio. This
                           indicates a thoughtful understanding of the problem space.
                           3. The use of a Nerf-based renderer with a variational motion generator to prevent the ”mean
                           face” problem often encountered in similar systems is commendable. This shows an adept
                           application of recent advances in AI to solve complex challenges in creative ways.
                           4. The extensive series of experiments conducted comparing GeneFace with other current state-
                           of-the-art GAN-based and NeRF-based methods substantiates the claims made in the paper
                           regarding the superior performance of their approach.
                           Weak Points: 1. The paper doesn’t explicitly discuss the limitation of their training dataset.
                           Information about its size, diversity, and domain-specific aspects could have been provided for
                           a better understanding.
                           2. The proposed adversarial training pipeline for refining predictions in the motion domain
                           adaptation stage lacks a detailed exposition. Without a clear description of the adversarial
                           training pipeline, it becomes challenging to appreciate its potential impact fully.
                           3. While the paper provides comprehensive information about the GeneFace system, more
                           visual representations or graphical models would have made the three-stage framework clearer
                           and more accessible to the readers.
                           4. The paper does not discuss potential ethical concerns of such technology in depth. Given that
                           GeneFace can be used to create very convincing fake videos (deepfakes), an in-depth discussion
                           on potential misuse and mitigation strategies is warranted.
                           Overall, while the paper showcases a promising advancement in the field of audio-to-visual
                           synthesis with the three-stage GeneFace system, it falls somewhat short in discussing its limi-
                           tations, potential misuse, and provides limited explanation for the adversarial training pipeline
                           used in the motion domain adaptation stage. I would recommend the authors to address these
                           issues in a revised version of the paper.
 Clarity, Quality, Nov-    Prompt: Please evaluate the clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility of the paper.
 elty, and Reproducibil-   P5 Answer: Clarity: The paper is clearly organized into different sections, allowing readers to
 ity                       understand the progress from problem identification to solution development. The introduction
                           and conclusion concisely summarize the main points and the proposed contributions. However,
                           there are some complex discussions, particularly the adversarial training pipeline that could
                           have been elucidated with more clarity. Visual aids like diagrams, charts, or schematics showing
                           the structure of the model would have boosted the clarity score. Accordingly, the clarity score
                           is 7/10.
                           Quality: The paper exhibits high standards in terms of scientific intellectual contribution. It
                           demonstrates a deep understanding of the field and its challenges, proposes a novel mechanism
                           to address these challenges, and supports the proposal with comprehensive experiments. How-
                           ever, it falters slightly in terms of explaining data limitations or detailing the adversarial training
                           phase sufficiently. The quality score is 7.5/10.
                           Novelty: The novelty score of this paper is high. The proposed three-stage approach to synthe-
                           sizing 3D talking faces from audio inputs using a Nerf-based renderer and a variational motion
                           generator is both innovative and novel. The authors have applied recent advances in artificial
                           intelligence to address a long-standing issue in audio-visual synthesis. Therefore, the novelty
                           score is 8.5/10.
                           Reproducibility: Although the paper provides some technical detail on the GeneFace system,
                           it does not provide sufficient specifics or disclose open-source code that would ensure repro-
                           ducibility. In term of reproducibility, the paper scores 6.5/10.
                           Overall Assessment: The primary strength of the paper lies in the novelty of the proposed
                           GeneFace system and the three-stage framework to synthesize 3D talking faces from audio
                           inputs. However, the paper could considerably improve in terms of clarity, particularly by
                           offering more detailed explanations and adding visual aids. Additionally, more information and
                           discussion around potential misuse, data limitations, and reproducibility would make the paper
                           more balanced. Thus, combining all scores, the overall score is 7.4/10.
                           Recommendation: The paper is a strong submission for ICLR 2023, showing creativity and a
                           significant step in the field of audio-visual synthesis. However, I recommend acceptance on the
                           condition that the authors to address observed shortcomings in terms of clarity, details about the
                           adversarial training pipeline, data limitations, potential misuse, and reproducibility.

Table 7: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers:
Strengths/weaknesses, clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                 Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary of the           Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                   sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                          P5 Answer:
                          Initial Recommendation: Accept
                          Key Reasons: The submission presents a novel and innovative approach to synthesize 3D talk-
                          ing faces from audio signals using a NeRF-based renderer and a variational motion generator.
                          Besides, the approach demonstrated superior performance compared to state-of-the-art GAN-
                          based and NeRF-based methods.
                          Supporting Arguments:
                          1. Novelty: The three-stage GeneFace system for synthesizing 3D talking faces from audio
                          inputs shows a new perspective in the field of audio-visual synthesis that could open avenues
                          for further research.
                          2. Quality: Despite some weaknesses, the overall scientific quality of the paper is high. The
                          methodology is well-designed, and the experiments conducted are comprehensive in supporting
                          the claims made by the authors.
                          3. Potential Impact: Given the results shown, this work has the potential to significantly impact
                          the field of audio-visual synthesis and applications such as film-making and virtual reality.
                          4. Improvements: While the paper lacks in certain areas like a detailed explanation of the ad-
                          versarial training pipeline, limitations of training data, ethical implications, and reproducibility,
                          these weaknesses are not insurmountable and could be addressed in a revised version.
                          Overall, the novelty and significant potential impact of the paper, along with the thoughtful
                          three-stage design of the GeneFace system, outweigh the weaknesses. Therefore, I recommend
                          accepting this paper for ICLR 2023, with the requirement that the authors address the high-
                          lighted issues in a revised version.
 Flag for Ethics Review   Prompt: If there are no ethical issues with this paper please respond with NO. Otherwise if
                          there are ethical issues with this paper please flag the paper for an ethics review by one of the
                          following: Yes, Potentially harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Legal com-
                          pliance (e.g., GDPR, copyright, terms of use) Yes, Privacy, security and safety, Yes, Potentially
                          harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Discrimination / bias / fairness concerns
                          Yes, Responsible research practice (e.g., human subjects, data release) Yes, Research integrity
                          issues (e.g., plagiarism, dual submission) Yes, Other reasons (please specify below)
                          P5 Answer: Yes, Potentially harmful insights, methodologies and applications
 Overall Score            Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                          this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                          the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                          good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                          threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                          P5 Answer: 7
 Confidence               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                          your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                          your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                          carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                          but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                          unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                          is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                          with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                          willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                          parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                          details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                          ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                          P5 Answer: 4

Table 8: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers: Summary of
the review, flag for ethics review, overall score, and confidence


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                  Prompt and Human Answer
 Summary                   Prompt: Summarize what the paper claims to contribute. Be positive and constructive.
                           Human Answer:
                           This paper proposed an end-to-end NeRF-based method, for talking face generation. It was
                           trying to solve 2 problems: 1) weak generalizability due to small scale of training data, 2) “mean
                           face” result: bad image quality and bad lip-synchronization. This paper proposed 3 parts: 1)
                           Variational Motion Generator used to generate landmarks from audio, 2) Domain Adaptative
                           Post-Net for landmark refinement, and 3) NeRF based Renderer for final frame generation. It
                           produces good talking face generation results.
 Correctness               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the correctness of the
                           technical claims, experimental and research methodology and on whether the central claims
                           of the paper are adequately supported with evidence. 4: All of the claims and statements are
                           well-supported and correct. 3: Some of the paper’s claims have minor issues. A few statements
                           are not well-supported, or require small changes to be made correct. 2: Several of the paper’s
                           claims are incorrect or not well-supported. 1: The main claims of the paper are incorrect or not
                           at all supported by theory or empirical results.
                           Human Answer: 4
 Technical Novelty and     Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the technical novelty and
 Significance              significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                           3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                           prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                           are neither significant nor novel.
                           Human Answer: 3
 Empirical Novelty and     Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the empirical novelty and
 Significance              significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                           3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                           prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                           are neither significant nor novel. NA: Not applicable.
                           Human Answer: 3

Table 9: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Summary, correctness, technical novelty and significance, and empirical novelty and significance.


 Category                  Prompt and Human Answer
 Strengths/Weaknesses      Prompt: List strong and weak points of the paper. Be as comprehensive as possible.
                           Human Answer:
                           Strength: This paper has well-organized structure, and it is clear in logicality. This work has
                           well-designed network structure and proposed structure, which can actually solve proposed
                           problems. This work combines previous works and gives an new approach to generating talking
                           face in another way, which moves the NeRF-based method field forward a bit.
                           Weaknesses: Some evaluation metric do not outperform other methods, this work could de-
                           sign more evaluation metrics to evaluate the results. The generated face in the demo video is
                           moving around, maybe consider temporal information and design into network structure. The
                           lip-synchronization is not as good as wav2lip, the synchronization can be improved.
 Clarity, Quality, Nov-    Prompt: Please evaluate the clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility of the paper.
 elty, and Reproducibil-   Human Answer: This paper has well-organized structure, and it is clear in logicality. This work
 ity                       proposed three sub-network and they can solve problems. It is reproducible work according to
                           the designed network structure and experiment results.

Table 10: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Strengths/weaknesses, clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                 Prompt and Human Answer
 Summary of the           Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                   sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                          Human Answer:
                          The paper is overall well written and much of it is well described. It combines previous works
                          and proposes an new approach to generating 3D talking face. It produces better results than
                          previous NeRF-based work. I recommend this work.
 Flag for Ethics Review   Prompt: If there are no ethical issues with this paper please respond with NO. Otherwise if
                          there are ethical issues with this paper please flag the paper for an ethics review by one of the
                          following: Yes, Potentially harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Legal com-
                          pliance (e.g., GDPR, copyright, terms of use) Yes, Privacy, security and safety, Yes, Potentially
                          harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Discrimination / bias / fairness concerns
                          Yes, Responsible research practice (e.g., human subjects, data release) Yes, Research integrity
                          issues (e.g., plagiarism, dual submission) Yes, Other reasons (please specify below)
                          Human Answer: Yes, Privacy, security and safety
 Overall Score            Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                          this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                          the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                          good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                          threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                          Human Answer: 6
 Confidence               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                          your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                          your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                          carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                          but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                          unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                          is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                          with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                          willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                          parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                          details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                          ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                          Human Answer: 3

Table 11: ICLR 2023 accepted paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Summary of the review, flag for ethics review, overall score, and confidence


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary                 Prompt: Summarize what the paper claims to contribute. Be positive and constructive.
                         P5 Answer:
                         The paper aims to tackle the issue of increased computational expense in calculating the batch
                         gradient in each iteration when using the Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT) algorithm for solv-
                         ing sparse optimizations. This becomes problematic in cases of high-dimensional data or ma-
                         chine learning applications. The authors propose a variant of the Stochastic IHT algorithm that
                         uses a mini-batch gradient to remedy the computational expensive process.
                         The authors claim a few main contributions: 1. They establish a novel sparse stochastic gradient
                         descent property of the Hard Thresholding (HT) operator. 2. For a given step size, they find
                         a lower bound on the size of the mini-batch that ensures the expected descent of the objective
                         value function after hard-thresholding. 3. They show that the sequence generated by the mini-
                         batch SIHT algorithm is supermartingale and converges with a probability of one. 4. They
                         demonstrate that for certain classes of functions in problem (P), the sum of norm squared of
                         individual gradients, evaluated at every point, is proportionate to the norm of the batch gradient,
                         where the proportionality only depends on the data.
                         However, some key concerns remain. All these results are claimed without explicitly illustrat-
                         ing any significant experimental or practical scaling trends. Furthermore, the work lacks any
                         comparative benchmarks against recent methods. Also, some dense theory presentation makes
                         the paper less accessible to a broader readership. Useful connections to machine learning al-
                         gorithms, networks, and commonly faced issues are not convincingly made with numerous
                         concepts assumed to be known by readers without enough explanation. Finally, potential lim-
                         itations or downsides of the authors’ approach remain unaddressed. Therefore, from a critic’s
                         point of view, this work could score around 4/10. Some recommendations would be to simplify
                         complex theoretical presentations, provide comparative benchmarks, and explicitly discuss lim-
                         itations for balance and context.
 Correctness             Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the correctness of the
                         technical claims, experimental and research methodology and on whether the central claims
                         of the paper are adequately supported with evidence. 4: All of the claims and statements are
                         well-supported and correct. 3: Some of the paper’s claims have minor issues. A few statements
                         are not well-supported, or require small changes to be made correct. 2: Several of the paper’s
                         claims are incorrect or not well-supported. 1: The main claims of the paper are incorrect or not
                         at all supported by theory or empirical results.
                         P5 Answer: 2
 Technical Novelty and   Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the technical novelty and
 Significance            significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                         3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                         prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                         are neither significant nor novel.
                         P5 Answer: 2
 Empirical Novelty and   Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the empirical novelty and
 Significance            significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                         3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                         prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                         are neither significant nor novel. NA: Not applicable.
                         P5 Answer: 2

Table 12: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers: Summary,
correctness, technical novelty and significance, and empirical novelty and significance.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                  Prompt and P5 Answer
 Strengths/Weaknesses      Prompt: List strong and weak points of the paper. Be as comprehensive as possible.
                           P5 Answer:
                           Strong Points: 1. The paper addresses a significant challenge in applying IHT for sparse opti-
                           mizations in high-dimensional data or machine learning applications. 2. The authors propose
                           an innovative variant of the Stochastic IHT algorithm employing a mini-batch gradient which
                           is computationally cheaper. 3. The establishment of a novel sparse stochastic gradient descent
                           property of the HT operator is a potentially significant contribution. 4. The authors determine
                           the minimum mini-batch size based on a given step size, permitting expected descent of the ob-
                           jective value function after hard-thresholding. 5. The proof that the sequence generated by the
                           mini-batch SIHT algorithm converges with a high probability and behaves like a supermartin-
                           gale could provide strong theoretical underpinning.
                           Weak Points: 1. The lack of significant experimental or practical scaling trends limits the appli-
                           cability and demonstrability of the proposed methods. 2. Absence of comparison benchmarks
                           against other current methods weakens the paper’s argument for its proposed methodology. 3.
                           The prolonged sections of dense theory could alienate readers who may not be highly famil-
                           iar with the content, thereby reducing accessibility. 4. There is insufficient contextualization
                           between numerous concepts and their corresponding relevance to machine learning algorithms
                           and networks. 5. The work does not address any of its potential limitations or downsides, lim-
                           iting its observed objectivity and balance.
                           Given these reasons, the authors ought to strive for improved engagement with the readership
                           by simplifying theoretical presentations, conducting and presenting experimental or practical
                           proofs, providing comparative benchmarks, and discussing limitations explicitly for a well-
                           rounded view.
 Clarity, Quality, Nov-    Prompt: Please evaluate the clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility of the paper.
 elty, and Reproducibil-   P5 Answer: Clarity: The paper is somewhat hard to follow for readers not already very familiar
 ity                       with the specific concepts referenced. While it is organized logically, a significant portion
                           of the content is mired in complex, dense theory that may make it inaccessible to a broader
                           readership. Illustrations, intuitive descriptions, and more contextualizations should be included
                           to clarify the derived theorems and properties. The authors may also want to invest in building
                           a more convincing narrative regarding the problems they’re addressing and the potential of their
                           proposed solutions in actual applications.
                           Quality: Research quality appears to be reasonably strong with stated claims backed up by
                           mathematical formulations and reasoning. However, the paper does not provide any imple-
                           mentation details or extensive insights from experiments, testing, or simulations, which can
                           buttress the claims. The applicability of the theoretical findings to practical scenarios is thus
                           not firmly demonstrated, affecting the perceived quality of the paper. Furthermore, the work
                           does not engage with other related research in a comparative way, which could have validated
                           the uniqueness and potency of their offerings against existing methods.
                           Novelty: The novel components in this paper include a new sparse stochastic gradient descent
                           property of the HT operator and the establishment of a lower bound on mini-batch size for
                           the mini-batch SIHT algorithm. To academic specialists, these findings could represent some
                           healthy progress. However, with the paper lacking an experimental component or concrete
                           prototypes to validate these novelty points, their actual effectiveness, utility, or applicability
                           could be unclear to many readers.
                           Reproducibility: The authors focus the paper on theory and do not report on any empirical
                           investigations they may have carried out. Although the theorems and proofs are presented,
                           details that would help to reproduce these findings such as data sets, code snippets, or certain
                           specifics of the experimental setup (if one was used), are missing in the paper. As a result, the
                           reproducibility of this work is currently low.
                           In accordance to the provided guidelines, my suggested scores would be: Clarity: 4, Quality:
                           5, Novelty: 6, Reproducibility: 3. The authors need to work on improving the presentation,
                           comparative benchmarks, offering experimental / practical details, and discussing limitations as
                           part of enhancing the overall appeal and substance of this work.

Table 13: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers:
Strengths/weaknesses, clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                 Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary of the           Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                   sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                          P5 Answer:
                          Initial Recommendation: Reject
                          Reasons: 1. Lack of Experimental Verification: The paper lacks significant practical exper-
                          imental verification. Although theoretical analysis is important, practical demonstrations are
                          also necessary to prove the practical feasibility of the approach proposed.
                          2. Absence of Comparative Benchmarks: The paper doesn’t justify the novel contributions by
                          including comparative benchmarks against existing approaches. This greatly undermines the
                          demonstrated efficiency of the proposed method.
                          Supporting Arguments:
                          1. While the paper provides some motivated theoretical insights, their practicality and efficacy
                          remain untested. To ensure credibility, the authors need to complement their theory with exper-
                          imental evidence illustrating the actionable significance of their assays.
                          2. It’s unclear how the proposed approach fares against existing solutions since there isn’t any
                          comparative benchmark provided in the paper.
                          3. The dense theory presentation of content and lack of an accessible exposition can make it
                          harder for readers not well-versed with the concepts to appreciate the innovations presented.
                          Therefore, making these sections more accessible can significantly improve the appeal and en-
                          gagement of the paper,
                          4. Lastly, the authors fail to discuss the potential shortcomings of their approach which can
                          make the work seem unbalanced and poorly contextualized. Thus, acknowledging and outlining
                          limitations can serve to enhance the transparency and credibility of their findings.
                          While the paper’s methodology exhibits novelty, the lack of experimental groundwork and com-
                          parative benchmarks limit its viability for presentation in its current form. These expansive
                          changes can result in a notable lift in the paper’s bigger capabilities, hence, warranting adjust-
                          ments to be made before another review attempt.
 Flag for Ethics Review   Prompt: If there are no ethical issues with this paper please respond with NO. Otherwise if
                          there are ethical issues with this paper please flag the paper for an ethics review by one of the
                          following: Yes, Potentially harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Legal com-
                          pliance (e.g., GDPR, copyright, terms of use) Yes, Privacy, security and safety, Yes, Potentially
                          harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Discrimination / bias / fairness concerns
                          Yes, Responsible research practice (e.g., human subjects, data release) Yes, Research integrity
                          issues (e.g., plagiarism, dual submission) Yes, Other reasons (please specify below)
                          P5 Answer: NO
 Overall Score            Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                          this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                          the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                          good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                          threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                          P5 Answer: 3
 Confidence               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                          your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                          your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                          carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                          but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                          unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                          is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                          with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                          willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                          parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                          details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                          ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                          P5 Answer: 4

Table 14: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of P5 answers: Summary of
the review, flag for ethics review, overall score, and confidence


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                  Prompt and Human Answer
 Summary                   Prompt: Summarize what the paper claims to contribute. Be positive and constructive.
                           Human Answer:
                           The authors study mini-batch stochastic iterative hard thresholding (IHT). IHT is a well known
                           algorithm for sparse optimization with extensive literature. IHT is essentially ℓ2 -projected gra-
                           dient descent on the set of s-sparse vectors. Given the ML-wide focus on stochastic optimization
                           algorithms, it is natural to study the guarantees of stochastic IHT.
                           The main result of the paper is a martingale convergence result that claims stochastic IHT
                           converges to the optimal function value, although no convergence rate is given.
 Correctness               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the correctness of the
                           technical claims, experimental and research methodology and on whether the central claims
                           of the paper are adequately supported with evidence. 4: All of the claims and statements are
                           well-supported and correct. 3: Some of the paper’s claims have minor issues. A few statements
                           are not well-supported, or require small changes to be made correct. 2: Several of the paper’s
                           claims are incorrect or not well-supported. 1: The main claims of the paper are incorrect or not
                           at all supported by theory or empirical results.
                           Human Answer: 2
 Technical Novelty and     Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the technical novelty and
 Significance              significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                           3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                           prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                           are neither significant nor novel.
                           Human Answer: 2
 Empirical Novelty and     Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate the empirical novelty and
 Significance              significance of this paper. 4: The contributions are significant, and do not exist in prior works.
                           3: The contributions are significant and somewhat new. Aspects of the contributions exist in
                           prior work. 2: The contributions are only marginally significant or novel. 1: The contributions
                           are neither significant nor novel. NA: Not applicable.
                           Human Answer: Not applicable

Table 15: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Summary, correctness, technical novelty and significance, and empirical novelty and significance.



 Category                  Prompt and Human Answer
 Strengths/Weaknesses      Prompt: List strong and weak points of the paper. Be as comprehensive as possible.
                           Human Answer:
                           Strengths - Advancing the theoretical understanding of stochastic IHT is an important task. -
                           The writing is generally easy to follow.
                           Weaknesses - The literature review is quite limited. - The proofs are missing, so it is not
                           possible to fully verify the claimed results. - In Claim 2, the minimum singular value should
                           be 0, because the matrix is low-rank. If the authors define minimum singular value differently,
                           it is hard to know because the proof is not included. - In Claim 2, an upper bound is derived
                           for c (10). Based on this, c seems to be ≥ N 2 . When I plug that back into Theorem 2, I get
                           a batch size of roughly N − Θ(1). This does not seem like a great choice for a batch size,
                           which typically should be much less than N . It would be great if the authors could comment on
                           whether I am missing something here. - There are no experiments, which could shed light for
                           example on what is the value of c in practice.
 Clarity, Quality, Nov-    Prompt: Please evaluate the clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility of the paper.
 elty, and Reproducibil-   Human Answer: On novelty, I find that at least one very related paper is missing from the
 ity                       discussion [1] (probably others too). This paper presents a convergence analysis of stochastic
                           IHT for functions that have the restricted smooth and strongly convexity assumptions. By the
                           way, the strong convexity assumption can be guaranteed by regularizing the loss function.
                           On reproducibility, some of the results like Lemmas 3-4 seem true, while e.g. Claim 2 is hard
                           to verify. Again, since the proofs aren’t included, this has a negative effect on reproducibility.
                           [1] Ac/dc: Alternating compressed/decompressed training of deep neural networks Peste,
                           Alexandra and Iofinova, Eugenia and Vladu, Adrian and Alistarh, Dan

Table 16: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Strengths/weaknesses, clarity, quality, novelty, and reproducibility



                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                 Prompt and Human Answer
 Summary of the           Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                   sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                          Human Answer:
                          In summary, while I like the problem of minibatch stochastic IHT and the approach, I find that
                          there are significant issues with novelty that should be resolved in the literature review section,
                          as well as my other concerns outlined above. I encourage the authors to continue working on
                          the manuscript since I think this is an important subject.
 Flag for Ethics Review   Prompt: If there are no ethical issues with this paper please respond with NO. Otherwise if
                          there are ethical issues with this paper please flag the paper for an ethics review by one of the
                          following: Yes, Potentially harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Legal com-
                          pliance (e.g., GDPR, copyright, terms of use) Yes, Privacy, security and safety, Yes, Potentially
                          harmful insights, methodologies and applications Yes, Discrimination / bias / fairness concerns
                          Yes, Responsible research practice (e.g., human subjects, data release) Yes, Research integrity
                          issues (e.g., plagiarism, dual submission) Yes, Other reasons (please specify below)
                          Human Answer: NO
 Overall Score            Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                          this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                          the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                          good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                          threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                          Human Answer: 3
 Confidence               Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                          your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                          your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                          carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                          but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                          unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                          is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                          with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                          willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                          parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                          details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                          ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                          Human Answer: 4

Table 17: ICLR 2023 rejected paper evaluation prompts and example of human reviewer answers:
Summary of the review, flag for ethics review, overall score, and confidence


                                                    28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category               Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary of the         Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                 sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                        P5 Answer:
                        Initial Recommendation: Reject
                        Key Reasons for Rejection:
                        1. Lack of Evidence and Rigorous Validation: The authors state that they have designed ef-
                        ficient attack algorithms, but no substantial empirical evidence or case studies are provided to
                        support these claims. The conspicuous absence of practical illustrations significantly weakens
                        the presented arguments.
                        2. Theoretical Focus with Minimal Consideration for Real-World Applicability: While there
                        are decent theoretical foundations and analytical rigor presented throughout the paper, it lacks a
                        well-illustrated methodology or consideration for practical implications that could reaffirm the
                        utility of the proposed work in real-world scenarios.
                        Supporting Arguments:
                        1. The paper presents an interesting perspective regarding security threats to adversarial bandits,
                        a niche that is indeed intriguing. However, the presentation substantially lacks evidence-based
                        arguments and ends up being too theoretical in most parts. Any claims made require substanti-
                        ation through rigorous empirical analysis, which the paper seems to inadequately provide.
                        2. The theoretical designs discussed would provide grounds for further exploration but require
                        resemblance and alignment to practical scenarios. This alignment is lacking and handicaps
                        the strength of this submission in efficiently exhibiting the relevance and potential of proposed
                        models.
                        3. Overall, the research demonstrates potential but is unable to effectively convince the reader
                        about its practical and impactful implications. Lack of strong experimental support, complexity
                        in interpreting the results presented, and insufficient acknowledgment of the broader range of
                        existing work dilute the comprehension and appreciation of the deliverance.
                        4. Key messages deriving the novelty of the work get lost due to not-so-well-illustrated back-
                        ground study, unclear results, and inadequately examined novelty. Upon accommodating revi-
                        sions targeting these concerns, the research could turn out to be a qualified proposal exhibiting
                        more effective and clarified novelties.
                        Resolving these issues and incorporating substantial empirical validation will significantly aug-
                        ment the concreteness, relevance, and palpability of the work, potentially setting requisites for
                        its acceptance.
 Overall Score          Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                        this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                        the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                        good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                        threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                        P5 Answer: 4
 Confidence             Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                        your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                        your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                        carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                        but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                        unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                        is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                        with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                        willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                        parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                        details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                        ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                        P5 Answer: 4

Table 18: Example of P5 review after adding metric errors to the paper: Summary of the review,
overall score and confidence.


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category                Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary of the          Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                  sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                         P5 Answer:
                         Initial Recommendation: Reject
                         Key Reasons:
                         1. Insufficient Theoretical Justifications: The paper fails to strategically present sufficient theo-
                         retical motivation for its proposed approach that might justify its relevance over other existing
                         methods, thereby putting the novelty and originality of the paper into question.
                         2. Limited Experimentations: The quality of the paper is hampered significantly by the fact
                         that it only evaluates its method on validation sets without considering any application on
                         independent test sets for generalizability. The experimentation procedure noticeably lacking
                         comparison with other state-of-the-art methods, making it difficult to consider the observed im-
                         provements as valid or significant.
                         Supporting Arguments:
                         1. Theoretical reasoning is a vital aspect that differentiates any research piece. Sufficient back-
                         ground literature and logical rationale must support the proposed approach. The lack of these
                         seriously dents the credibility and thus pulls the overall score down for this submission.
                         2. The robustness analysis, potential challenges, and limitations of the proposed algorithm are
                         starkly missing from the paper. Such discourse would offer insights into the practice readiness
                         of the model and its fitness for real-world scenarios.
                         3. For efficacy and the subsequent impact of this research work on the academic community,
                         a robust experimental methodology constituting benchmark comparisons and generalizability
                         study would be crucial. Else, the research stands isolated from the context.
                         4. A clear reproducibility profile is a must for driving a healthy trend in academic contributions,
                         as it allows for potential comparative studies, enhancements, and to corroborate the results. The
                         absence of such essential details in this submission marks another strike against it.
                         Conclusively, my evaluation suggests that the paper holds some promise with its introduced
                         method, the CIM, placing itself on a novel idea platform. However, substantial scope for im-
                         provement in theory justification, experimentation design, and the reproducible outlook before
                         it might hold a ground in the ICLR 2023 niche persists. Therefore, at its current state, it does
                         not qualify for meeting the year’s acceptance threshold.
 Overall Score           Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                         this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                         the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                         good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                         threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                         P5 Answer: 4
 Confidence              Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                         your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                         your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                         carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                         but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                         unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                         is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                         with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                         willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                         parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                         details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                         ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                         P5 Answer: 2

Table 19: Example of P5 review after adding theoretical errors to the paper: Summary of the review,
overall score and confidence.


                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Category               Prompt and P5 Answer
 Summary of the         Prompt: Clearly state your initial recommendation (accept or reject) with one or two key rea-
 Review                 sons for this choice. Provide supporting arguments for your recommendation.
                        P5 Answer:
                        Initial Recommendation: Reject
                        Reasons: Firstly, the paper is insufficient in providing comprehensive experimental validation
                        and comparative studies with other models to back up the claims about the efficacy of their
                        proposed technique. For example, it lacks a comparison with mechanisms such as the MIM or
                        BEiT and doesn’t offer enough evidence to support the superiority of their ResPix and RepDet
                        objectives. Secondly, the heavy reliance on existing techniques reduces its novelty. However,
                        the concepts brought out are promising and if better validated methodologically, could be worth
                        acceptance.
                        Supporting Arguments: 1. Lack of Comparisons: For the novel aspect of Corrupted Image
                        Modeling (CIM), the paper does not offer comparative studies with other techniques in the
                        field. The verification of the superiority of the novel components, including the ResPix and
                        RepDet objectives, is also not well proven against existing pre-training objectives.
                        2. Dependence on known approaches: While it’s not a flaw to build upon existing theories
                        or methods, the paper appears to lean heavily on established techniques like BEiT and the
                        Transformer family. Thereby, limiting its own novelty.
                        3. Insufficient validation: The experimental setup presented doesn’t demonstrate conclusively
                        that the proposed approach is efficient or better than others. Providing entire process metrics
                        against familiar methods can strengthen this aspect.
                        4. Clarity and Reproducibility Issues: The complex concepts and theoretical explanations aren’t
                        properly illustrated. Essential details are missing which can lead to obstacles in understanding
                        and reproducing the results.
                        Overall, despite its novel proposals, the shortcomings regarding validation, comparison and
                        dependency on familiar methods warrant a rejection at the current review. The paper needs
                        extensive updates and improvements to receive a higher score.
 Overall Score          Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale and provide an ”overall score” for
                        this submission. Provide your output with the numerical rating. You are encouraged to use
                        the full range of scores. 10: strong accept, should be highlighted at the conference 8: accept,
                        good paper 6: marginally above the acceptance threshold 5: marginally below the acceptance
                        threshold 3: reject, not good enough 1: strong reject
                        P5 Answer: 4
 Confidence             Prompt: Please classify the paper on the following scale to indicate how confident you are in
                        your review. Provide your output with the numerical rating. 5: You are absolutely certain about
                        your assessment. You are very familiar with the related work and checked the math/other details
                        carefully. 4: You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
                        but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
                        unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. 3: You are fairly confident in your assessment. It
                        is possible that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar
                        with some pieces of related work. Math/other details were not carefully checked. 2: You are
                        willing to defend your assessment, but it is quite likely that you did not understand the central
                        parts of the submission or that you are unfamiliar with some pieces of related work. Math/other
                        details were not carefully checked. 1: You are unable to assess this paper and have alerted the
                        ACs to seek an opinion from different reviewers.
                        P5 Answer: 4

Table 20: Example of P5 review after adding exaggerated claims in the paper: Summary of the
review, overall score and confidence.


                                                 31
