Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


YOU O NLY S UBMIT O NE I MAGE TO F IND THE M OST
S UITABLE G ENERATIVE M ODEL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

             Deep generative models have achieved promising results in image generation, and
             various generative model hubs, e.g., Hugging Face and Civitai, have been de-
             veloped that enable model developers to upload models and users to download
             models. However, these model hubs lack advanced model management and iden-
             tification mechanisms, resulting in users only searching for models through text
             matching, download sorting, etc., making it difficult to efficiently find the model
             that best meets user requirements. In this paper, we propose a novel setting called
             Generative Model Identification (GMI), which aims to enable the user to iden-
             tify the most appropriate generative model(s) for the user’s requirements from
             a large number of candidate models efficiently. To our best knowledge, it has
             not been studied yet. In this paper, we introduce a comprehensive solution con-
             sisting of three pivotal modules: a weighted Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding
             (RKME) framework for capturing the generated image distribution and the rela-
             tionship between images and prompts, a pre-trained vision-language model aimed
             at addressing dimensionality challenges, and an image interrogator designed to
             tackle cross-modality issues. Extensive empirical results demonstrate the pro-
             posal is both efficient and effective. For example, users only need to submit a
             single example image to describe their requirements, and the model platform can
             achieve an average top-4 identification accuracy of more than 80%. The code and
             benchmark are all released to promote the research.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Deep generative models (Jebara, 2012), including variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; 2019; Parmar et al., 2021), generative adversarial network (GAN) (Creswell et al.,
2018; Mirza & Osindero, 2014; Sohn et al., 2015), flow-based model (Kobyzev et al., 2021; Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015), and the diffusion models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015), have achieved remarkable performance in image generation. Recently, stable diffusion mod-
els (Rombach et al., 2022) have achieved state-of-the-art generative capabilities and become one of
the popular topics in artificial intelligence. Various model hubs, e.g., Hugging Face1 and Civitai2 ,
have been developed to enable model developers to upload and share their generative models.
Existing model hubs provide some trivial methods such as tag filtering, text matching, and download
volume ranking (Shen et al., 2023), to help users search for models. However, these methods cannot
accurately capture the users’ requirements, making it difficult to efficiently identify the most appro-
priate model for users. As shown in Figure 1, the user should submit their requirements (usually in
text) to the model hub and subsequently, they must download and evaluate the searched model one
by one until they find the satisfactory one, causing significant time and computing resources.
The above limitation of existing generative model hubs inspires us to consider the following ques-
tion: Can we describe the functionalities and utilities of different generative models more precisely
in some format that enables the model can be efficiently and accurately identified in the future by
matching the models’ functionalities with users’ requirements? We call this novel setting Generative
Model Identification (GMI). To the best of our knowledge, this problem has not been studied yet.
    1
        https://huggingface.co/
    2
        https://civitai.com/


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Tags                                                  Upload Image               R

                    Sorted by Download                                       Sorted by Similarity



                                         Not selected                                                   Download     Satisfactory
                           25K+                                                       0.98



                                         Download       Unsatisfactory
                            14K+                                                      0.20

    I want to
    generate a                           Download       Unsatisfactory
    comic role               5K+                                                      0.12
    just like        ……                     ……              ……                ……
    this one!
                                         Download       Satisfactory
                            859                                                       0.08



                             40                                                       0.03


                 Search & Select         Download         Evaluate         Upload & Rank                Download          Evaluate

                       Traditional Generative Model Search                              Generative Model Identification


Figure 1: Comparison between traditional generative model search of existing model hubs and GMI.
GMI matches requirements and specifications during the identification process. A detailed explana-
tion is presented in B.


It is evident that two problems need to be addressed to achieve GMI, the first is how to describe the
functionalities of different generative models, and the second is how to match the user requirements
with the models’ functionalities. Inspired by the learnware paradigm (Zhou, 2016), which proposes
to assign a specification to each model that reflects the model’s utilities, we adopt the Reduced Ker-
nel Mean Embedding (RKME) as the model specification to capture the distribution of generated
images produced by different generative models, since the generated image distribution could reflect
the model functionality. However, previous RKME studies mainly focus on classification tasks, and
can not be directly applied to generative models. To this end, we propose a novel systematic so-
lution consisting of three pivotal modules: a weighted Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding (RKME)
framework for capturing not only the generated image distribution but also the relationship between
images and prompts, a pre-trained vision-language model aimed at addressing dimensionality chal-
lenges, and an image interrogator designed to tackle cross-modality issues. For the second problem,
we assume the user can present one image as an example to describe the requirements, and then
we can match the model specification with the example image to compute how well each candidate
generative model matches users’ requirements. Figure 1 provides a comparison between previous
model search methods and the new solution. The goal is to identify the most suitable generative
model with only one single image as an example to describe the user’s requirements.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposal, we construct a benchmark platform consisting of 16
tasks specifically designed for GMI using stable diffusion models. The experiment results show
that our proposal is both efficient and effective. For example, users only need to submit a single
example image to describe their requirements, and the model platform can achieve an average top-4
identification accuracy of more than 80%, indicating that recommending four models can satisfy
users in major cases on the benchmark dataset.


2     P ROBLEM AND A NALYSIS

In this section, we first describe the notation and formulation of GMI. Then, we theoretically dis-
cuss the obstacles existing methods face in generative models. Finally, we propose an advanced
formulation motivated by our analysis.

2.1     P ROBLEM S ETUP

In this paper, we explore a novel problem setting called GMI, where users identify the most appro-
priate generative models for their specific purposes using just one single image. We assume there


                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      M
is a model platform, consisting of M generative models {fm }m=1 . Each model is associated with
a corresponding specification Sm to describe its functionalities for future model identification. The
platform consists of two stages: the submitting stage for model developers and the identification
stage for users.
In the submitting stage, the model developer submits a generative model fm to the platform. Then,
the platform assigns a specification Sm to this model. Here, the specification Sm = As (fm , P)
                                                                                                   N
is generated by a specification algorithm As using the model fm and a prompt set P = {pk }k=1 .
If the model developer can provide a specific prompt set for the uploaded model, the generated
specification would be more precise in describing its functionalities. In the identification stage, the
users identify models from the platform using only one image xτ . When users upload an image
xτ to describe their purposes, the platform automatically calculates the pseudo-prompt p   b τ and then
generates requirements Rτ = Ar (xτ , p  b τ ) using a requirement algorithm Ar . Users can optionally
provide corresponding prompt pτ , setting p    b r = pτ , to more precisely describe their purposes.
During the identification process, the platform matches requirement Rτ with model specifications
      M
{Sm }m=1 using a evaluation algorithm Ae and compute similarity score sbτ,m = Ae (Sm , Rτ ) for
each model fm . Finally, the platform returns the best-matched model with the maximum similarity
                                            M
score or a list of models sorted by {b
                                     sτ,m }m=1 in descending order.
Note that the GMI setting helps reduce the consumption of network traffic and computing resources,
as well as the time and effort of users. As shown in Figure 1, users are relieved from the burden
of repeatedly selecting, downloading, and evaluating models by utilizing the calculated similarity
              M
scores {b
        sτ,m }m=1 . Moreover, the GMI setting is easy to use for both developers and users since all
the processes are automatically conducted in the background without requiring complex inputs.
There are two main challenges for addressing GMI setting: 1) In the submitting stage, how to design
As to fully characterize the generative models for identification? 2) In the identification stage, how
to design Ar and Ae to effectively identify the most appropriate generative models for user needs?

2.2   P ROBLEM A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we first briefly introduce the principle of the generative model, taking the stable
diffusion models as examples. Then, we show the RKME method (Wu et al., 2023) can address
GMI as a baseline method, modeling the data distribution of the model as the specification. We
present an example to show impossible cases of the baseline method because of overlooking the
interplay between prompts and images for generative tasks. Finally, we introduce our weighted
RKME framework for solving GMI problem setting.

Stable Diffusion. Generative models (Jebara, 2012) are capable of sampling images from a data
distribution defined by the model. Recently, stable diffusion models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)
have become one of the most popular models for their impressive performance. Therefore, we take
conditional stable diffusion models as examples for subsequent analysis and experiments. The con-
ditional diffusion model is a latent variable model, modeling a Markov chain with learned Gaussian
transitions pθm (xt−1 |xt ; p) for each iteration t ∈ [1, T ] starting an initial state p(xT ) ∼ N (0, I):
                                                        T
                                                        Y
                             pθm (x0:T |p) = p(xT )           pθm (xt−1 |xt ; p)                      (1)
                                                        t=1

Here, p is a prompt guiding the generation process, and pθm (·) is the learned Gaussian transitions
parameterized by θm . For simplicity, we assume the generative model fm generate an image set
               N
Xm = {xm,i }i=1 = {x|x ∼ fm (p), ∀p ∈ P} sampled from corresponding probability distribution
pθm (x0:T |p), using prompt set P of model platform.

Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding. A baseline method to describe the model’s functionality is
the RKME techniques (Wu et al., 2023). It maps data distribution of each model fm as corresponding
                                  RKME
               RKME
                                Nm
specification Sm    = xRKME
                          m,i   i=1
                                                RKME
                                       , where Nm      is the reduced set size of fm . For one query
image xτ from the users, the baseline method defines the requirement as RτRKME = {xτ }. Finally,


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the platform computes the similarity score in RKHS Hk using evaluation algorithm ARKME
                                                                                  e    :
                                                  RKME                                        2
                                                 Nm
                                                     X           1
                ARKME
                 e
                        RKME
                      (Sm    , RτRKME ) =                       RKME
                                                                     k(xRKME
                                                                        m,i , ·) − k(xτ ·)                  (2)
                                                     i=1
                                                               Nm
                                                                                              Hk

where k(·, ·) is the reproducing kernels associated with RKHS Hk . This baseline method fails to
capture the interplay between generated images Xm and the prompt set P, which is the probability
distribution pθm (x0:T |p) inside the generative model fm . We present an example to show this
interplay is important otherwise the specification cannot distinguish two models in specific cases,
resulting in unsatisfactory identification results.
Example 2.1. Suppose that there are two simplified generative models f1 and f2 on the platform.
f1 generates scatter points following x = cos (pπ), y = sin (pπ). f2 generates scatter points fol-
lowing x = sin (pπ), y = cos (pπ). The prompt set p follows U(−1, 1). The user wants to de-
ploy the identified model conditioned on prompts pτ following distribution U(0.5, 0). In Figure 2,
we show that the baseline method in Equation 2 fails to distinguish two models f1 and f2 for the
user. However, the two models function differently with pτ . Figure 2a and Figure 2b show that


         (a) Distribution of specifi-    (b) Distribution of specifi-       (c) Distributions of f1 (pτ )
         cation X1 ∼ f1 (p)              cation X2 ∼ f2 (p)                 and f2 (pτ )

    Figure 2: Baseline method in Equation 2 fails to distinguish two different models for users.

although models f1 and f2 function differently, the data distribution X1 ∼ f1 (p) and X2 ∼ f2 (p),
conditioned on the default prompt distribution p, could be identical. Therefore, the specificaions
S1RKME and S2RKME are identical, resulting in the same similarity scores ARKME
                                                                            e     (S1RKME , RτRKME ) and
  RKME     RKME      RKME
Ae      (S2      , Rτ      ). However, Figure 2c shows that two models f1 and f2 generate different
data distributions f1 (pτ ) and f2 (pτ ) conditioned on the user prompt distribution pτ .
Remark. Example 2.1 shows us that overlooking the interplay between images and prompts leads
to impossible cases for distinguishing generative models effectively. Existing RKME studies mainly
focus on classification tasks, which can implicitly model the tasks through data distribution since
the class space is discrete and small. For generative models, we have to explicitly model the model’s
functionality, i.e., the relation between images and prompts, to achieve satisfied identification results.

Incorporating relation between images and prompts Motivated by our analysis, how to incor-
porate the relationship between images and prompts in model specification and identifying process
is the key challenge for our GMI setting. Inspired by existing studies (Li et al., 2015; Ren et al.,
2016) about the conditional maximum mean discrepancy, we propose to consider the above relation
using a weighted formulation of Equation 2:
                                                     Nm                                           2
                                                     X    1
             AWeighted
              e
                         Weighted
                       (Sm        , RτWeighted ) =          wm,i · k(xm,i , ·) − k(xτ , ·)                  (3)
                                                     i=1
                                                         Nm
                                                                                                  Hk
                        N
where Wm = {wm,i }i=1    m
                           are required to measure the relation between user image xτ and prompt
set P. Here, we make the simplifications RτWeighted = xτ and Sm       Weighted
                                                                               = Xm in Equation 3.
This raises challenges inherent in dimensionality since stable diffusion models produce high-quality
images. Moreover, measuring the relation using Wm is also a challenging problem and encounters
cross-modality issues. Below we propose a comprehensive solution based on Equation 3 addressing
these challenges.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, we present our solution for the GMI setting, building upon the previous analysis and
the weighted formulation introduced in Equation 3. As mentioned earlier, two significant challenges
remain to be addressed: 1) The raw images reside in a high-dimensional space, and pixel-level com-
parisons are highly sensitive. How can we efficiently and effectively measure the similarity between
images? 2) The user’s image xτ and the platform’s prompt set P belong to different modalities.
How do we address cross-modality issues and calculate Wm to capture the relationship between
images and prompts?
To address the aforementioned challenges, we employ a large pre-trained vision model G(·) to map
images from raw input space to a common feature representation space. Subsequently, an image
interrogator I(·) is adopted to convert xτ to corresponding pseudo prompt p    b τ , thereby mitigating
the cross-modality issues. Consequently, the similarity in the common feature representation space
can be computed with the help of a large pre-trained language model T (·). We provide a detailed
description of our proposed method for the submitting stage and the identification stage, respectively.

3.1   S UBMITTING S TAGE

In the submitting stage, the model developer submits the generative model fm , and the platform
generates the model specification in the background using the specification algorithm As with the
submitted models fm and default prompt set P. The developer can optionally replace P with a
specific prompt set to generate a more precise specification. The algorithm As first samples images
from the generative model fm using the prompt set:
                                       Xm = {fm (p)|p ∈ P}                                        (4)
Then, the large pre-trained vision model G(·) is adopted to encode Xm as follows. The obtained
feature representation Zm is efficient and robust to compute similarity between images.
                                       Zm = {G(x)|x ∈ Xm }                                        (5)
Subsequently, As encodes prompt set P to the common feature representations using T (·):
                                        Qm = {T (p)|p ∈ P}                                        (6)
Finally, the specification Sm of generative model fm is defined as follows:
                                 Sm = As (fm ; Pm ) = {Zm ; Qm }                                  (7)
Note that Sm is automatically computed inside the platform, which is very convenient for developers
to use and deduce their burden of uploading models. Additionally, the specification does not occupy
a large amount of storage space on the platform since the only feature representation is storage.

3.2   I DENTIFICATION S TAGE

In the identification stage, the users upload one single image xτ to describe their requirements. Then,
the platform describes the requirements with Rτ from xτ . Specifically, the requirement algorithm
Ar first generates feature representations of xτ using G(·), i.e., zτ = G(xτ ). Subsequently, the
pseudo-prompt p   b τ is generated by I(·), i.e., p
                                                  b τ = I(xτ ), and converted to feature representations
using T (·), i.e., q
                   bτ = T (b  pτ ). The user can optionally replace p b τ with a prompt pτ built on his
understanding to precisely describe the requirement. Finally, the requirement is:
                                        Rτ = Ar (x) = {zτ ; q  bτ }                                  (8)
Note that Rτ is automatically computed inside the platform, which is very easy to use for users.
After the platform generates the requirement Rτ , it will calculates the similarity score for each
model fm using evaluation algorithm Ae :
                                  Nm                                              2
                                  X    1    q
                                            bm,i q
                                                 bτ
                  Ae (Sm , Rτ ) =                     k(zm,i , ·) − k(zτ , ·)                       (9)
                                  i=1
                                      N m ∥b
                                           q m,i qτ ∥
                                                ∥∥b
                                                                                  Hk
where the Wm of Equation 3 is define as the cosine similarity between platform prompts q       bm,i ∈
Qb m and pseudo-prompt q   bτ . Wm encodes the structure information of xτ within Pm during the
identification, which successfully captures the relation between images and prompts. The platform
returns a list of models sorted in increasing order of similarity score obtained by Equation 9.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   D ISCUSSION

It is evident that our proposal for the GMI scenario achieves a higher level of accuracy and efficiency
when compared to model search techniques employed by existing model hubs.
For accuracy, our proposal elucidates the functionalities of generated models by capturing both the
distribution of generated images and prompts. This approach allows for more accurate identifica-
tion of suitable models for users, as opposed to the traditional model search method that relies on
download counts and star ratings for ranking models.
For efficiency, suppose the platform generates one requirement in Tr time and calculates the simi-
larity score for each model in Ts time. The time complexity of our proposal for one identification
is O(Tr + M Ts ) time. Moreover, with accurate identification results, users can save the efforts of
browsing and selecting models, as well as reducing the consumption of network and computing. This
is linearly correlated to the number of models on the platform (which can be reduced through tag
filtering). Additionally, our approach also has the potential to achieve further acceleration through
the use of a vector database (Guo et al., 2023) such as Faiss (Johnson et al., 2019).

4     E XPERIMENTS

To verify the effectiveness of our proposed method for GMI problem, we conduct experiments on a
novel generative model identification benchmark dataset based on stable diffusion models (Rombach
et al., 2022). Our objective is to answer the following three research questions:

       • Whether the most suitable generative model can be identified by our proposed method?
       • Whether our proposal can achieve satisfactory model recommendations for users?
       • To what extent does each component contribute to the proposed method?

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Model Platform and Task Construction. In practice, we expect model developers to submit their
models and corresponding prompts to the model platform. And we expect users to identify models
for their real needs. In our experiments, we constructed a model platform and user identification
tasks respectively to simulate the above situation. For the construction of the model platform, we
manually collect M = 16 different stable diffusion models {f1 , . . . , fM } from one popular model
platform, CivitAI, as uploaded generative models on the platform. Note that these collected models
belong to the same category to simulate the real process in which users first trigger category filters
and then select the models. We construct 55 prompts {p1 , . . . , p55 } as default prompt set P of
platform. For task construction, we construct 18 evaluation prompts {pτ1 , . . . , pτ18 } for each model
on the platform to generate testing images with random seed in {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, forming
                                                                              Nτ
Nτ = 18 × 16 × 10 = 2880 different identification tasks {(xτi , ti )}i=1          , where each testing image
xτi is generated by model fti and its best matching model index is ti . Here, we ensure that there is
no overlap between {p1 , . . . , p55 } and {pτ1 , . . . , pτ18 } to ensure the correctness of the evaluation.

Evaluation Metrics. In our experiments, we use accuracy and average rank to evaluate the perfor-
                                                                             PM
mance of methods. We define the rank of model fm for task τ as rbτ,m = 1 + i=1 I [b  sτ,i < sbτ,m ].
The accuracy is defined as Acc. = N1τ I [b
                                         rτi ,ti = 1], where Acc. ∈ [0, 1] evaluates the ability of
                                                                                                      r
each method to find the best matching model. The average rank is defined as Rank = τNi ,tτ i ,
                                                                                                      b

where Rank ∈ [1, M ] evaluates the ability of each method to rank the best matching model
among other models. We additionally report the T op-k accuracy, which is calculated as T op-
k Acc. = N1τ I [b rτi ,ti ≤ k]. This metric measures the average effort spent by users during the
identification process and T op-k Acc. ∈ [0, 1].

Comparison Methods. Initially, we compare it with the traditional model search method called
Download. This method is used to simulate how users search generative models according to their
downloading volumes (Shen et al., 2023), where users will try models with high downloading vol-
ume first. This baseline method can represent a family of methods that employ statistical information


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Average Accuracy          Average Rank                                                   Detailed Rank on Each Task
                                   8                         15.0                                                                  Download
       0.4                                                                                                                         RKME
                                                             12.5                                                                  RKME-CLIP
                                   6                                                                                               Proposal
       0.3                                                   10.0
Accuracy


                                Rank


                                                      Rank
       0.2                         4                          7.5
                                                              5.0
       0.1                         2
                                                              2.5
       0.0                         0                          0.0
                RK d
                    ME


               Pro IP
                      al


                                        RK d
                                            ME


                                       Pro IP
                                              al


                                                                       #1

                                                                              #2

                                                                                      #3

                                                                                            #4

                                                                                                 #5

                                                                                                      #6

                                                                                                           #7

                                                                                                                #8

                                                                                                                     #9

                                                                                                                          Ta 0

                                                                                                                          Ta 1

                                                                                                                          Ta 2

                                                                                                                          Ta 3

                                                                                                                          Ta 4

                                                                                                                          Ta 5
                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                               #1
                   loa


                                           loa


                                                                                                                          #1



                                                                                                                               #1

                                                                                                                               #1

                                                                                                                               #1

                                                                                                                               #1

                                                                                                                               #1
                  pos


                                          pos
                 -CL


                                         -CL


                                                                        k
                                                                               sk

                                                                                       sk

                                                                                           sk

                                                                                                sk

                                                                                                     sk

                                                                                                          sk

                                                                                                               sk

                                                                                                                    sk


                                                                                                                            sk
                wn


                                        wn


                                                                    Tas


                                                                                                                         sk



                                                                                                                            sk

                                                                                                                            sk

                                                                                                                            sk

                                                                                                                            sk

                                                                                                                            sk
                                                                            Ta

                                                                                    Ta

                                                                                        Ta

                                                                                             Ta

                                                                                                  Ta

                                                                                                       Ta

                                                                                                            Ta

                                                                                                                 Ta
              ME


                                      ME


                                                                                                                      Ta
             Do


                                     Do
           RK


                                   RK
Figure 3: The left two subfigures present the average accuracy and rank on all tasks. The right
subfigure presents the detailed rank of each task. For accuracy, the higher the better. For rank,
the lower the better. The accuracy shows that our proposal outperforms existing solutions (e.g.,
Download and RKME) and our simple solution which combines some existing techniques. The
average rank and detailed ranks present the user’s efforts in identifying satisfied models for each
task. Our proposal requires minimal user effort.


without regard to model capabilities. We also consider the basic implementation of the RKME spec-
ification (Wu et al., 2023) as a baseline method RKME-Baisc for our GMI problem. The details
of generating specifications, and identifying models are presented in section 2.2. Furthermore, we
compare our proposed method with a variant of the basic RKME specification, that is, RKME-CLIP,
which calculates specifications in the feature representation space encoded by the CLIP model (Rad-
ford et al., 2021). The results obtained from RKME-CLIP further support our viewpoint on the
critical challenges posed by dimensionality.

Implementation Details. We adopt the official code in Wu et al. (2023) to implement the RKME-
Basic method and the official code in Radford et al. (2021) to implement the CLIP model. For
RKME-Basic and RKME-CLIP methods, we follow the default hyperparameter setting of RKME
in previous studies (Guo et al., 2023). We set the size of the reduced set to 1 and choose the RBF
kernel (Xu et al., 1994) for RKHS. The hyperparameter γ for calculating RBF kernel and similarity
score is tuned from {0.005, 0.006, 0.007, 0.008, 0.009, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05} and set to 0.02
in our experiments. Experiment results below show that our proposal is robust to γ.

4.2          E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

Whether the most suitable generative model can be identified by our proposed method? The
objective of GMI setting is to identify the most suitable generative model for the user’s needs.
Hence, our initial focus is to determine the effectiveness of baseline methods and our proposed
method in identifying the most suitable generative model. We report the accuracy in the left subfig-
ure of Figure 3 to evaluate each method’s ability to identify the best matching generative model.
Specifically, the Download and RKME-Basic methods cannot work in the GMI problem. The
Download method will return models ranked by download volume, which is unable to meet the vari-
ous needs of users. The identification results of the RKME-Basic method are biased to one model in
the platform. The high resolution of images, such as 512x512, presents challenges in calculating the
RKME specification and renders the RKME-Basic method ineffective. The performance of RKME-
CLIP demonstrates that encoding images is necessary to address the high dimensionality in GMI.
However, RKME-CLIP fails to consider the relation between images and prompts, which cannot
give the optimal identification results. Our proposal solves the above challenges, giving the best
average accuracy compared to baseline methods. These results demonstrate that the specification
can help identify the most suitable generative models, which is in line with our starting point.

Whether our proposal can achieve satisfactory model recommendations for users? When de-
ploying our proposal in real model platforms, the platform will recommend multiple models for
users sorted by similarity score. Therefore, our focus shifts to rank and T op-k accuracy metrics.
We report the average rank and detailed ranks in the right two subfigures of Figure 3. Specifically,


                                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance of each method evaluated by T op-k accuracy. The results show that our
proposal achieves 80% top-4 accuracy, indicating that user only requires four models to satisfy their
needs in major cases.

 Method        Top-1 Acc.   Top-2 Acc.   Top-3 Acc.   Top-4 Acc.     Top-5 Acc.   Top-6 Acc.   Top-7 Acc.   Top-8 Acc.
 Download          0.062         0.125       0.188           0.250       0.312        0.375        0.438        0.500
 RKME-Basic        0.062         0.125       0.188           0.250       0.312        0.375        0.438        0.500
 RKME-CLIP         0.419         0.576       0.688           0.770       0.832        0.870        0.905        0.934
 Proposal          0.455         0.614       0.734           0.812       0.863        0.899        0.922        0.943



Table 2: Ablation study. For accu-
racy, the higher the better. For rank,
the lower the better. The best perfor-
mance is in bold.

 Methods        Acc.    Top-2 Acc.   Rank
 Download       0.062       0.125    8.500
 RKME-Basic     0.062       0.125    8.500
 RKME-CLIP      0.419       0.576    3.130
 RKME-Concat    0.433       0.602    2.938
 Proposal       0.455       0.614    2.852             Figure 4: Visualization of generated images.


Download and RKME-Basic methods show poor performance for similar reasons stated above. Our
proposal achieves the best average rank, thus demonstrating its effectiveness. Note that the average
rank is related to the efforts of the user when identifying the most appropriate models. Therefore,
our proposal can save users time and effort compared to baseline methods. We also report the T op-
k accuracy in Table 1. Our proposal gives the best performance among all different values of K,
which demonstrates its effectiveness. The experiment results show that our proposal can achieve
80% accuracy when just recommending four models for users. These results reveal the possibility
of building a generative model platform and recommending models to users with specifications.

To what extent does each component contribute to the proposed method? In order to com-
prehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our proposal, we investigate whether each component
contributes to the final performance. We additionally compare our proposal with two variants,
called RKME-CLIP and RKME-Concat. RKME-CLIP adopts the CLIP model to extract the fea-
ture representation for constructing RKME specifications. RKME-Concat adopts both vision and
text branches of the CLIP model to extract representations of images and prompts. It combines two
modes of representation for constructing RKME specifications. We report accuracy and rank metrics
in Figure 2. The performance of RKME-CLIP demonstrates that employing large pre-trained models
is an effective approach for addressing dimensionality issues. The performance of RKME-Concat
demonstrates the benefits of considering both images and prompts for model identification. Our
results achieve the best performance, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our weighted formulation
in Equation 3 and our specifically designed algorithm in Equation 9.

4.3   V ISUALIZATION

We conducted visualization experiments to further show that the new proposal can identify the best-
matched model and thereby generate images that meet user requirements better in Figure 4. Specif-
ically, we show the example image xτ submitted by the user in the first column. Then, we generate
requirement Rτ and identify models from the platform using different methods. For each method,
we show the image generated with its identified model and pseudo-prompt I(xτ ). The title of the
images indicates different model identification methods. The results clearly show that the generative
model identified via the new proposal can generate images that best match the users’ requirements
(most similar to the example image). For example, our method correctly captures the two differ-
ent comic styles of the image and generates a satisfied image, whereas other methods either have a
mismatch in style or have errors in content.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    R ELATED W ORK

Generative modeling (Jebara, 2012) is a field of machine learning that focuses on learning the un-
derlying distribution and generation of new samples for corresponding distribution. Recently, sig-
nificant progress has been made in image generation with various methods. Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Brock et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2020; Goodfellow et al.,
2014) apply an adversarial approach to learn the data distribution. It consists of a generator and
a discriminator playing a min-max game during the training process. Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; van den Oord et al., 2017) is a variant of
Auto-Encoder (AE) (Wang et al., 2016), where both consist of the encoder and decoder networks.
The encoder in AE learns to map an image into a latent representation. Then, the decoder aims to
reconstruct the image from that latent representation. Diffusion Models (DMs) (Nichol & Dhari-
wal, 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) leverages the concept of the diffusion
process, consisting of forward and reverse diffusion processes. Noise is added to an image during
the forward process and the diffusion model learns to denoise and reconstruct the image. With the
development of the generative model, various generative model hubs/pools, e.g., HuggingFace, Civ-
itai, have been developed. However, they lack model management and identification mechanisms,
resulting in inefficiency for users to find the most suitable model.
Lu et al. (2022) performs context-based search for unconditional generative models and involves a
contrastive learning process for all models in the model hubs. However, this learning process sig-
nificantly hinders the adaptability of the approach, making it unsuitable for a frequently updated
model hub. Assessing the transferability of pre-trained models is related to the problem studied
in this paper. Negative Conditional Entropy (NCE) (Tran et al., 2019) proposed an information-
theoretic quantity (Cover, 1999) to study the transferability and hardness between classification
tasks. LEEP (Nguyen et al., 2020) is primarily developed with a focus on supervised pre-trained
models transferred to classification tasks. You et al. (2021) designs a general algorithm, which is
applicable to vast transfer learning settings with supervised and unsupervised pre-trained models,
downstream tasks, and modalities. However, these methods are not suitable for our GMI problem
because they impose significant computational overhead in terms of model inference during the iden-
tification process. Learnware (Zhou, 2016) presents a general and realistic paradigm by assigning a
specification to models to describe their functionalities and utilities, making it convenient for users to
identify the most suitable models. Model specification is the key to the learnware paradigm. Recent
studies (Tan et al., 2022) are designed on Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding (RKME) (Wu et al.,
2023), which achieves model identification by comparing similarities in the RHKS. Tan et al. (2023;
2022) make their efforts to solve heterogeneous feature spaces. However, these studies primarily
focus on classification tasks, overlooking the relationship between images and prompts, which is
crucial for identifying generative models. Therefore, existing techniques are inadequate for address-
ing the GMI problem, requiring for novel technologies.

6    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, for the first time, we propose a novel problem called Generative Model Identification.
The objective of GMI is to describe the functionalities of generative models precisely and enable
the model to be accurately and efficiently identified in the future by users’ requirements. To this end,
we present a systematic solution including a weighted RKME framework to capture the generated
image distributions and the relationship between images and prompts, a large pre-trained vision-
language model aimed at addressing dimensionality challenges, and an image interrogator designed
to tackle cross-modality issues. Moreover, we built and released a benchmark platform based on
stable diffusion models for GMI. Extensive experiment results on the benchmark clearly demon-
strate the effectiveness of our proposal. For example, our proposal achieves more than 80% top-4
identification accuracy using just one example image to describe the users’ requirements, indicating
that users can efficiently identify the best-matched model within four attempts in major cases.
In future work, we will endeavor to develop a novel generative model platform based on the tech-
niques presented in this paper, aiming to provide a more precise description of generative model
functionalities and user requirements. This will assist users in efficiently discovering models
that align with their specific requirements. We believe this could facilitate the development and
widespread usage of generative models.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martı́n Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 214–223, 2017.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2019.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 8185–8194, 2020.
Thomas M Cover. Elements of Information Theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Antonia Creswell, Tom White, Vincent Dumoulin, Kai Arulkumaran, Biswa Sengupta, and Anil A.
  Bharath. Generative adversarial networks: An overview. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 35
  (1):53–65, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8780–8794, 2021.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.
Lan-Zhe Guo, Zhi Zhou, Yu-Feng Li, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Identifying useful learnwares for hetero-
  geneous label spaces. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12122–12131, 2023.
Tony Jebara. Machine Learning: Discriminative and Generative. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
   Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Proceedings of the 2nd
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations
  and Trends in Machine Learning, 12(4):307–392, 2019.
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J. D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction
  and review of current methods. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
  43(11):3964–3979, 2021.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven C. H. Hoi. BLIP: bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 39th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900, 2022.
Yujia Li, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S. Zemel. Generative moment matching networks. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1718–1727, 2015.
Daohan Lu, Sheng-Yu Wang, Nupur Kumari, Rohan Agarwal, David Bau, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Content-based search for deep generative models. CoRR, abs/2210.03116, 2022.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative adversarial nets. CoRR, abs/1411.1784,
 2014.
Cuong Nguyen, Tal Hassner, Matthias Seeger, and Cedric Archambeau. Leep: A new measure to
  evaluate transferability of learned representations. In Proceedings of 37th International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 7294–7305, 2020.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gaurav Parmar, Dacheng Li, Kwonjoon Lee, and Zhuowen Tu. Dual contradistinctive generative au-
  toencoder. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 823–832, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceed-
  ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Yong Ren, Jun Zhu, Jialian Li, and Yucen Luo. Conditional generative moment-matching networks.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2928–2936, 2016.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In
  Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1530–1538, 2015.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  GPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in HuggingFace. CoRR, abs/2303.17580,
  2023.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2256–2265, 2015.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using
  deep conditional generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  3483–3491, 2015.
Peng Tan, Zhi-Hao Tan, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Towards enabling learnware to handle
  heterogeneous feature spaces. Machine Learning, pp. 1–22, 2022.
Peng Tan, Zhi-Hao Tan, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Handling learnwares developed from
  heterogeneous feature spaces without auxiliary data. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4235–4243, 2023.
Anh T Tran, Cuong V Nguyen, and Tal Hassner. Transferability and hardness of supervised classifi-
  cation tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  1395–1405, 2019.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. NVAE: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 19667–19679, 2020.
Aäron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learn-
  ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6306–6315, 2017.
Yasi Wang, Hongxun Yao, and Sicheng Zhao. Auto-encoder based dimensionality reduction. Neu-
  rocomputing, 184:232–242, 2016.
Xi-Zhu Wu, Wenkai Xu, Song Liu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Model reuse with reduced kernel mean
  embedding specification. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(1):699–
  710, 2023.
Lei Xu, Adam Krzyzak, and Alan L. Yuille. On radial basis function nets and kernel regression:
  Statistical consistency, convergence rates, and receptive field size. Neural Networks, 7(4):609–
  628, 1994.
Kaichao You, Yong Liu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. LogMe: Practical assessment of pre-
  trained models for transfer learning. In Proceedings of 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 12133–12143, 2021.
Zhi-Hua Zhou. Learnware: On the future of machine learning. Frontiers of Computer Science, 10
  (4):589–590, 2016.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

A.1   V ISUALIZATION

In this section, we present the additional visualization in Figure 5. Each image is genearated using
prompts obtained from image interrogator and models identified by corresponding methods. The


                                           (a) Example 1


                                           (b) Example 2


                                           (c) Example 3


                                           (d) Example 4

         Figure 5: Examples of images generated by the identified model of each method.


results show that our proposal can identify the best-matched model and generate the most similar
images, compared to baseline methods. For all examples, the Download method is biased towards
the DreamShaper model, while the RKME-basic method is biased towards the RevAnimated model.
Our proposed methods successfully identify the most suitable model in examples 1 and 4, while
the other RKME-Clip method fails to find the best model. As a result, our proposal yields superior
generated results compared to the results of other methods. For example 2, our proposed method
identified a model that can generate more cartoonish images. However, the models identified by
other methods all generate more realistic images. For example 3, all methods did not find the most
suitable model, but the model identified by our method was not inferior to other methods. Detailed
results about ground-truth prompts, generated prompts, ground-truth model and identified models
are shown in Table 3.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The prompts generated using the image interrogator, the corresponding ground-truth
prompts, the ground-truth model, and the identified model using different methods for each example.

             Ground-truth Prompts                                  Generated Prompts                                        Ground-truth Model   Download      RKME-basic    RKME-CLIP     Proposal
                                                                   a woman with blonde hair and blue eyes, art-
             a woman with blonde hair and blue eyes, a de-
                                                                   germ. high detail, extremely detailed artgerm,
             tailed painting, by rossdraws, fantasy art, red-
                                                                   marc brunet, trending artgerm, artgerm on artsta-
 Example 1   purple gradient map, mercy from overwatch, close                                                               ComicBabes           DreamShaper   RevAnimated   TAnime        ComicBabes
                                                                   tion pixiv, featured on artgerm, as seen on art-
             up of a blonde woman, a brightly colored, lux, sy-
                                                                   germ, artgerm comic, artgerm detailed, artgerm.
             las
                                                                   anime illustration
                                                                   a woman with blonde hair and blue eyes, mercy
                                                                   ( overwatch ), overwatch splash art, mercy from
             a woman with blonde hair and blue eyes, a de-
                                                                   overwatch, mercy from overwatch game (2016),
             tailed painting, by rossdraws, fantasy art, red-
                                                                   heroes of the storm splash art, overwatch fanart,
 Example 2   purple gradient map, mercy from overwatch, close                                                               QMega                DreamShaper   RevAnimated   DreamShaper   2DAnimerge
                                                                   iconic character splash art, official splash art, art
             up of a blonde woman, a brightly colored, lux, sy-
                                                                   of kryssalian, character portrait closeup, cine-
             las
                                                                   matic closeup!!, 4 k asymmetrical portrait, ze-
                                                                   rochan art
             a black car parked on the side of the road, a com-    a black car driving down a street next to tall build-
             puter rendering, inspired by Stefan Lochner, ver-     ings, ctane 3 d rendered, render in re engine, pho-
             dadism, looks like jerma985, on a great neoclas-      torealistic -20, virtual engine 5, 1 9 9 8 render, vue
 Example 3                                                                                                                  QMega                DreamShaper   RevAnimated   2DAnimerge    Mistoon
             sical square, insignia, veveltaria, rowan atkinson,   3d render, rendered in 3 dsmax, denoised photore-
             vetements, written in a neat, an ultra realistic 8k   alistic render, photorealistic highly detailed, pho-
             octa photo                                            toreal render, cg graphics, v-ray engine
                                                                   a close up of a person wearing glasses, ilya ku-
             a man with glasses and a striped shirt, a picture,
                                                                   vshinov face, ilya kuvshinov with long hair, nerdy
             inspired by Victor Meirelles, cubo-futurism, 2019
                                                                   man character portrait, portrait of archie andrews,
 Example 4   trending photo, clean shaven wide wide wide face,                                                              ComicBabes           DreamShaper   RevAnimated   2DAnimerge    ComicBabes
                                                                   viktor antonov concept art, covid-19 as a human,
             joel fletcher, pixel degradation, uncropped, tired
                                                                   ilya kuvshinov!, artstyle : ilya kuvshinov, disco
             face, k-pop, lolth, tiled, blond boy
                                                                   elysium character


                  Table 4: Performance when users upload multiple images as their requirements

                                                           Top-1 Acc.                      Top-2 Acc.                       Top-3 Acc.               Top-4 Acc.
                                 1 image                               0.455                           0.614                         0.734                     0.812
                                 2 images                              0.578                           0.743                         0.840                     0.908
                                 3 images                              0.658                           0.791                         0.883                     0.950
                                 4 images                              0.709                           0.854                         0.929                     0.969
                                 5 images                              0.755                           0.873                         0.946                     0.979



Here, Image interrogator is implemented with official code3 for optimizing text prompts to match a
given image. It first generates candidate captions using the BLIP model (Li et al., 2022). Then, it
adopts a search process to identify the caption list that maximizes the similarity between the captions
and images, evaluated by the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021).


A.2          M ULTIPLE I MAGES FOR Q UERYING

RKME paradigm performs more effectively when the provided image set accurately represents the
distribution. Thus, our framework, built upon RKME, naturally accommodates situations in which
users provide multiple images as queries. We conducted experiments using user queries consisting
of 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 images. In this case, the performance comparison is a bit unfair as lines 2 to
5 involve more images for querying. The results are shown in Table 4. The results demonstrate
that the accuracy of identifying the most appropriate model improves as the number of uploaded
images increases. Therefore, our framework has the capability to handle multiple images as a query.
However, uploading a single image offers a compromise between performance and convenience.


A.3          D IFFERENT S ELECTION OF D EFAULT P ROMPT S ETS

This section involves conducting experiments to assess the impact of different default prompt sets
on our performance. We denote Split 1 as our default prompt set used in our experiments. Split 2
and Split 3 are two non-overlapping subsets, each half the size of Split 1. The results demonstrate
the robustness of the identifying performance to varying default prompt sets used in generating
specifications.

    3
        https://github.com/pharmapsychotic/clip-interrogator


                                                                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 5: Performance using different default prompt sets

                            Top-1 Acc.    Top-2 Acc.     Top-3 Acc.    Top-4 Acc.
                  Split 1        0.455          0.614         0.734         0.812
                  Split 2        0.442          0.609         0.729         0.810
                  Split 3        0.460          0.617         0.732         0.808


                   Table 6: Performance using an extreme small reduced set size

                             Top-1 Acc.    Top-2 Acc.    Top-3 Acc.     Top-4 Acc.
                 Size = 1         0.434          0.592         0.707          0.789
                 Proposal         0.455          0.614         0.734          0.812



A.4   S CALABILITY P ROBLEM

We conduct an extreme experiment with reduced set size = 1 as the size will affect the running time
for each query. Compared to proposed methods, the performance is relative stable in Table 6. There-
fore, the scalability of the method is guaranteed when the number of generative models increases.
As discussed in Section 3.3, scalability problem can be handled using other techniques.

A.5   D EVELOPER & U SER P ROVIDED P ROMPT

We claim that if the developers and users provide their own prompt, the identify results can be more
accurate. The detailed explanations and instructions are given as follows.
Users should provide prompts that accurately describe the images they upload. In our proposed
method, we generate prompts by employing an image interrogator that demonstrated effective per-
formance in our experiments. When ground-truth prompts are provided, the identification perfor-
mance will intuitively not be worse.
Developers should provide prompts to guide the model in generating images it excels at. A model-
specific prompt set will enhance identification by amplifying the contrast between generated spec-
ifications, resulting in improved accuracy. We conducted synthetic experiments to validate this
claim. In this experiment, developers will provide 5 prompts for each model, assuming they excel at
them, and generate corresponding specifications. The user will query images generated using simi-
lar prompts. The results in Table 7 demonstrate that providing prompts for specification generation
leads to improved accuracy. However, in actual situations, it is difficult for the model hub to force
developers to provide prompts. Therefore, we conduct experiments under a default prompt set.

A.6   C ONFUSION M ATRIX

We present the confusion matrix for the prediction of each method in Figure 6. The Download and
RKME algorithm consistently show a bias towards a specific model regardless of the user image xτ .
This indicates that the Download and RKME methods cannot address GMI problem. The results
show that our proposal achieves the best identification performance on major tasks.

A.7   H YPERPARAMETER ROBUSTNESS

We evaluate the robustness of each method to the hyperparameter γ in Figure 7. The results demon-
strate that our proposed method exhibits robust performance across a wide range of γ values. How-
ever, as γ continues to increase, the performance of both our proposal and the baseline methods
begins to degrade. This observation highlights the importance of tuning the hyperparameter γ be-
fore deploying our method in practical applications. Once γ is properly tuned, our method can
operate robustly due to its hyperparameter robustness within a broad range.


                                                 14
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          Table 7: Performance when developers provide specific prompts

                                                                                                      Top-1 Acc.            Top-2 Acc.                                                   Top-3 Acc.             Top-4 Acc.
                                                      Default Prompt Set                                     0.455                                                          0.614                    0.734              0.812
                                                      Developer Provided Prompt                              0.777                                                          0.937                    0.985              0.987



                                                                                                               1.0                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
         15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0


                                                                                                                               15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%             0.8                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%           0.8
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
Ground-truth


                                                                                                                      Ground-truth
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%             0.6                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%           0.6
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%             0.4                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%           0.4
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%             0.2                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%           0.2
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0%
                                                                                                               0.0                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                  0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                                              0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                           Prediction                                                                                                            Prediction
                                                                          (a) Download                                                                                                           (b) RKME
                                                 24% 5% 1% 7% 1% 2% 11% 2% 18% 2% 3% 0% 4% 10% 4% 7%                                                                   28% 7% 1% 5% 1% 2% 8% 0% 11% 4% 3% 0% 8% 11% 5% 7%
         15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0


                                                                                                                               15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0



                                                  5% 5% 0% 5% 1% 3% 4% 2% 32% 1% 15% 0% 5% 9% 0% 14%                                                                   5% 13% 1% 5% 1% 2% 3% 1% 23% 3% 12% 0% 8% 7% 1% 16%
                                                 14% 4% 2% 8% 2% 2% 5% 1% 10% 4% 4% 0% 11% 16% 4% 13%                                                                  17% 10% 6% 7% 1% 1% 3% 0% 6% 7% 4% 0% 14% 10% 4% 9%
                                                  3% 0% 0% 57% 8% 3% 5% 1% 0% 1% 0% 0% 13% 2% 6% 1%            0.8                                                     1% 0% 0% 53% 6% 2% 3% 0% 0% 2% 0% 0% 22% 1% 9% 0%           0.8
                                                  2% 0% 0% 18% 35% 6% 4% 1% 1% 7% 0% 0% 15% 1% 1% 9%                                                                   1% 0% 0% 14% 34% 6% 2% 1% 0% 8% 1% 0% 24% 1% 3% 7%
                                                  1% 0% 1% 2% 4% 19% 13% 3% 27% 0% 6% 0% 0% 3% 0% 22%                                                                  1% 0% 1% 2% 4% 24% 15% 3% 19% 1% 8% 0% 0% 3% 1% 19%
Ground-truth


                                                                                                                      Ground-truth


                                                  3% 0% 1% 5% 4% 4% 42% 1% 21% 0% 7% 0% 7% 2% 2% 3%            0.6                                                     3% 0% 1% 5% 3% 3% 46% 0% 12% 4% 8% 0% 8% 2% 3% 3%           0.6
                                                  0% 0% 0% 6% 2% 7% 11% 11% 24% 0% 13% 0% 4% 4% 0% 18%                                                                 0% 1% 0% 6% 3% 8% 11% 12% 17% 2% 16% 0% 4% 5% 0% 14%
                                                  0% 1% 0% 1% 1% 0% 1% 0% 94% 0% 0% 0% 1% 3% 1% 0%                                                                     0% 1% 0% 0% 1% 0% 0% 0% 91% 0% 1% 0% 2% 5% 1% 0%
                                                 4% 0% 0% 8% 11% 13% 14% 1% 7% 12% 4% 0% 3% 4% 4% 16%          0.4                                                     2% 1% 0% 6% 10% 16% 11% 1% 4% 20% 3% 0% 9% 3% 7% 9%         0.4
                                                 0% 0% 0% 2% 3% 1% 3% 1% 32% 0% 53% 0% 1% 2% 0% 3%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 3% 2% 1% 3% 0% 27% 0% 56% 0% 1% 3% 0% 3%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 99% 1% 1% 0% 0%                                                                      0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 99% 1% 1% 0% 0%
                                                 4% 1% 0% 2% 0% 0% 3% 0% 2% 0% 1% 0% 81% 4% 3% 0%              0.2                                                     2% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 3% 0% 0% 0% 1% 0% 87% 2% 6% 0%            0.2
                                                 1% 1% 0% 5% 2% 0% 0% 0% 33% 0% 7% 0% 2% 48% 0% 1%                                                                     1% 1% 0% 5% 1% 0% 0% 0% 24% 0% 8% 0% 3% 57% 0% 1%
                                                 12% 2% 1% 28% 2% 3% 11% 0% 7% 6% 1% 0% 6% 4% 15% 2%                                                                   9% 2% 2% 23% 2% 2% 8% 1% 2% 6% 1% 0% 11% 2% 27% 1%
                                                 0% 0% 0% 1% 4% 3% 0% 0% 15% 0% 2% 0% 2% 1% 0% 73%                                                                     0% 0% 0% 1% 4% 4% 0% 0% 10% 1% 2% 0% 2% 2% 0% 75%
                                                                                                               0.0                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                  0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                                              0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                           Prediction                                                                                                            Prediction
                                                                      (c) RKME-CLIP                                                                                                              (d) Proposal

    Figure 6: The confusion matrix of each method. The results show that our proposal performs the
    best. The baseline method, e.g., Download and RKME, cannot work in our GMI problem.



    B                                             D ETAILED E XPLANATION FOR F IGURE 1

    In Figure 1, we compare the difference between GMI setting and traditional model search process.
    In traditional searches for generative models, the models are initially filtered by the model hubs
    using tags and then sorted based on download volume. However, this approach presents challenges
    for users in identifying their desired models, as the model with the highest download volume may
    not necessarily align with their specific target. Consequently, users select models based on their own
    judgement, and then download and evaluate each model individually. This consumes a significant
    amount of network resources and human effort, and there is also the possibility of filtering out the
    potentially best model due to judgment errors.
    In our GMI setting, each model is directly sorted based on its matching score. This means that
    the most suitable model is recommended at the top, enabling users to effortlessly find their desired
    models with minimum effort.


                                                                                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  0.45

                                  0.40

                                  0.35

                                  0.30        RKME-Basic


                           Accuracy
                                              RKME-CLIP
                                  0.25        RKME-Concat
                                              Proposal
                                  0.20

                                  0.15

                                  0.10

                                  0.05
                                         0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009       0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04   0.05
                                                                         γ


Figure 7: The accuracy with varying values of γ was evaluated. The results demonstrate that our
proposal is robust to slight changes in the value of γ.


C    L IMITATIONS
In this section, we will discuss the limitations of our paper, which encompass two main aspects.
First, the time complexity of our work has the potential for improvement. At present, our time
complexity increases linearly with the number of models in the model platform, which will not
become a heavy burden when the number of models is large. Previous research (Guo et al., 2023)
has demonstrated that acceleration techniques can enhance the identification process, such as the use
of a vector database. This could be an area for future exploration.
Second, we currently only consider the cases that identify generative models using one uploaded
image to describe users’ requirements. The assumption is reasonable since users’ ideas often rely on
existing image templates when they want to generate images, and it is not difficult to find only one
image that has a similar style to fulfill the user’s requirements. Despite this, it is also interesting to
study how to quickly and accurately identify models via other information such as textual prompts.
We will study this problem in future work.


                                                                  16
