Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MPROVING THE R ELIABILITY OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS BY L EVERAGING U NCERTAINTY-AWARE I N -
C ONTEXT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In recent years, large-scale language models (LLMs) have gained attention for
         their impressive text generation capabilities. However, these models often face
         the challenge of ”hallucination,” which undermines their reliability. In this study,
         we introduce an uncertainty-aware in-context learning framework to empower the
         model to enhance or reject its output in response to uncertainty. Human-defined
         methods for estimating uncertainty typically assume that ”uncertainty is lower
         when the model’s response is correct compared to when it is incorrect.” However,
         setting a precise threshold to distinguish correctness is challenging. Therefore, we
         introduce uncertainty information as an intermediary variable that implicitly influ-
         ences the model’s behavior. Our innovative uncertainty-aware in-context learning
         framework involves fine-tuning the LLM using a calibration dataset. Our aim is
         to improve the model’s responses by filtering out answers with high uncertainty
         while considering the model’s knowledge limitations. We evaluate the model’s
         knowledge by examining multiple responses to the same question for the pres-
         ence of a correct answer. When the model lacks relevant knowledge, the response
         should indicate that the question cannot be answered. Conversely, when the model
         has relevant knowledge, the response should provide the correct answer. Extensive
         experiments confirm the effectiveness of our framework, leading to two key find-
         ings. First, the logit output values of the LLM partly reflect inherent uncertainty.
         Second, our model autonomously recognizes uncertainty, resulting in improved
         responses.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Despite the remarkable progress made in the field of Large-scale Language Models (LLMs) (He &
Garner (2023) Deng & Lin (2022) Aljanabi et al. (2023)), they remain susceptible to well-known
reliability issues, particularly in the domain of trustworthiness regarding their generated content.
In the context of language models, “hallucination” refers to the generation of text or responses
that appear to be syntactically sound, fluent, and natural but are factually incorrect, nonsensical, or
deviate from the provided source input (McKenna et al. (2023)).
To alleviate the hallucination problem, an emerging research direction is uncertainty estimation for
LLMs. They seeks to model the inherent uncertainty in LLM responses, primarily by analyzing
the logit output values of generated tokens (Huang et al. (2023) Xiong et al. (2023) Kadavath et al.
(2022)). The fundamental hypothesis driving uncertainty estimation is that “uncertainty is lower
when the model’s response is correct compared to when it is incorrect.” While existing works aim to
develop more effective uncertainty estimation criteria to align with this hypothesis, the question of
how to optimize model responses based on the calculated uncertainty remains relatively unexplored
within the research community.
In this work, we focus on the problem of refining the LLM responses based on the calculated un-
certainty. Setting a strict uncertainty threshold to discern the correctness of the model’s response
seems intuitive, but it presents a formidable challenge in practice. Hence, we turn to propose a novel
uncertainty-aware in-context learning framework. We encode uncertainty information as an inter-
mediary variable that can implicitly influence the model’s behavior. Concretely, our goal centers on


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the adaptive adjustment of the model’s responses in cases of high uncertainty. We believe that when
the model generates a response with high uncertainty and it is subsequently assessed as incorrect,
the response should be modified to the correct answer if the model possesses the necessary knowl-
edge. Conversely, if the model lacks the necessary knowledge, the response should be altered to
indicate that it cannot answer the question. Besides, for responses with low uncertainty but deemed
incorrect, which we refer to as “over-confidence problem,” we believe that this indicates a deficit in
the model’s knowledge. It is worth noting that the over-confidence problem is not our target scenario
and cannot be corrected through uncertainty-based modifications.


 Question:                                                                         SFT
                                                                   LLM                            Uncertainty-aware LLM
 What cause many human diseases by killing host
 cells or disturbing their homeostasis?

              Answer1/Uncertainty score:     The answer is viruses ...   /89                  The answer is bacteria ... /22

              Answer2/Uncertainty score:     The answer is bacteria ... /17                  The answer is bacteria ... /14
                                                                                  Refine
              Answer3/Uncertainty score:     The answer is parasites ... /74                  The answer is bacteria ... /16

                              (a) Model have the relevant knowledge to answer the question

 Question:                                                                         SFT
 Hot magma beneath the surface mixes with water                   LLM                             Uncertainty-aware LLM
 and forms what?

               Answer1/Uncertainty score:     The answer is liquids ... /85                  I can not answer this question ...

               Answer2/Uncertainty score:     The answer is liquids ... /67                  I can not answer this question ...
                                                                                  Refine
               Answer3/Uncertainty score:     The answer is magma ... /74                    I can not answer this question ...

                              (b) Model lack the relevant knowledge to answer the question


Figure 1: An illustration of automatic correction of LLM responses based on uncertainty score. Two
scenarios are considered: firstly, the model has the relevant knowledge (illustrated in Figure (a)),
and secondly, the model lacks relevant knowledge (illustrated in Figure (b)). If the model has the
relevant knowledge, the incorrect response should be modified to the correct answer . Conversely,
if the model lacks the relevant knowledge, the response should be altered to indicate that it cannot
answer the question.


To achieve the above goals, we propose an uncertainty-aware in-context learning framework. Our
framework incorporates the use of a calibration dataset to fine-tune the LLM. This fine-tuning pro-
cedure is designed to preserve the model’s linguistic fluency while equipping it with the ability to
adapt its responses in response to uncertainty. The calibration dataset is comprised of question-
answer pairs, where each question is equipped with one correct answer along with multiple dis-
tractor options. In our framework, for each question in the calibration dataset, the model generates
multiple responses, each labeled as “correct” or “incorrect”, with corresponding uncertainty calcu-
lations. When all of the model’s responses for a particular question are classified as “incorrect”,
the uncertainty-aware model should refrain from providing an answer. Conversely, if at least one
of the model’s responses aligns with the correct answer, the uncertainty-aware model should select
the correct response as its final answer. This process ensures that the model dynamically adjusts its
behavior in response to the inherent uncertainty, enhancing its overall reliability.
To summarize, we make a comprehensive analysis of existing uncertainty estimation methods, which
we seamlessly integrate into our uncertainty-aware in-context learning framework. We introduce a
promising strategy for leveraging uncertainty to enhance the reliability of LLM responses. And it
is demonstrated through extensive experiments that our framework delivers obviously performance
improvement on the test set. We draw two main conclusions from our experimental results. First,
the token generation probability of LLM partially reflects the inherent uncertainty. Second, our
framework has the ability to recognise uncertainty autonomously, thus improving its response. We
also demonstrate that the model’s behavior can be effectively modified by introducing uncertainty


                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


information during inference stage. This dynamic adaptation empowers the model to flexibly refine
its responses in alignment with its knowledge boundaries.

2      M ETHOD
2.1      OVERVIEW

(a) Uncertainty score calculation                                                 Log-sum probabilities     Uncertainty score

    Question:                                        Answer1:
                                                                                          1.57                       89
    What cause many human diseases by killing host   The answer is viruses ...
    cells or disturbing their homeostasis?
                                                     Answer2:
                                     Answer set                                           0.36                       17
                                                     The answer is bacteria ...                     Mapping

                        LLM                          Answer3:
                                                                                          1.34                       74
                                                     The answer is parasites ...


(b) Uncertainty-aware correction
    Question:                                                       Answer1:             Uncertainty score: 89
    What cause many human diseases by killing host                  The answer is viruses ...
    cells or disturbing their homeostasis?                                                                            Answer set

                                                     The original answer:
                                                                                                 If answer is True
                                                     The answer is viruses ...
                Uncertainty-aware LLM
                                            SFT      The correct answer:                         If answer is False, and correct
                                                                                                 answer exists in answer set
                                                     The answer is viruses ...

                                                     The refused answer:                         If answer is False, and correct
                                                                                                 answer not exists in answer set
                                                     I have no idea about ...


Figure 2: An illustration of our uncertainty-aware framework. It reveals a two-step process com-
prising uncertainty score calculation and uncertainty-aware correction. In the first step, known as
uncertainty score calculation, we undertake two subtasks: uncertainty estimation and uncertainty
score mapping. This sequence results in the generation of an uncertainty score for each response
within the answer set. Subsequently, we incorporate these uncertainty scores into the LLM, facili-
tating adaptive self-correction. Through a supervised fine-tuning procedure, we empower the model
to explore and expand its knowledge boundaries. This fine-tuning process enables the model to au-
tonomously refine its responses by taking into account the calculated uncertainty scores.

Figure 3 shows an overview of our framework. Our uncertainty-aware framework is divided into
two steps, namely uncertainty score calculation and uncertainty-aware correction. To compute the
uncertainty score, we follow existing works in uncertainty estimation of LLM. Firstly, we utilize the
logit output values of the model’s response to obtain the uncertainty of each generated token. Then
we aggregate these token-level uncertainties to derive the uncertainty of each generated output. We
will elaborated this part in Section 2.2.1.
To explore the knowledge boundary of the model and investigate the beam search space within
the answer set, we make the model responds to the same question multiple times. For each of
these responses, we calculate the uncertainty as mentioned. Then, we map the uncertainty of each
response to an uncertainty score, drawing upon the model’s uncertainty distribution on the training
set. We will elaborated this part in Section 2.2.2.
After obtaining the uncertainty score for each response, we supervised fine-tuning the model for
self-correction. This fine-tuning process empowers the model to autonomously adjust its responses
based on the calculated uncertainty scores. The format of the SFT dataset and finetuning procedure
will be elaborated in Section 2.3.1.
Finally, we introduce the test-time correction with our uncertainty-aware framework in Section 2.3.2.


                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2     U NCERTAINTY S CORE C ALCULATION

2.2.1    U NCERTAINTY ESTIMATION METHOD
Given an input X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] (xi denotes i-th input token), an LLM f with pre-trained
weights w. The output Y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , ym ] (yj denotes j-th generated token) is generated through
a decoding process. An uncertainty estimation method g is to calculate a score s regarding the
uncertainty of Y . In general, uncertainty estimation methods are classified into single-inference
based and multi-inference based. To improve the efficiency of the inference stage, our framework
focuses on the former. We will therefore focus on the former and briefly introduce the latter.
Single-inference Based Uncertainty Estimation. Single-inference based uncertainty estimation
methods model the token-level logit output value to obtain the sentence-level uncertainty. First, we
apply the softmax function over the logit output values for each token yj and obtain maximum soft-
max probabilities [p1 , p2 , . . . , pm ]. We study the four standard techniques for calculating uncertainty
based on the probabilities.
Minimum of Token Probabilities.
                                   s = − log(M in(p1 , p2 , . . . , pm ))                               (1)
In this way, we use the minimum token probabilities to represent the whole sentence.
Average of Token Probabilities.
                                    s = − log(Avg(p1 , p2 , . . . , pm ))                               (2)
In this way, we directly average the probabilities before feeding it into the logarithmic function.
Normalized Product of Token Probabilities.
                                                                      1
                                     s = − log (p1 · p2 · . . . · pm ) m                                (3)
In this way, we take a normalized product of the probabilities of each token.
Log-sum of Token Probabilities.
                                      s = − log (p1 · p2 · . . . · pm )                                 (4)
In this way, we take the Log-sum of each token probabilities to represent uncertainty. We will give
experimental results and analysis of these four techniques in the Experiment Section 3.1.
Multi-inference Based Uncertainty Estimation. Multi-inference based uncertainty estimation
methods first collect a answer set through test-time data augmentation methods. Then the uncer-
tainty is estimated as the divergence among those predictions. Concretely, if the more semantically
similar a response is to other responses, the lower the uncertainty of that response. Because our
framework involves utilize the uncertainty for self-correction, whereas multi-inference based uncer-
tainty estimation methods need to get the answer set before calculating the uncertainty. This will
significantly increase the overhead of the inference stage. Hence, we do not use these uncertainty
estimation methods in our framework.

2.2.2    U NCERTAINTY SCORE M APPING
To enable the model to generate adaptive corrective responses based on uncertainty, we reintroduce
the computed uncertainty into the model by incorporating it as contextual information. Due to the
highly uneven distribution of uncertainty in the training dataset, the direct inclusion of uncertainty
introduces a great deal of noise and confusion.
To mitigate the challenges posed by the non-uniform distribution of uncertainty within our dataset,
we adopt a strategy of mapping uncertainty values to a discrete set of labels, referred to as “uncer-
tainty scores.” In our experiment, we investigate the impact of various classification granularities,
namely deciles, hundreds, and thousands, which correspond to uncertainty scores ranging from 1 to
10, 1 to 100, and 1 to 1000, respectively.
Our approach involves uniformly partitioning the uncertainty distribution within the training dataset
into a matching number of intervals based on the chosen granularity for classification. Within each


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


interval, uncertainties are assigned identical uncertainty scores. This same mapping strategy is ap-
plied during the inference stage, with uncertainty scores computed based on the intervals established
during the training phase.
This mapping technique serves to alleviate the complexity associated with interpreting uncertainty
within the model, leading to improvements in both robustness and overall performance.

2.3     U NCERTAINTY- AWARE C ORRECTION

2.3.1    U NCERTAINTY- AWARE F INETUNING

After obtaining the uncertainty scores for each response, we utilize the calibration dataset to con-
struct an uncertainty labelled fine-tuned dataset to train the model. Specifically, for each question
in the calibration dataset, it was paired with one correct option and multiple distractor options. It’s
essential to emphasize that our framework is primarily centered around uncertainty-aware correc-
tion rather than the infusion of fresh knowledge into the model. Consequently, rather than directly
injecting correct answers from the calibration dataset into the model, we employ it to assess the
correctness of the model’s responses.
In our framework, for each question in the calibration dataset, the model first generates multiple
responses. Then we categorize each response as either “correct” or “incorrect” depends on the
correct answer and calculating corresponding uncertainty scores as mentioned. In cases where all of
the model’s responses for a particular question are categorized as “incorrect,” we interpret this as an
indication that the model lacks the requisite knowledge to respond to the question. Consequently,
we assign the ground truth for such instances to a rejection response, such as “I am unable to answer
the question due to a lack of relevant knowledge.” On the other hand, when at least one of the
model’s responses aligns with the correct answer, we infer that the model possesses the requisite
knowledge to address the question. In such scenarios, for the responses classified as incorrect under
this question, we designate the ground truth as a randomly selected correct answer from the answer
set of this question. Conversely, for the response classified as correct under this question, the ground
truth remains unchanged, i.e., it retains the original response. After constructing the fine-tuned
dataset, we follow a standard supervised fine-tuning process to train the uncertainty-aware LLM.

2.3.2    T EST- TIME C ORRECTION

During inference stage, to improve the efficiency of reasoning, we no longer answer each question
multiple times to get a answer set. Instead, the model respond to each question once and calculate
its corresponding uncertainty score. We then resend the problem, the response and the uncertainty
score to the model for self-correction.
Despite the fact that our framework also introduces a increased inference cost, we contend that, given
the current state of technology, it is of greater significance to prioritize the resolution of reliability
concerns of Language Models (LLMs).


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Datasets. We consider the free-form question answering datasets SciQ (Welbl et al. (2017)) as the
calibration dataset, which is widely used in the uncertainty estimation task. In our experiments,
we utilize the validation set (1,000 questions) of SciQ as the testset and the training set of SciQ to
construct training set.
Evaluation Metrics. In our framework, the model categorizing questions into two distinct groups:
“refused questions” and “answered questions.” Within this context, we employ the term “accuracy”
(abbreviated as “acc”) to quantify the percentage of correct responses specifically among the “an-
swered questions.” Additionally, we introduce the concept of the “answer rate,” which serves as a
measure denoting the proportion of “answered questions” in relation to the total number of ques-
tions. To determine whether a response to a question is correct, we first input a prompt “Choose


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a correct answer,” and we subsequently use the ChatGPT to extract the answer from the model’s
response and check its correctness.
To evaluate the merits and drawbacks of various uncertainty estimation methods concerning their
alignment with the fundamental hypothesis that “uncertainty is lower when the model’s response
is correct than when it is incorrect,” we employed the AUROC metric. The AUROC metric is
known as the “Area Under the Receiver Operator Characteristic Curve” (AUROC). It is equivalent
to the probability that, when selecting answers at random, a correct response will possess a higher
uncertainty score than an incorrect response.
Implementation Details. To construct answer set, we generate 5 responses for each question. The
temperature t is set to 0.001. We conduct experiments on the Vicuna (Chiang et al. (2023)) and
LLama (Touvron et al. (2023)) model. We repeat each experiment five times and report the mean of
results. All the experiments are conducted with 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs.



3.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS


Our experimental results is provided in Table 1.
Analysis of different uncertainty estimation methods. We first give a analysis for different un-
certainty estimation methods. The “Min” approach, in practice, selects the token with the highest
uncertainty within a response to represent the overall uncertainty of the entire response. However, it
is noteworthy that responses frequently consist of multiple tokens characterized by high uncertainty
values, potentially leading to information loss.
On the other hand, methods denoted as ‘Avg” and “Norm” adopt a different strategy for estimating
the uncertainty of the complete response. They calculate a form of mean uncertainty by considering
each token within the response. However, it is important to acknowledge that not every token in a
response carries equal significance in terms of uncertainty. In some cases, the uncertainty associated
with certain tokens, particularly those deemed as meaningless words or prepositions, may not be of
paramount importance. During the averaging process, it is essential to recognize that the presence of
numerous tokens categorized as such—those with low informational content—can dilute the tokens
with high uncertainty.
The “Log-sum” method, while viable, presents its own set of limitations. As it combines the un-
certainty values of all tokens within a response to represent the overall response uncertainty, it can
be notably influenced by the response’s length. To mitigate this length-based bias, we adopt a prac-
tice of computing uncertainty solely for the sentence in the response that holds a pivotal role in the
decision-making process. Typically, this is the initial sentence, aligned with our prompt setting.
To ensure fair comparison among different uncertainty calculation methods, we maintain consis-
tency by calculating uncertainty exclusively for the sentence that drives the decision-making process
for other methods as well.
It can be observed from the Table 1 that the “Log-sum” uncertainty estimation methods achieves
best performance in our framework. When incorporating with LLama, our framework delivers a
10.3% performance improvement compared to “LLama-finetuned” in terms of accuracy. When
incorporating with Vicuna, our framework delivers a 9.0% performance improvement compared to
“Vicuna-finetuned” in terms of the Accuracy. This demonstrates that the reliability of the model
responses is obviously improved by injecting uncertainty information.
Analysis of mean uncertainty score and AUROC. As depicted in the Table 1, it is evident that our
framework’s exhibits a notable reduction in mean uncertainty score, accompanied by an improve-
ment in accuracy. This observation underscores the presence of a correlation between the mean
uncertainty of responses and overall accuracy. This further supports the hypothesis that “uncertainty
is lower when the model’s response is correct than when it is incorrect.”
Furthermore, our analysis reveals a positive association between the AUROC metric and the accu-
racy of the method. This relationship suggests that a superior uncertainty estimation method can
enhance the validity of our framework.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Experimental results on SciQ dataset. “LLama” and “Vicuna” denotes the LLM backbone
of our framework. “Min”,“Avg”,“Norm”,“Log-sum” denotes the four different uncertainty esti-
mation methods “Minimum of Token Probabilities”,“Average of Token Probabilities”,“Normalized
Product of Token Probabilities”,“Log-sum of Token Probabilities”, respectively. “finetuned” de-
notes directly finetuning the backbone using the same training set. The best accuracy performance
is shown in bold.

                   Method                                Accuracy           Answer rate            Accuracy*Answer rate                      Mean uncertainty score                 AUROC
 LLama (Touvron et al. (2023))                              44.5                 100.0                            44.5                                      49.3                         –
      LLama-finetuned                                       66.9                 100.0                            66.9                                      45.2                         –
     Ours-LLama(Min)                                        75.0                  89.3                            67.0                                      27.8                        68.1
     Ours-LLama(Avg)                                        73.8                  90.5                            66.8                                      28.0                        67.3
     Ours-LLama(Norm)                                       74.1                  89.4                            66.2                                      28.4                        67.9
   Ours-LLama(Log-sum)                                      77.2                  88.1                            68.0                                      27.6                        70.2
  Vicuna (Chiang et al. (2023))                             67.1                 100.0                            67.1                                      46.1                         –
       Vicuna-finetuned                                     84.6                 100.0                            84.6                                      44.0                         –
       Ours-Vicuna(Min)                                     92.2                  94.5                            87.1                                      22.3                        70.0
       Ours-Vicuna(Avg)                                     91.3                  95.0                            86.7                                      24.6                        69.5
      Ours-Vicuna(Norm)                                     91.7                  95.2                            87.3                                      23.9                        68.8
     Ours-Vicuna(Log-sum)                                   93.6                  94.4                            88.4                                      21.4                        70.5


Table 2: Examples of our uncertainty-aware correction of model Vicuna on the testset. The color
green denotes correct responses, while red denotes incorrect ones. The “Original” denotes original
responses while “Refine” denotes uncertainty-aware correction responses. For ease of expression,
we only display the initial sentence from the complete response.
                                         Question/type                                             Answer set
                                                                                                   1.The olfactory receptor neurons are located in the olfactory epithelium. Uncertainty score: 96
   The olfactory receptor neurons are located in a small region within what cavity? / Original     2.The correct answer is between inferior nasal and posterior nasal. Uncertainty score: 45
                                                                                                   3.The correct answer is: the superior nasal cavity. Uncertainty score: 51
                                                                                                   1.The olfactory receptor neurons are located in the superior nasal cavity. Uncertainty score: 16
    The olfactory receptor neurons are located in a small region within what cavity? / Refine.     2.The correct answer is: superior nasal. Uncertainty score: 9
                                                                                                   3.The correct answer is: the superior nasal cavity. Uncertainty score: 11
                                                                                                   1.The correct answer is an action potential. Uncertainty score: 85
 What type of response is generated when a stimulus is received by the nervous system?/ Original   2.The correct answer is: A neural response. Uncertainty score: 91
                                                                                                   3.The correct answer is: a motor response. Uncertainty score: 63
                                                                                                   1.Based on the above information, I have no idea on this question.
 What type of response is generated when a stimulus is received by the nervous system?/ Refine     2.The correct answer is: a motor response. Uncertainty score: 21
                                                                                                   3.The correct answer is: a motor response. Uncertainty score: 15
                                                                                                   1.The correct answer is “southwest and southeast”. Uncertainty score: 65
       Magnetic poles always occur in pairs - what are the names of each pole? / Original          2.The correct answer is “tropic and arctic”. Uncertainty score: 82
                                                                                                   3.The correct answer is “southwest and southeast”. Uncertainty score: 59
                                                                                                   1.Based on the above information, I have no idea on this question.
        Magnetic poles always occur in pairs - what are the names of each pole? /Refine            2.Based on the above information, I have no idea on this question.
                                                                                                   3.Based on the above information, I have no idea on this question.


3.3       C ASE S TUDIES

As shown in Table 2, our model employs adaptive self-correction strategies based on the uncertainty
score. From the case presented in the table, there are three main observations:
First, it is evident that the uncertainty scores associated with correct responses do not consistently
fall below those of incorrect responses. Nonetheless, our framework exhibits robustness in its ability
to retain correct responses and rectify incorrect ones.
Second, during the training phase, the model only rejects responses when there is no correct answer
available within the answer set. In contrast, during testing, responses with high uncertainty scores
may be rejected, even if the model has the necessary knowledge to generate an answer. This adjust-
ment does not necessarily improve the accuracy of the model’s responses, but it does improve the
reliability of the model’s responses.
Third, the model consistently modifies its behavior to reject responses when it encounters questions
that fall beyond its knowledge domain.
Figure 3 illustrates the transformation in model behavior as a result of uncertainty-aware fine-tuning.
Our analysis involved tracking changes in decision outcomes across four categories: “True2False,”
“True2Unknown,” “False2True,” and “False2Unknown.” Notably, the figure reveals a obviously
discrepancy, with a significantly lower count of decisions exhibiting negative shifts compared to
those showing positive shifts.


                                                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a) Changes in the behavior of our       (b) Changes in the behavior of
                 model in contrast to Vicuna              our model in contrast to Vicuna-
                                                          finetuned

Figure 3: An illustration of the change in model behavior as a result of uncertainty-aware fine-
tuning. “Our-model” refer to the “Ours-Vicuna(Log-sum)” mentioned before.


This observation demonstrates the consistent benefits of introducing uncertainty information into the
model. It also supports the potential for enhancing the model’s reliability through our framework.


4   D ISCUSSIONS

Q.1 Is there any better uncertainty estimation methods? Uncertainty estimation methods play
a pivotal role in our framework, and our experimental findings unequivocally demonstrate that the
quality of uncertainty estimation directly correlates with overall performance. A natural concept that
arises is to initially extract entities from responses and subsequently compute uncertainty values for
each entity independently. However, this approach is not without its challenges, as the extraction of
entities itself can introduce errors, and not all responses inherently focus on entities.
Furthermore, our investigation has revealed an important distinction between the manner in which
current uncertainty computation methods operate and how human comprehension functions. While
existing methods compute sentence-level uncertainty based on token-level generation probabilities,
human comprehension operates primarily at the word level, not the token level. In fact, it is often the
initial token that significantly influences the overall comprehension. Therefore, a more rational ap-
proach appears to be modeling token-level generation probabilities to derive word-level confidence.
Subsequently, this word-level confidence can be used to model the uncertainty of the entire sentence,
predicated on the semantic understanding of the words within that sentence.
Q.2 How to deal with over-confidence problem? In addressing the issue we referred to as “over-
confidence problem,” characterized by low uncertainty in model responses that are nonetheless in-
correct, our analysis identifies two principal contributing factors. Firstly, we argue that the uncer-
tainty within this study pertains to the model’s confidence level regarding its responses. In situations
where the model has gaps in knowledge or expertise, it can exhibit a high degree of unwarranted
confidence in providing incorrect answers. Furthermore, while the probability of the generated token
can serve as a partial indicator of the model’s uncertainty, it does not encapsulate the full spectrum
of uncertainty. Our observations reveal that certain over-confidence questions are highly susceptible
to variations in question content, resulting in significant fluctuations in model output. Consequently,
we believe that the model’s resilience to variations in question content may serve as a potential
indicator to judge whether a given response is a over-confidence question or not.
Q.3 Data uncertainty and model uncertainty. The scope of our study centers on the model’s
confidence level regarding its responses, specifically focusing on the concept of model uncertainty.
It is crucial to acknowledge that inherent uncertainties exist within the original data or the questions
posed. Within this context, certain questions are open-ended, yielding non-unique answers, while
others inherently lack a definitive response, as exemplified by inquiries like “Are there aliens?” We
classify this category of uncertainty as data uncertainty.
In scenarios where data uncertainty prevails, the model’s response confidence does not necessarily
correlate directly with the uncertainty surrounding the answer. As such, within the framework of our
research, we intentionally target for datasets and scenarios where there exists a single, unequivocal


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


answer. This enables us to maintain precision and clarity in assessing the model’s confidence without
confounding factors arising from the intrinsic uncertainty present in the data or questions themselves.


5     R ELATED W ORKS

5.1   U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION

Uncertainty estimation has been a subject of extensive study over the years. Glushkova et al. (2021)
employed techniques such as Monte Carlo dropout to observe the effect of model perturbations on
output. Fomicheva et al. (2020) utilized uncertainty quantification methods to improve probability
estimates in neural networks for better quality estimation. Ott et al. (2018) assessed uncertainty
by comparing multiple model outputs against multiple references, using inter-sentence BLEU as a
metric. Lahlou et al. (2021) introduced a model-agnostic framework called Direct Epistemic Uncer-
tainty Prediction for estimating epistemic uncertainty in machine learning models. In the context of
regression tasks, Wang et al. (2022) employed uncertainty estimation to address both data and model
uncertainty, while Malinin et al. (2020) proposed a method for uncertainty estimation using Prior
Networks, which provides interpretable measures of uncertainty at a low computational cost. For
Natural Language Understanding tasks, Talman et al. (2023) applied Bayesian uncertainty modeling
using Stochastic Weight Averaging-Gaussian.
Besides, Large-scale Language Models (LLMs), including ChatGPT, are known to be hallucinatory,
generating counterfactual responses, which may affect the credibility of their outputs (Manakul
et al. (2023)). In the realm of uncertainty estimation within Large Language Models (LLMs), it’s
noteworthy to acknowledge that while extensive research has delved into models with distinct labels,
such as classification models (Ulmer et al. (2022)), the domain of uncertainty estimation remains
relatively under-explored in the context of popular free-form LLMs like LLama (Touvron et al.
(2023)) and Vicuna (Chiang et al. (2023)). Uncertainty estimation in these models introduces a
unique challenge, primarily due to their adaptable and virtually limitless solution spaces. In this
context, any generated output can conceivably be deemed correct, provided it consistently aligns
with the underlying semantics of the actual answer.
Recent advancements in this field have witnessed notable contributions. For instance, Xiao et al.
(2022) conducted comprehensive empirical evaluations, exploring the impact of various configura-
tions, including model size, architecture, and training loss, on uncertainty within LLMs. Meanwhile,
Lin et al. (2022) proposed novel methodologies aimed at quantifying uncertainty by directly prompt-
ing language models to express uncertainty about their generated responses.
More recently, Predictive Entropy (Kadavath et al. (2022)) and Length-normalized Predictive En-
tropy (Malinin & Gales (2020)) calculates the uncertainty of its response by using the probability of
generated each token. Semantic Entropy (SE) (Kuhn et al. (2023)) has emerged as a promising ap-
proach to tackle the challenge of ”semantic equivalence” in uncertainty quantification. SE operates
by clustering generated responses that share the same semantics and employs cluster-wise predictive
entropy as a means of measuring uncertainty.
In contrast to the aforementioned methods, in this work, our primary objective is not the development
of improved uncertainty estimation techniques for Large Language Models (LLMs). Instead, our
focus is on leveraging uncertainty as a potential information to dynamically refine and enhance the
model’s generated responses.


6     C ONCLUSIONS

To mitigate the issue of hallucination in Lagre Language Models (LLM), we present an innovative
framework known as Uncertainty-Aware In-context Learning. Our framework involves fine-tuning
the LLM using a calibration dataset, with the objective of preserving linguistic fluency while endow-
ing it with the capability to adapt responses based on uncertainty. Our extensive experimentation
substantiates the efficacy of our framework and leads to two noteworthy findings. First, we observe
that the logarithmic output values of the LLM partially reflect inherent uncertainty. Second, our
model exhibits autonomous recognition of uncertainty, resulting in improved response accuracy.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mohammad Aljanabi, Mohanad Ghazi, Ahmed Hussein Ali, Saad Abas Abed, et al. Chatgpt: Open
 possibilities. Iraqi Journal For Computer Science and Mathematics, 2023.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Jianyang Deng and Yijia Lin. The benefits and challenges of chatgpt: An overview. Frontiers in
   Computing and Intelligent Systems, 2022.
Marina Fomicheva, Shuo Sun, Lisa Yankovskaya, Frédéric Blain, Francisco Guzmán, Mark Fishel,
 Nikolaos Aletras, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Lucia Specia. Unsupervised quality estimation for
 neural machine translation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:
 539–555, 2020.
Taisiya Glushkova, Chrysoula Zerva, Ricardo Rei, and André FT Martins. Uncertainty-aware ma-
  chine translation evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06352, 2021.
Mutian He and Philip N Garner. Can chatgpt detect intent? evaluating large language models for
 spoken language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13512, 2023.
Yuheng Huang, Jiayang Song, Zhijie Wang, Huaming Chen, and Lei Ma. Look before you leap:
  An exploratory study of uncertainty measurement for large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.10236, 2023.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language mod-
  els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
  uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664, 2023.
Salem Lahlou, Moksh Jain, Hadi Nekoei, Victor Ion Butoi, Paul Bertin, Jarrid Rector-Brooks,
  Maksym Korablyov, and Yoshua Bengio. Deup: Direct epistemic uncertainty prediction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.08501, 2021.
Zi Lin, Jeremiah Zhe Liu, and Jingbo Shang. Towards collaborative neural-symbolic graph semantic
   parsing via uncertainty. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022,
   2022.
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07650, 2020.
Andrey Malinin, Sergey Chervontsev, Ivan Provilkov, and Mark Gales. Regression prior networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11590, 2020.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark JF Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallu-
  cination detection for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896, 2023.
Nick McKenna, Tianyi Li, Liang Cheng, Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Mark Johnson, and Mark
  Steedman. Sources of hallucination by large language models on inference tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14552, 2023.
Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Analyzing uncertainty in neu-
 ral machine translation. In In The Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 3956–3965. PMLR, 2018.
Aarne Talman, Hande Celikkanat, Sami Virpioja, Markus Heinonen, and Jörg Tiedemann.
  Uncertainty-aware natural language inference with stochastic weight averaging. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.04726, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Dennis Ulmer, Jes Frellsen, and Christian Hardmeier. Exploring predictive uncertainty and calibra-
  tion in nlp: A study on the impact of method & data scarcity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15452,
  2022.
Yuxia Wang, Daniel Beck, Timothy Baldwin, and Karin Verspoor. Uncertainty estimation and reduc-
  tion of pre-trained models for text regression. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2022.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06209, 2017.
Yuxin Xiao, Paul Pu Liang, Umang Bhatt, Willie Neiswanger, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-
  Philippe Morency. Uncertainty quantification with pre-trained language models: A large-scale
  empirical analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04714, 2022.
Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.13063, 2023.


                                                 11
