Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR DYNAMIC
C APACITATED V EHICLE ROUTING P ROBLEM
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has become increasingly popular for solving
         Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) due to its great potential. How-
         ever, the current DRL models are only suitable for static environments where
         information about customers and orders is provided before the delivery vehicle
         departs from the depot and does not change during delivery. In reality, deliv-
         ery tasks are dynamic, and much information about customers and orders is dis-
         closed over time. In this paper, we propose a DRL model based on a designed
         dynamic attention network for dynamic CVRP, which extends the attention model
         from the original static-only CVRP environment to a dynamic CVRP environ-
         ment. With dynamic encoder-decoder architecture, the proposed DRL model
         can track the changes in customer disclosure status in real-time. For compari-
         son, we develop two methods based on LKH and OR-Tools for dynamic CVRP.
         Experimental results show that the DRL model outperforms LKH and OR-Tools
         in computational speed and solution quality. The code is publicly available on
         https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AM2DCVRP-0D4B.


1    I NTRODUCTION

With the rapid growth of industries like e-commerce, food delivery, and ride-hailing, research on the
Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is becoming increasingly relevant. The focus of research is shift-
ing to address real-world environments, which include problems such as Capacitated VRP (CVRP)
(Longo et al., 2006; Akhtar et al., 2017), Heterogeneous CVRP (HCVRP) (Koç et al., 2016; Subra-
manian et al., 2012; Li et al., 2021), and CVRP with Time Windows (CVRPTW) (Akbar et al., 2020;
Baños et al., 2013). These problems are aimed at finding optimal routes under various constraints.
However, most of the research in the field of VRP is based on static delivery tasks. In such tasks,
the information about customers and orders is provided before the delivery vehicle departs from the
depot, and it remains constant during delivery. However, in real-world, the delivery tasks are often
dynamic, where only some orders are known in advance before the vehicle departs from the depot
and the rest of the orders are disclosed over time (Jia et al., 2017). Therefore, research in the field of
dynamic VRP has begun to emerge in recent years.
Ulmer et al. (2019) devised a rollout algorithm based on offline value function approximation (VFA)
that takes into account the temporal and spatial anticipation of service requests. This algorithm is
designed to solve the single-vehicle routing problem with stochastic service requests. Sultana et al.
(2021) developed a fast, parallelized, and approximate learning-based solution for the generic class
of CVRP with Time Windows and Dynamic Routing (CVRP-TWDR). It allows each agent (vehicle)
to independently evaluate serving each customer, and uses a centralized allocation heuristic to make
the final allocations based on the generated values. Jia et al. (2017) created a dynamic logistics
scheduling system using a set-based particle swarm optimization algorithm. Additionally,Meng
et al. (2021) proposed a dynamic optimization policy that enhances Variable Neighborhood Search
(VNS) to address CVRP, where transportation costs among the customers change over time. It takes
into account both initial scheduling and rescheduling when traffic information changes. Liu (2019)
introduced a mixed-integer programming (MIP) model, which discretizes the temporal dimension to
exchange the spatial dimension’s continuity. This allows for the dynamic input of order information
with arbitrary pickup and delivery locations, thereby facilitating on-demand meal delivery service
scheduling. These successful studies have paved the way for the development of dynamic VRP.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Besides previous traditional exact and heuristic algorithms, there has been a burgeoning interest in
using DRL algorithms to solve VRP. Compared to other algorithms like exact and heuristic algo-
rithms, end-to-end DRL algorithms can handle multiple tasks uniformly, offering faster computation
and higher solution efficiency. Notable approaches include the attention model (AM) (Kool et al.,
2018), multi-decoder attention model (Xin et al., 2021), and policy optimization with multiple op-
tima (Kwon et al., 2020), all of which have shown promising results and have source code available.
However, it is unfortunate that most DRL-based VRP research has focused on static cases. To the
best of our knowledge, DRL for dynamic CVRP has not been well addressed yet. This paper pro-
poses an approach for dynamic cases, providing inspiration for future DRL-based VRP research in
dynamic environments.
When employing DRL algorithms to tackle the dynamic CVRP, there exist two key challenges that
need to be addressed. The first challenge is about changes in customer information when new or-
ders come in. The second challenge is related to the varying number of orders we get for different
instances, which leads to different numbers of customer points. This can be a problem when we’re
doing batch training. To tackle the first challenge, we make changes to the input information when-
ever new orders are received. For the second challenge, we take inspiration from a method used
in Wu et al.’s DRL-based improvement heuristic algorithms (Wu et al., 2021). This method in-
volves adding a dummy depot to account for the varying lengths of solutions between instances. In
our paper, we use the locations and demands of depot points to hide undisclosed customer points.
This helps us address the issue of varying customer point numbers between instances, making batch
training possible.
This paper presents three key contributions. First and foremost, we present a DRL model with a dy-
namic attention network and encoder-decoder architecture to address the dynamic CVRP, expanding
it from a static environment to a dynamic one. Furthermore, we have developed two methods based
on LKH and OR-Tools to serve as baselines in solving dynamic CVRP. Finally, we have established
a mathematical model for dynamic CVRP, focusing on the constraints between the departure time at
one point and the disclosure time of the succeeding point.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the mathematical model of
dynamic CVRP. In Section III, the overall structure of DRL is first proposed, then followed by the
specific implementation details, including the algorithmic pseudo-code. In Section IV, experimental
results are presented to demonstrate the performance of the proposed DRL and LKH as well as
OR-Tools method. Conclusions are given in Section V.

2     P ROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1   P ROBLEM DEFINITION

The dynamic CVRP delivery model involves a vehicle departing from a depot to deliver goods to
multiple customer points, and the vehicle can return to the depot for restocking during delivery.
Some customer points are known in advance, while others are gradually disclosed over time. To
minimize unnecessary travel, the vehicle remains stationary after completing deliveries to all known
customer points until the next point is disclosed. At the end of working hours, the vehicle finally
returns to the depot. The vehicle’s maximum capacity and the depot’s location are already estab-
lished. The objective is to plan routes to minimize the total distance traveled by the vehicle. To
facilitate analysis and research, we have made the following assumptions: (1) The vehicle’s speed
remains constant at 1; (2) The demand for goods at each customer point does not exceed the vehicle’s
maximum capacity; (3) Each customer point is only serviced once.

2.2   M ATHEMATICAL FORMULATION

Suppose there are n customer points, and we have a set of locations X = {loc0 , . . . , loci , . . . , locn },
in which loc0 represents the location of the central depot, and loci (i ̸= 0) represents the location of
the ith customer point. We also have a demand set D = {d1 , . . . , di , . . . , dn }, where di represents
the demand of the ith customer point, and a maximum material capacity Q for the vehicle, such that
∀i ∈ [1, n], di < Q. Additionally, we have a set of disclosure times T = {t1 , . . . , ti , . . . , tn }, where
ti denotes the time at which the ith customer point is disclosed. Some customer points are disclosed
before the vehicle departs from the depot, and their disclosure time is 0. While visiting customer


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


point j, the set of all previously visited customer points is represented as πj . The objective is to
minimize the distance traveled by the vehicle while ensuring that each customer point’s demand is
met.
obj.
                                         X        X
                                min                        Eu 2D(i, j) × rij ,                    (1)
                                        i∈[0,n] j∈[0,n]

s.t.
                              X
                                       tj × rij ≤ tcur
                                                   i , ∀i ∈ [1, n] ∪ (0, k),                      (2)
                             j∈[0,n]


                        tj , if j∈[1,n] tcur
                               P                                        P
                 min                        × rji < tl , ∀l ∈ ([1, n] − j∈[1,n] πj × rji )
                
                                         j
                    l
         tcur
          i   =   0, else if i = (0, 1)                                                     ,     (3)
                 P                  cur
                                   (t
                      j∈[1,n]∪(0,k) j    +  Eu 2D(j,  i))  × rji , else
                                X                 X
                                         rij =             rji = 1, ∀i ∈ [0, n],                  (4)
                               i∈[0,n]           i∈[0,n]

                                         X       X
                                                         rijk di ≤ Q, ∀k.                         (5)
                                       i∈[1,n] j∈[0,n]

In objective 1, the term Eu 2D(i, j) represents the Euler distance between point i and point j.
Furthermore, rij is a binary variable indicating whether a vehicle travels directly from customer
point i to customer point j. Another similar binary variable, rijk in Equation 5, indicates if the
vehicle departs from the depot during the k departure. The information in constraint 2 implies that
the vehicles do not visit any undisclosed customer points. According to the proposed model in this
paper, the demands and locations of these undisclosed customer points are not known. The variable
tcur
 i   represents the time at which a vehicle departs from point i, while tcur(0,k) represents the time
                                                         th
at which the vehicle departs from the depot for the k time. Within the specified constraint 3,
we can observe the computation of the departure time tcur i   from point i. If all disclosed customer
points have already been visited, the vehicle will await the revelation of the next customer point.
In such instances, the scope of values for l encompasses all unvisited customer points. Conversely,
if no unvisited customer points remain, the vehicle will depart straightaway upon reaching point
i, foregoing any waiting period. Here, i = (0, 1) denotes the vehicle’s first departure from the
depot. As per constraint 4, the vehicle is allowed to enter and exit each customer point only once.
Additionally, constraint 5 specifies that the total demand served by the vehicle during any departure
from the depot until the next return to the depot should not exceed the maximum capacity of the
vehicle.

3      AM FOR DYNAMIC CVRP
In the dynamic CVRP, the number of customer points may change over time as some of them are
gradually disclosed. However, existing models employing the attention model have a fixed number
of customer points during the solution and cannot accommodate dynamic changes. The algorithm
proposed in this paper tracks customer point disclosure status by dynamically adjusting input in-
formation. The overall network structure, depicted in Figure 1, still comprises an encoder and a
decoder. Nevertheless, the key innovation lies in the continuous adaptation of input information to
reflect changes in the disclosure status. Encoding is initially performed using information for only
n0 (nl when step l = 0) customer points are disclosed before the vehicle’s departure from the depot.
Subsequently, every time a new customer point is disclosed, the input data is updated to incorporate
information for all nl customer points that have been disclosed up to the lth step in the loop.
The dynamic CVRP may involve a changing number of customer points as some are gradually
disclosed. However, the current DRL models that utilize the attention model rely on a fixed number


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of customer points throughout the solution and cannot adapt to these dynamic changes. To address
this issue, this paper introduces a dynamic attention model that adjusts the input information in
real-time to track customer point disclosure status. The network structure, as shown in Figure 1,
employs a dynamic encoder-decoder architecture that continuously adapts to reflect changes in the
disclosure status. Initially, the encoding process only considers information for n0 (or nl at step
l = 0) customer points that are disclosed before the vehicle departs from the depot. Subsequently,
each time any new customer point is disclosed, its location and demand will add to the input data.
So that, there are a total of nl customer points in the input data by the lth step of the loop.
The disclosure status is updated through a series of steps. Each step, labeled as l, calculates the
next destination point of the vehicle as il+1 in Figure 1. The departure time tcur            i   of the vehicle
from point i can be calculated using Formula 3. We compare tcur             i   with the disclosure times of all
points T = {t1 , . . . , ti , . . . , tn }. If the disclosure time is earlier than tcur
                                                                                    i , the status is considered
disclosed. Otherwise, it is considered undisclosed.


                              Figure 1: Architecture of our policy network.

In deep neural networks, batch training and batch inference play vital roles in achieving faster train-
ing, which is a significant advantage of such networks. However, customer points’ disclosure times
vary across different instances, which can cause certain instances to have disclosed customer points
at a step, while others may not at the same step. As a result, the number of disclosed points, denoted
as nl , may differ at step l in different instances, leading to varying input information lengths across
the instances. This creates a challenge for both batch training and batch inference since they require
consistent input information lengths for all instances.
To address this issue, we developed a method inspired by the DRL-based improvement heuristics
algorithm proposed by Wu et al. (2021). Their approach involves improving an initial solution for
each instance using DRL. However, the length of the path sequence for each instance’s solution can
vary due to the different numbers of actual returns to the depot. They added a sufficient number of
dummy depots to the initial solution to address this issue. We build upon this method and further
optimize the network as follows:

      1. The input message length is set to a fixed value instead of a previously set variable value
         nl in the loop. In some real-world applications, the number of customer points disclosed
         during working hours may vary. Therefore, it is recommended to set the fixed value to the
         maximum number of customer points that may be encountered to ensure that all possible
         customer points are taken into account. For the purposes of this document, the value is n.
      2. For undisclosed customer points, their locations and demands are replaced with those of
         the depot, and the demand of the depot is set to zero in this paper.


                                                       4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         3. To ensure that no attention information of undisclosed customer points is calculated during
            decoding and their selection probability is zero, they are masked in both the Multi-Head
            Attention layer and Softmax process.

  To better understand the proposed DRL algorithm in this paper, we present pseudo-code in Algo-
  rithm 1 that outlines the process of solving the dynamic CVPR. Initially (Line 1), sets the current
  time to zero, assumes a fully-loaded vehicle, and assumes that none of the customer points have
  been visited. At the start of the loop (Line 3), the disclosure status of each point is calculated by
  comparing the disclosure time of that point with the current time. Locations and demands of undis-
  closed points are transformed into those of the depot. Next (Line 4), the encoding information of the
  transformed points is processed. A mask matrix is computed, which includes undisclosed points,
  points with demands exceeding the remaining loaded material, and points that have already been
  visited. Simultaneously (Line 5), a mask matrix is obtained, where the information about undis-
  closed points, points with demands exceeding the remaining loaded material, and points that have
  already been visited is set to one, and that about other points is zero. Following this (Line 6), multi-
  head attention is not calculated for those points that are one in the mask matrix. Additionally (Line
  8), the selection probability for these points is set to zero. Subsequently (Line 9), using a greedy
  method, the point with the highest probability il+1 is selected as the target point, which the vehicle
  travels directly to from the current point. Then (Line 10), the current time, vehicle load, and the
  visited status of customer points are updated. Eventually (Line 11), the planned route π is updated
  by adding the target point il+1 .

  Algorithm 1: DRL for dynamic CVRP
   Data: disclosure time set T ,demand set D, location set of customer points and depot X, maximum
           capacity Q.
   Result: π.
             cur
 1 Initial t     = 0, load = Q, step l = 0, visited, net parameter θ;
 2 while not finish all points do
 3      D′ , X ′ = Transform(tcur , T, D, X);
 4      encode = ENCODEθ (D′ , X ′ );
 5      mask = MASK(T, tcur , load, visited);
 6      mha = MHAθ (encode, mask);
 7      sha = SHAθ (mha, encode);
 8      p = softmax(sha, mask);
 9      il+1 = select(p);
10      tcur , load, visited = update(il+1 );
11      π = π + [il+1 ];
12      l = l + 1;
13 end
14 return π.


   4    E XPERIMENTS

  4.1    I NDIRECT IMPLEMENTATION OF DYNAMIC CVRP

  Currently, research on dynamic CVRP is limited, and there is a need for more open-source code to
  address this issue. Even widely used VPR-solving tools such as LKH and OR-Tools do not support
  dynamic CVRP solving, making it challenging to compare the proposed algorithm in this paper with
  other algorithms. To solve this problem, the paper presents a method to indirectly solve the dynamic
  CVRP through solving the static CVRP using LKH and OR-Tools. Although this method cannot
  completely replace the direct approach, it can still produce comparable results.
  The method is illustrated in Figure 2. In Step 1, a path is planned as [0, A, cur, B, 0, C, 0] for visiting
  all known customer points by solving the static CVRP. If a new point, such as the blue star point new
  in Step 2, is disclosed while the vehicle is following the path just planned towards the red square
  point cur, the vehicle will no longer continue on its current path; instead, it will follow a newly
  re-planned route. In the diagram, the solid lines [0, A, cur] represent the part already travelled of the
  path, whereas the dashed lines [cur, B, 0, C, 0] depict the part yet to be taken.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Indirect implementation of dynamic CVRP. A, B, C, E, F, G are sequences of some
points.


Several steps need to be taken to plan a new path that includes the newly disclosed point and remain-
ing customer points. Firstly, exclude previously visited points, and set current demand to the sum of
previously visited customer demands since the last departure from the depot. For instance, in Step
3, d3 = d1 + d2 + d3 . After that, execute a static CVRP path planning for visiting the remaining
points and the current point, i.e., {cur, new, B, C, 0}. Then, trim the path to make cur the start
point of the path. Suppose the newly planned path is [0, E, cur, F, 0, G, 0]. To trim the path with
minimal modification, there are only two ways: reverse [E, cur] and obtain [0, cur, E −1 , F, 0]; or
reverse [cur, F ] and obtain [0, E, F −1 , cur, 0]. Then, delete the 0 near cur to get [cur, E −1 , F, 0]
like in Step 4 and [cur, F, E −1 , 0] like in Step 5, respectively, where E −1 represents the reverse path
of E. Since either method only deletes two links and adds one link, they change very little. Finally,
combine the shorter one, which in this case is the former, with the previously visited path, and get
[0, A, cur, E −1 , F, 0, G, 0], as shown in Step 6. The vehicle follows this newly planned path until
another customer point is disclosed, and then it re-plans the path using this method again until it
eventually completes all customer points.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

This paper presents an implementation of the proposed algorithm using PyTorch and trains the policy
network model on 10 GPUs (PH402 SKU 200 Tesla with 32GB of VRAM). The experiments were
conducted on an Ubuntu 16.04.7 LTS operating system (GNU/Linux 4.4.0-31-generic x86-64). The
case studies in this paper involve dynamic CVRP with customer point sizes of 10, 20, and 50. To
evaluate performance, comparisons were made between the proposed algorithm and LKH as well as
OR-Tools.
The parameter settings and data generation in this
paper are identical to those of AM (Kool et al.,
2018). Dynamic customer points account for 50%
of the total, and disclosure times for tasks with sizes
of 10, 20, and 50 are uniformly generated within the
ranges [0-3.8], [0-6.4], and [0-10.98], respectively.

4.3   C OMPARATIVE STUDY

Figure 3 displays the training curve for the objec-
tive value in the proposed algorithm, where “obj.”
represents the average transportation path length of
all training instances (see Equation 1). From the               Figure 3: Training curve for obj.
training curve, it can be observed that the algo-
rithm exhibits stable performance across different
problem sizes, converging quickly, with smaller in-
stances converging even faster.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


After training the proposed algorithm, it was tested alongside LKH and OR-Tools. In the exper-
iments, 1024 dynamic CVRP instances were randomly generated for each problem size, using a
fixed random seed. The average length of the paths solved by each algorithm for these instances are
presented in Table 1. The comparison revealed that the proposed algorithm consistently outperforms
LKH. It shows slightly inferior performance to OR-Tools for smaller problem sizes (size=10 and 20),
while exhibiting the best performance among the three for larger problem sizes (size=50). Addition-
ally, the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms LKH and OR-Tools in terms of calculation
time.

            Table 1: Performance of each algorithm in 1024 dynamic CVRP instances.
                                LKH               OR-Tools              DRL
                  Size
                         obj.     time         obj.  time            obj.   time

                  10     5.88     1m8s         5.40     1h7m25s      5.48     <1s
                  20     8.71     9m3s         8.12     2h23m58s     8.14     <1s
                  50     14.88    1h45m8s      14.11    6h7m43s      13.97    21s


During the experiment, OR-Tools faced several instances that it couldn’t solve. For instance, in cases
with a size of 50, almost 40% of the instances were unsolvable. To deal with these cases, this paper
followed a skipping approach, which involved calculating the average for the remaining solvable
60% of instances as “obj.”. In comparison, LKH uses a soft-constraint approach for unsolvable
instances, adding a penalty value to the path length as a final path length for instances exceeding
constraints.


              (a) LKH                       (b) OR-Tools                       (c) DRL



  Figure 4: Screenshots of the example solutions obtained by each algorithm at different times.

To better illustrate the differences between the algorithms, Figure 4 displays screenshots of example
solutions obtained by each algorithm at different times. For a solution obtained by an algorithm, we
captured three moments during the solving process, showing the disclosure status of customer points


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the vehicle’s route. The first moment is when the vehicle first visits a newly disclosed point.
The second moment is at 5, typically corresponding to the vehicle having visited approximately
1/3 of the customer points. The third moment is at 10, generally corresponding to the vehicle
having visited about 2/3 of the customer points. In the figure, ”static point” refers to customer
points disclosed before the vehicle departs from the depot, ”dynamic point” refers to customer points
disclosed gradually after the vehicle departs from the depot until the current moment, and ”current
point” indicates the last location visited by the vehicle before the current moment. From the figure, it
can be observed that there are no significant differences between the algorithms at the first moment.
However, as time progresses, by the second moment, the path planned by LKH start to become
disordered, with noticeable crossing between routes and longer path length. Although there are no
significant differences between OR-Tools and our algorithm at this point, as time progresses to the
third moment, the path planned by OR-Tools also start to become slightly disorderly compared to
the latter.

5   C ONCLUSION
This study focuses on addressing the dynamic Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) by
extending the previously static CVRP attention network to a dynamic environment. By utilizing a
dynamic encoder-decoder architecture, the proposed Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) model is
capable of adapting to changes in customer disclosure status. As there is currently no other paper
that discusses DRL methods used to solve this CVRP where orders are disclosed over time, We
believe that our method is a powerful starting point for DRL for dynamic CVRP.
To facilitate experimental comparisons, we have also devised two additional methods for solving
dynamic CVRP using LKH and OR-Tools as baselines. Through extensive experimentation con-
ducted on 1024 instances of varying customer sizes with a 50% dynamic ratio, DRL demonstrates
superior performance compared to LKH and OR-Tools in dynamic CVRP.

R EFERENCES
Mohammad Deni Akbar, Rio Aurachmana, et al. Hybrid genetic–tabu search algorithm to optimize
 the route for capacitated vehicle routing problem with time window. International Journal of
 Industrial Optimization, 1(1):15–28, 2020.
Mahmuda Akhtar, MA Hannan, RA Begum, Hassan Basri, and Edgar Scavino. Backtracking search
 algorithm in cvrp models for efficient solid waste collection and route optimization. Waste Man-
 agement, 61:117–128, 2017.
Raúl Baños, Julio Ortega, Consolación Gil, Antonio L Márquez, and Francisco De Toro. A hybrid
  meta-heuristic for multi-objective vehicle routing problems with time windows. Computers &
  industrial engineering, 65(2):286–296, 2013.
Ya-Hui Jia, Wei-Neng Chen, Tianlong Gu, Huaxiang Zhang, Huaqiang Yuan, Ying Lin, Wei-Jie
  Yu, and Jun Zhang. A dynamic logistic dispatching system with set-based particle swarm op-
  timization. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 48(9):1607–1621,
  2017.
Çağrı Koç, Tolga Bektaş, Ola Jabali, and Gilbert Laporte. Thirty years of heterogeneous vehicle
   routing. European Journal of Operational Research, 249(1):1–21, 2016.
Wouter Kool, Herke Van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, learn to solve routing problems! arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1803.08475, 2018.
Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jinho Choo, Byoungjip Kim, Iljoo Yoon, Youngjune Gwon, and Seungjai Min.
  Pomo: Policy optimization with multiple optima for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:21188–21198, 2020.
Jingwen Li, Yining Ma, Ruize Gao, Zhiguang Cao, Andrew Lim, Wen Song, and Jie Zhang. Deep
   reinforcement learning for solving the heterogeneous capacitated vehicle routing problem. IEEE
   Transactions on Cybernetics, 52(12):13572–13585, 2021.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yanchao Liu. An optimization-driven dynamic vehicle routing algorithm for on-demand meal de-
  livery using drones. Computers & Operations Research, 111:1–20, November 2019. ISSN
  03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2019.05.024. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
  retrieve/pii/S0305054819301431.
Humberto Longo, Marcus Poggi De Aragao, and Eduardo Uchoa. Solving capacitated arc routing
  problems using a transformation to the cvrp. Computers & Operations Research, 33(6):1823–
  1837, 2006.
Xianghu Meng, Ziwen Li, and Jing Tang. A dynamic vrp with varying transportation costs and its
  solution strategy. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control
  (ICNSC), volume 1, pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Anand Subramanian, Puca Huachi Vaz Penna, Eduardo Uchoa, and Luiz Satoru Ochi. A hybrid
  algorithm for the heterogeneous fleet vehicle routing problem. European Journal of Operational
  Research, 221(2):285–295, 2012.
Nazneen N Sultana, Vinita Baniwal, Ansuma Basumatary, Piyush Mittal, Supratim Ghosh, and Har-
  shad Khadilkar. Fast approximate solutions using reinforcement learning for dynamic capacitated
  vehicle routing with time windows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12088, 2021.
Marlin W Ulmer, Justin C Goodson, Dirk C Mattfeld, and Marco Hennig. Offline–online approxi-
 mate dynamic programming for dynamic vehicle routing with stochastic requests. Transportation
 Science, 53(1):185–202, 2019.
Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, and Andrew Lim. Learning improvement heuris-
  tics for solving routing problems. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems,
  33(9):5057–5069, 2021.
Liang Xin, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Multi-decoder attention model with embedding
  glimpse for solving vehicle routing problems. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 12042–12049, 2021.


                                                9
