Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C AUSAL LM IS NOT OPTIMAL FOR IN - CONTEXT LEARN -
ING

 Nan Ding Tomer Levinboim Jialin Wu Sebastian Goodman Radu Soricut
 Google Research
 {dingnan,tomerl,jialinwu,seabass,rsoricut}@google.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recent empirical evidence indicates that transformer based in-context learning
         performs better when using a prefix language model (prefixLM), in which in-
         context samples can all attend to each other, compared to causal language models
         (causalLM), which use auto-regressive attention that prohibits in-context samples
         to attend to future samples. While this result is intuitive, it is not understood from
         a theoretical perspective. In this paper we take a theoretical approach and analyze
         the convergence behavior of prefixLM and causalLM under a certain parameter
         construction. Our analysis shows that both LM types converge to their stationary
         points at a linear rate, but that while prefixLM converges to the optimal solution
         of linear regression, causalLM convergence dynamics follows that of an online
         gradient descent algorithm, which is not guaranteed to be optimal even as the
         number of samples grows infinitely. We supplement our theoretical claims with
         empirical experiments over synthetic and real tasks and using various types of
         transformers. Our experiments verify that causalLM consistently underperforms
         prefixLM in all settings.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the default foundational model for
various machine learning applications such as natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown
et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Beyond their
traditional usage in machine learning applications, it has recently been discovered that pretraining
large transformers on a vast amounts of data leads them to develop a striking ability referred to as
in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020). Specifically, once such pretraining is complete, these
models are able to solve new tasks at inference time (without changing their parameters) by simply
ingesting a short sequence (prefix) of labeled examples from a task and then computing a prediction
for a query example.
The ICL capability was first demonstrated by GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), where a causalLM (a
Transformer decoder with auto-regressive attention masks) was used as the main model architecture.
However, follow up work empirically found that restricting the auto-regressive masks on the entire
sequence is too prohibitive and therefore proposed the so-called prefixLM (Raffel et al., 2020b; Tay
et al., 2022) which allows full attention within the prefix tokens. Moreover, the latest models (such
as PaLM2 (Google et al., 2023)) adopt a mixture of different LM objectives during pretraining to
achieved state-of-art performance across a diverse set of tasks and capabilities.
However, beyond the few empirical results in those and related papers, there is yet no theoretical ex-
planation that accounts for the different ICL behavior of prefixLM and causalLM. Indeed, theoretical
studies of ICL are difficult due to the complicated non-linearity of the (ordinary) transformer archi-
tecture. However, recent work (Von Oswald et al., 2023) focusing on ICL of linear regression was
able to show that a specifically designed parameter construction of a one-layer Linear Self-Attention
(LSA) transformer can simulate a single step of gradient descent by using the in-context examples as
training data. Moreover, a different recent study (Zhang et al., 2023) used gradient flow to prove that
a randomly initialized LSA-transformer indeed converges to such a construction during training.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this paper, we continue the theoretical line of work above by investigating the convergence
properties of ICL for both prefixLM and causalLM multi-layer LSA-transformers in a linear regression
setting. We summarizes our contributions as follows:

       • We first present a clear, formal proof that establishes the relationship between a multi-layer
         LSA and multi-step gradient descents in linear regression.
       • We then show that both causalLM and prefixLM based multi-layer LSA-transformers
         converge to their respective stationary points with linear rates of convergence. We prove
         that the stationary point of prefixLM corresponds to the optimal least square solution of
         the linear regression problem, while the stationary points of causalLM correspond to the
         weights obtained along the iterations of online gradient descent with non-decaying step
         sizes. Importantly, the stationary points obtained by causalLM may not become optimal
         even as the number of in-context examples increases, which indicates that causalLM is not
         optimal for in-context learning.
       • Finally, we verify the above theoretical insights by conducting experiments with LSA-
         transformers as well as ordinary softmax attention based transformers on various synthetic
         tasks including linear and non-linear regression, and multiclass classifications. We also
         compare causalLM and prefixLM ICL based on LLMs including T5 (Roberts et al., 2022)
         and PaLM2 (Google et al., 2023), as well as the multimodal model PaLI-X (Chen et al.,
         2023). Our experimental results support our theoretical findings and consistently show the
         superiority of prefixLM over causalLM on ICL for such settings.

2     BACKGROUND
We begin by reviewing a few types of transformer attention and in-context learning (ICL), as well as
a specific transformer construction for linear regression ICL by (Von Oswald et al., 2023) which our
theories will be based on. The discussions of other related work are deferred to Appendix A.

2.1   T RANSFORMERS : SSA, LSA, CAUSAL LM, AND PREFIX LM

Given a sequence of input vectors Z = (z1 , . . . , zn ), the output of standard Softmax Self-Attention
(SSA) layer is
                             zj ← zj + P V Z softmax(Z⊤ K⊤ Q zj ),
where P, V, K, Q respectively corresponds to the output projection, value transformation, key
transformation and query transformation.
Since the softmax attention of standard transformers is non-linear, its theoretical analysis becomes
complicated even for a single layer. For this reason, theoretical approaches to analyze transformers
have often resorted to the Linear Self-Attention (LSA) layer (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023), which simply drops the softmax function from the attention,
                                                               Xn
               zj ← zj + P V Z(Z⊤ K⊤ Q zj ) = zj + P V             zi z⊤i K ⊤
                                                                              Q  z j   .          (1)
                                                               i=1

Furthermore, since each input zj can attend to all positions j ∈ {1 . . . n}, this form of attention is
categorized as full (or bidirectional) attention, and is typically used in the transformer encoder.
On the other hand, a (linear) transformer decoder uses the auto-regressive attention
                                               j
                                               X
                                                             ⊤
                               zj ← zj + P V          zi z⊤
                                                          i K Q zj .                                (2)
                                                i=1

which restricts each token zj to attend only to previous positions (and itself) from {1 . . . j}. This
restriction is due to the role of the decoder as a causal language model (causalLM) which predicts the
next token in the context of the previously generated ones.
The original transformer involves both a full attention based encoder and an auto-regressive atten-
tion based decoder. However, prominent NLP research has often chosen either encoder-only (e.g.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)) or decoder-only (e.g. GPT (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery
et al., 2022)) models according to the task at hand. This is partially for the purpose of halving the
parameter sizes.
Another version of attention, between full and auto-regressive, followed from the observation that
some tasks can benefit from a prefix sequence such as context or prompt. That is, the input sequence Z
is composed of n′ prefix tokens (z1 , . . . , zn′ ) configured for the task, while the tokens (zn′ +1 , . . . , zn )
represent the sample. Specifically, prefixLM (Raffel et al., 2020b) suggests the following attention
(in its LSA version):
                                                  max(j,n′ )
                                                     X
                                                                      ⊤
                               zj ← zj + P V                   zi z⊤
                                                                   i K Q zj ,
                                                      i=1
where max(j, n′ ) ensures each prefix token zj with j < n′ can attend to all prefix tokens.

2.2    I N - CONTEXT LEARNING

A formal framework of in-context learning has been described in various existing literature such as
(Garg et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). Here, we briefly review the problem setting and introduce
notation that will be used across the paper.
In-context learning refers to the ability of models to produce context-driven predictions at inference
time. That is, at inference time, a model is fed with a sequence consisting of input-label pairs and
a query input (x1 , y1 , . . . , xn , yn , xquery ) and its goal is to predict the label yquery of xquery using
the context examples (x1 , y1 , . . . , xn , yn ) (specifically, without changing the model parameters).

2.3    L INEAR REGRESSION IN - CONTEXT LEARNERS

Linear regression is a classical machine learning problem. Given a set of input-label pairs (xi , yi ),
the goal is to find an optimal weight vector w that minimizes the l2-loss:
                                                 n
                                              1 X
                                   L(w) =            ∥ w xi −yi ∥22 .
                                             2n i=1
                                        Pn
The gradient of the loss is ∇w L = n1 i=1 (w xi −yi ) x⊤   i , and a gradient descent algorithm with
step size η follows the update rule:
                                                 n
                                              ηX
                             w(l) = w(l−1) +        (yi − w(l−1) xi ) x⊤
                                                                       i .                        (3)
                                              n i=1
Using linear regression as a lens to study in-context learning was first proposed in (Garg et al.,
2022), where the authors laid out an approach for training transformers to in-context learn a class of
simple predictors, including linear regression. However, no theoretical study was provided. More
recently, and most relevant to our work, (Von Oswald et al., 2023) proposed a succinct construction
that demonstrates how a single LSA layer can effectively implement a single gradient descent step.
According to their setup the input is formulated as

                                     (0)                       (0)    xj
                             Z = (z1 , . . . , z(0)
                                                n   ), where z j   =                               (4)
                                                                      yj
and the parameter matrices of (1) are set as:

                                   Id×d 0             0d×d             0        η
                    K=Q=                       ,V =                        , P = I,                             (5)
                                     0     0          w(0)             −1       n
where w(0) is an initial weight vector. (Von Oswald et al., 2023) then showed that this configuration
results in an update of their so-called transformed target yj ← yj + η (∇w(0) L) xj , and that this
target update is equivalent to the one performed by a single-step gradient descent of linear regression.
Although the construction of (Von Oswald et al., 2023) connected LSA-based ICL to the gradient
descent of linear regression, the "transformed target" view seems unnatural* to work with. Moreover,
their extension from single-layer to multi-layer LSA is unfortunately unclear.
    * The traditional ML formulation updates the weight vector or the model prediction, while the groundtruth

target remains fixed.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     M ULTI - LAYER IN - CONTEXT LEARNER
In this section, we provide a formal proof that a multi-layer LSA under the construction of (Von Os-
wald et al., 2023) progresses identically to multi-step gradient descent.
Instead of the "transformed target" view, the following proposition explicitly connects the GD weights
of (3) to the outputs of the multi-layer LSA under the constructions of K, Q, P and V in (5). Note
that we keep w(0) = 0 in the proposition because it simplifies the equations and makes the outputs
more meaningful. However, such specification is not mandatory, and we provide general propositions,
for arbitrary w(0) , in Appendix C.

Proposition 1 For a multi-layer LSA satisfying the construction (5) and with w(0) = 0, if its input Z
                                                    (l)        (l) ⊤        (l)
is formatted as (4), then its l-th layer output is zj = (x⊤
                                                          j , δj ) , where δj = yj − w
                                                                                           (l)
                                                                                               xj and
  (l)
w is the l-th updated weight from the gradient descents update rule in (3).
                                                                                           (l)             (l)
Proof Sketch: Plugging in K, Q, P and V of (5) with w(0) = 0 and zj = (x⊤       ⊤
                                                                        j , δj ) into (1), we
obtain that for all l > 0,
                                                  n
                            xj        xj

                                               ηX         0     ⊤
                             (l) =   (l−1)   −          (l−1) xi xj .
                            δj      δj         n      δi
                                                                             i=1
Since zj never changes its first d-dimension corresponding to xj , we can simplify it and focus only
    (l)
on δj , which is the last output coordinate of the j-th LSA-layer,
                                                                            n
                                          (l)           (l−1)       η X (l−1) ⊤
                                          δj = δj               −        δ   xi xj ,                                           (6)
                                                                    n i=1 i
       (0)                    (l)                     (l)                                        (0)
with δj      = yj . Defining ỹj = yj − δj and rearranging (6), we obtain ỹj                          = 0 and ∀l > 0:
                                                                    n
                                    (l)          (l−1)          ηX            (l−1)
                                ỹj = ỹj                   +         (yi − ỹi     ) x⊤
                                                                                       i xj .                                  (7)
                                                                n i=1
                                                (0)                                                                      (l)
Finally, using (7) and the fact that ỹj = 0 = w(0) xj , it can be proved by induction that ∀l : ỹj =
w(l) xj . A complete proof is provided in Appendix B.
                                                                 (l)
To summarize, the newly introduced variable ỹj is exactly the prediction of the l-th gradient descent
                                 (l)                                                                                           (l)
weights w(l) for xj , and δj is the difference between the true label yj and the predicted ỹj .
               (l)                                                                 (l)
Therefore, ỹj serves as a bridge to connect the LSA output δj and the GD weight w(l) .
So far, we have dealt with the behavior of LSA layers with full attention. In what follows, we move
on to the practical setting of in-context learning, where the input contains not only n in-context
                                                                               (0)
(training) examples in the format of (4), but also an additional (test) query zquery = (x⊤          ⊤
                                                                                          query , 0) .
In particular, we will focus on the two common ICL variants: prefixLM and causalLM, each with a
different type of attention.

3.1    P REFIX LM ICL

A prefixLM ICL treats the in-context examples Z as the prefix and uses full attention on the first n
positions, so that they can each freely attend to each other. The last query vector zquery can also
attend to any example in Z, but cannot attend to itself† . As a result, the updates of the prefixLM-ICL
under the same construction follow (6), with the outputs of the l-th layer being,
                                                      (l)                  (l)
                                                 δj = yj − ỹj = yj − w(l) xj ,
                                         (l)        (l)
                                    and δquery = −ỹquery = − w(l) xquery ,
     †
       This is because the query does not contain a meaningful label. Attending to itself would cause it to include
its last-dim input as a label, which would contaminate the resulting multi-layer prediction. This observation was
not considered in (Von Oswald et al., 2023).


                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            →0                  →


Figure 1: The inputs/outputs of a multi-layer in-context learner. We omitted xj and xquery since they
are unchanged.

                    (0)          (0)
where the initial ỹj         = ỹquery = 0.
                                                                               (l)
Intuitively, the dynamics of the prefixLM ICL is as follows: all ỹj starts as 0 at l = 0, and gradually
                                                                                              (l)
approach to the true label yj as l increases, so that the difference (also as the output) δj gradually
                                                  (l)
approaches to 0. At the same time, δquery starts at 0, and gradually approaches to −yquery , the
negation of the query label. Figure 1 provides an illustration of these dynamics.

3.2   C AUSAL LM ICL

A causalLM applies auto-regressive attention throughout the entire sequence. Therefore, plugging
the same K, Q, P, V into (2), the update rules of (6) and (7) become:
                                                                 j
                                        (l)    (l−1)         η X (l−1) ⊤
                                       δj = δj          −         δ   xi xj ,                            (8)
                                                             n i=1 i
                                                               j
                                         (l)   (l−1)   η       X         (l−1)
                                       ỹj = ỹj     +           (yi − ỹi     ) x⊤
                                                                                  i xj                   (9)
                                                             n i=1
‡      (l)              (l)
 with δj = yj − ỹj . Moreover, since different δj , ỹj are exposed to different ranges of inputs, there
is no uniform w as in (3) that is associated with all ỹj . Instead, if we define wj for each different
                 (0)
position j with wj = 0 and
                                                                 j
                                        (l)      (l−1)       ηX           (l−1)
                                    wj = wj              +         (yi − wi     xi ) x⊤
                                                                                      i                (10)
                                                             n i=1
then we have the following proposition:

Proposition 2 For a multi-layer causalLM-LSA satisfying (5) with w(0) = 0, if its input Z is
                                                 (l)        (l) ⊤        (l)       (l)       (l)
formatted as (4), then its l-th layer output is zj = (x⊤
                                                       j , δj ) , where δj = yj − wj xj and wj
follow (10).
The proof of Proposition 2 is provided in Appendix B. Similar to prefixLM-ICL, causalLM-ICL also
      (l)    (l)
has ỹj = wj xj , and
                                          (l)        (l)
                                         δquery = −ỹquery = − w(l)
                                                                n xquery .

                                                                                                         (l)
In summary, causalLM-ICL and prefixLM-ICL are associated with different update rules: wj
                                                                                                      (l−1)
follows (10) while w(l) follows (3). Specifically, in causalLM, it can be seen that the wi
  ‡
    There is another way of update which changes η/n to η/j for the j-th example. We provide more details in
Appendix D and show it performs worse than the main version in (8).


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


corresponding to the first positions are biased due to restricted access to only a few data points and
furthermore, that these biases are propagated to later positions by (10). In prefixLM on the other hand,
each position has access to all the data and a single w(l) can be used across the entire sequence as in
(3). Although Eq. (3) and Eq. (10) only hold for the structured LSA case, the profound difference
between causalLM and prefixLM stems from their architectural difference and therefore we believe
extends to general transformers, as indicated by our experimental results in Section 5.

4     C ONVERGENCE OF THE MULTI - LAYER IN - CONTEXT LEARNERS
In this section, we prove that both multi-layer prefixLM and causalLM converge to their respective
stationary points with increasing layers (and with linear rates). In addition, we show that the stationary
point of prefixLM corresponds to the optimal least-square solution of the linear regression problem,
while the ones corresponding to causalLM are equivalent to the iterative weights of online gradient
descent of linear regression, which are known to be sub-optimal for a limited number of examples.

4.1   C ONVERGENCE OF THE PREFIX LM ICL

The fact that a multi-layer prefixLM computation exactly follows the update rule of w(l) as in (3),
implies that the layer outputs of prefixLM have the same dynamics of multi-step gradient descent on
a linear regression problem. The convergence properties of such dynamics are well-known, and are
stated in the following proposition:

Proposition 3 If w(l) follows the iterative updates of (3), then there exists a stationary point w∗
with coefficients satisfying:
                                              y X⊤ = w∗ X X⊤ ,
where y = (y1 , . . . , yn ) and X = (x1 , . . . , xn ). Furthermore, the iterative weights w(l) converge to
w∗ with a linear rate of convergence:
                                                                    η
                                w(l) − w∗ = (w(l−1) − w∗ )(I − X X⊤ ).
                                                                    n
That is, Proposition 3 holds for the multi-layer prefixLM, so that the same exact w∗ is also the
stationary point of prefixLM, to which it converges in a linear rate. Furthermore this stationary point
is exactly the (optimal) least square solution of the linear regression problem.

4.2   C ONVERGENCE OF THE CAUSAL LM ICL

Following the update rule of (10), we can view a multi-layer causalLM as implicitly maintaining
different weight vectors wj for each position j. In what follows, we show that: (a) Each such position
j has its own stationary point w∗j , which appears to be different from the global optimal point w∗ of
linear regression; (b) even when the number of in-context samples n grows to infinity, convergence to
w∗ is not guaranteed.
Specifically, in Appendix B we provide a proof for the following proposition:
                    (l)  Pj     (l)
Proposition 4 If wj = i=1 ai,j x⊤   i follows the iterative updates of (10), then
                                        (l)      (l)       (l)
                                        ai,j = ai,i ≡ ai      ∀j ≥ i,
                                                  j
and there exist stationary points w∗j =                 ∗ ⊤
                                               P
                                                  i=1 ai xi (for j ∈ 1, . . . , n) with coefficients from
 ∗     ∗           ∗                     ∗
a = (a1 , . . . , an ) that satisfy y = a T, where
                                        ⊤
                                         x1 x1 x⊤                x⊤
                                                                        
                                                    1 x2 · · ·     1 xn
                                        0        x⊤2 x2 · · ·   x⊤2 xn 
                                                                        
                                  T= .                                   .
                                       
                                                     .      .       .
                                        ..          ..       ..    .. 
                                            0        0     · · · x⊤n xn

Furthermore, the coefficients a(l) converges to the stationary point a∗ with linear rate of convergence:
                                                                 η
                                 a(l) − a∗ = (a(l−1) − a∗ )(I − T).
                                                                 n

                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This proposition implies that the stationary points w∗j of causalLM-ICL are different from w∗ , the
least square solution of linear regression. However, a natural question is: if j increases, would w∗j
ultimately converge to the optimal solution?
To answer this question, the next proposition shows that the stationary points w∗j follow an online
gradient descent algorithm, whose loss and gradient at the j-th step is,
                                               1
                                    Lj (wj ) =   (wj xj+1 −yj+1 )2 ,
                                               2
                                ∇wj Lj (wj ) = (wj xj+1 −yj+1 ) x⊤
                                                                 j+1 .

Proposition 5 Assuming that w∗j is the stationary points obtained in Proposition 4, then
                                                     1
                                 w∗j+1 = w∗j −              ∇w∗j Lj (w∗j ).                       (11)
                                                 ∥ xj+1 ∥22

The proof of Proposition 5 is provided in Appendix B. Note that online gradient descent is known
to converge to an optimal solution only with a decaying step size j −ν for ν > 0 (Jentzen &
Von Wurstemberger, 2020). Since the step size of (11) does not decay, we conclude that causalLM
may not converge to w∗ even with increasing layers and increasing number of in-context examples.
More concretely, as for the case of in-context learning, where the number of in-context examples n is
limited, convergence to the optimal solution w∗ cannot be achieved by causalLM-ICL.

5      N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
Our experiments contain three parts.

    • We first use LSA-transformers on linear regression problems to directly verify our theorems. In
      Section 5.1, we show that despite that the in-context example (training) error of causalLM and
      prefixLM both decays in linear rates, the query (test) error of causalLM is significantly larger,
      which indicates its stationary solution is not optimal.
    • Secondly, we use ordinary softmax transformers on a few synthetic tasks including linear re-
      gression, nonlinear regression and multiclass classification. In Section 5.2, we show that our
      theoretical insights generalize to other tasks types (i.e., that ICL prefixLM still outperforms
      causalLM in all these cases).
    • Lastly, in Section 5.3, we conduct LLM based ICL experiments using T5 (Roberts et al., 2022).
      We also provide additional experimental results on PaLM2 (Google et al., 2023) as well as large
      multimodal models (PaLI-X, Chen et al. (2023)) in Appendix E.6 and E.7.

5.1     LSA- TRANSFORMERS ON LINEAR REGRESSION

In order to directly verify our theorems from Section 4, we first study in-context learning on linear
regression problem with the LSA transformer of (5). Each of the input sequence contains 40 in-
context examples and 200 queries, and each query attends to all the in-context examples but does not
attend to each other. See Appendix E for an illustration. The data input xi of the sequence is sampled
from U(−1, 1)16 . Each sequence is associated with a single weight vector w that is sampled from
                                                                                                 (l)
N (0, I), and the labels are computed as yi = w xi . Assuming the prediction of each layer is ỹi , we
                            (l)
evaluate the MSE ∥yi − ỹi ∥22 on both in-context and query examples across different layers l.
The results are plotted in Figure 2 left (for prefixLM) and middle (for causalLM). Our results are
averaged over 64 randomly generated sequences. As we can see, although both prefixLM and
causalLM has a linear rate of convergence (with respect to the number of layers) on the in-context
examples, the query errors of causalLM are stuck above the 10−1 level, while the query error of
prefixLM decays in the same linear rate as its training error.
Furthermore, in Figure 2 right, we plot the query errors of the stationary points (following Proposi-
tion 4, corresponding to the outputs of infinite layers) of causalLM-ICL with increasing number of
in-context examples up to 300. Although causalLM-ICL is able to eventually converge to optimal
solution when µx = 0, it takes more than 100 examples to reach below 10−2 . The convergence is


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Convergence of multi-layer prefixLM-ICL                                   Convergence of multi-layer causalLM-ICL                                  Stationary points of causalLM-ICL
                                                  In-context examples                                                                                               101
              100                                 Query examples                        100

             10 1                                                                      10 1                                                                        10 1


                                                                                                                                                 Query MSE error
             10 2                                                                      10 2
 MSE Error


                                                                           MSE Error
                                                                                                                                                                   10 3
             10 3                                                                      10 3
                                                                                                                                                                   10 5
                                                                                                                                                                           x=0
             10 4                                                                      10 4                                                                                x=1
                                                                                                   In-context examples                                             10 7    x=2
             10 5                                                                      10 5        Query examples                                                          x=3

                    0       10       20         30       40         50                        0        10       20         30     40        50                            50      100      150       200      250   300
                                    Number of layers                                                           Number of layers                                                  Number of training exemplars



Figure 2: Left/Middle: the MSE on in-context examples and query examples of multi-layer LSA-
based prefixLM/causalLM-ICLs with 40 in-context training examples. Right: the query MSE of
causalLM-ICL’s stationary points (per Proposition 4) using up to 300 in-context examples.

                                                                                                                 LR               N-LR           MC
                                                                        PrefixLM-SL                             8.6e-3            1.5e-4         24.1
                                                                        CausalLM-SL                             1.9e-1            2.7e-3         27.0
                                                                        PrefixLM-UL                             2.5e-3            9.0e-5         27.6
                                                                        CausalLM-UL                             1.6e-2            2.9e-3         32.1

Table 1: The test query errors of the unshared-layer (UL) and sharing-layer (SL) transformer-ICLs on
linear regression (LR), non-linear regression (NLR), and multiclass classification (MC) tasks. Both
regression tasks report mean squared errors; and the MC task reports the classification error.


even worse as we vary the input distribution x ∼ U(−1, 1)d + µx with increasing µx ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3},
which demonstrates that causalLM-ICL is not optimal for few-shot ICL.

5.2                 S TANDARD TRANSFORMERS ON SYNTHETIC TASKS

Previous experiments provided a proof of concept verification of the propositions from Section 4.
Next we verify if a standard softmax transformer-based prefixLM and causalLM ICL exhibit similar
differences on various types of synthetic tasks including linear regression, non-linear regression and
multiclass classification.
All three tasks used 16-dim inputs with x ∼ U(−1, 1)16 and w ∼ N (0, I). For non-linear regression,
we apply a sigmoid activation on the logit such that y = sigmoid(w x); and for multiclass classifica-
tion, we randomly generate three wc ∼ N (0, I), and assign labels based on y = argmaxc {wc x}.
We trained a few 24-layer transformers containing 128 hidden units and 2 heads. Besides of the
comparisons of prefixLM and causalLM, we also compare the transformers with or without sharing
layers (SL vs UL). In particular, the sharing-layer transformer can be considered a recurrent sys-
tem (Dehghani et al., 2018) where the dynamic is continual along the layers and a stationary point
may exist given infinite number of layers, which makes it closer to our constructed LSA.
The ICL training dataset contains 64,000 training sequences. Each sequence contains 40 in-context
examples and 20 queries, where queries are independent of each other similar to Section 5.1. The
transformers are trained with batch size 64 for 100 epochs. More details of the hyper-parameters of
the experiments are provided in Appendix E.
We evaluate the ICL performance using 64 holdout test sequences and report the test errors on
the query examples. The results are summarized in Table 1. We find that both prefixLM-SL and
prefixLM-UL significantly outperform their counterparts of causalLM in all cases. As a side note,
transformer-SL appears to outperform transformer-UL in the classification tasks, which indicates the
overfitting problem of the latter due to over-parameterization. In addition, we also add probes at the
output of each SL-transformer layer to visualize the test errors of intermediate layers in Figure 3.
Comparing Figure 3 and Figure 2 (left/middle) reveals some similarities. Although the test query
errors of causalLM decay in roughly the same rate as the ones of prefixLM in earlier layers, the
decays become much slower in later layers possibly due to the nature of its non-optimal stationary
points. These results suggest that the title argument of the paper also holds beyond LSA-based
transformers and linear regression.


                                                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Linear Regression                                                 Non-linear Regression                                                Multiclass Classification
                                                   PrefixLM                     10 1                                     PrefixLM                     0.34                                   PrefixLM
                                                   CausalLM                                                              CausalLM                                                            CausalLM
                                                                                                                                                      0.32
             100
                                                                                10 2
                                                                                                                                                      0.30
Test error


                                                                   Test error


                                                                                                                                         Test error
             10 1                                                                                                                                     0.28
                                                                                10 3
                                                                                                                                                      0.26

             10 2                                                                                                                                     0.24
                    0     5      10           15   20         25                       0    5        10           15     20         25                       0   5         10           15   20         25
                                      Layer                                                               Layer                                                                 Layer


Figure 3: The test query errors of the 24-layer SL-transformers based prefixLM/causalLM-ICLs on
linear regression (left), non-linear regression (middle), and multiclass classification (right).

                                                                                           MMLU                                                BBH
                                                                   Base                    Large                  XL          Base             Large                 XL
                                              PrefixLM             28.8                     32.0                  39.5        27.4             32.2                  35.8
                                              CausalLM             28.0                     26.9                  30.5        24.8             29.8                  32.0

Table 2: The averaged test query accuracies on 5-shot MMLU (57 tasks) and 3-shot BBH (23 tasks)
with FLAN-finetuned T5 DecoderOnly prefixLM/causalLM checkpoints.


5.3                     ICL ON LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS

In order to compare the ICL performance of causalLM and prefixLM in a large language model
setting, we conduct experiments using the publicly available T5 family of models (Roberts et al.,
2022). Note that the existing public T5X § checkpoints are all based on EncDec models, which are
similar to prefixLM. Thus, it would be unfair and unnatural to compare with causalLM by simply
replacing the bidirectional attention of the encoder to the causal attention during the finetuning
stage. To make a more reasonable comparison, we reran the pretraining stages of T5 on the C4
corpus (Raffel et al., 2020a) from a random initialization point using a span corruption objective,
but in the DecoderOnly setting. Moreover, for each size (from Base, Large and XL) of the models,
we pretrained two checkpoints, one with prefixLM and the other with causalLM, each for 1M
steps using the same T5 pretraining recipe. After pretraining, we use the FLAN recipe (Chung
et al., 2022) to finetune each checkpoint (40k steps for Base, 20k steps for Large and XL) with its
pretrained attention mask and evaluate the ICL capability of the finetuned models on two benchmarks:
MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and BBH (Suzgun et al., 2022).
Table 2 shows that for all three sizes of T5X DecoderOnly models, the MMLU and BBH accuracies
of prefixLM surpasses that of causalLM consistently and such gap widens as the size of the model
becomes larger. This result empirically verifies that our conjecture generalizes to the practical case.
We supply additional empirical evidence on state-of-the-art models in Appendix E.6 and E.7.

6                 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we analyzed the convergence properties of two types of widely-used transformer-based
language models (causalLM and prefixLM), during in-context learning. Using a simplified LSA
attention in a linear regression setting, we proved that both LM types converge to their stationary
points in linear rates, but that their stationary points have significantly different properties. In
particular, the stationary points of prefixLM coincides with the optimal least square solution; while
the ones of causalLM is equivalent to the weights of an online learning system, that is not guaranteed
to converge to the optimal solution. Our experiments verified the above theoretical results, and also
empirically extend the findings to general transformer on non-linear regression as well as classification
tasks. Finally, we compare causalLM and prefixLM on a few large language models and find that
prefixLM also consistently wins over causalLM in practical few-shot tasks.



              §
                  https://github.com/google-research/t5x


                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We want to specially thank Xinhua Zhang for helpful discussions and references about online learning.
We also thank Yi Tay for comments regarding the PaLM2 checkpoints.

R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Xi Chen, Josip Djolonga, Piotr Padlewski, Basil Mustafa, Soravit Changpinyo, Jialin Wu, Car-
  los Riquelme Ruiz, Sebastian Goodman, Xiao Wang, Yi Tay, Siamak Shakeri, Mostafa Dehghani,
  Daniel M. Salz, Mario Lucic, Michael Tschannen, Arsha Nagrani, Hexiang Hu, Mandar Joshi,
  Bo Pang, Ceslee Montgomery, Paulina Pietrzyk, Marvin Ritter, A. J. Piergiovanni, Matthias Min-
  derer, Filip Pavetic, Austin Waters, Gang Li, Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin, Lucas Beyer, Julien
  Amelot, Kenton Lee, Andreas Steiner, Yang Li, Daniel Keysers, Anurag Arnab, Yuanzhong Xu,
  Keran Rong, Alexander Kolesnikov, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai,
  Neil Houlsby, and Radu Soricut. Pali-x: On scaling up a multilingual vision and language model.
  ArXiv, abs/2305.18565, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  258967670.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Łukasz Kaiser. Universal
 transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03819, 2018.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Google, Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre
  Passos, Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
  Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
  Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Arnulf Jentzen and Philippe Von Wurstemberger. Lower error bounds for the stochastic gradient
  descent optimization algorithm: Sharp convergence rates for slowly and fast decaying learning
  rates. Journal of Complexity, 57:101438, 2020.
Andrej Karpathy and Li Fei-Fei. Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descriptions.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3128–3137,
  2015.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020a. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020b.
Adam Roberts, Hyung Won Chung, Anselm Levskaya, Gaurav Mishra, James Bradbury, Daniel
 Andor, Sharan Narang, Brian Lester, Colin Gaffney, Afroz Mohiuddin, Curtis Hawthorne, Aitor
  Lewkowycz, Alex Salcianu, Marc van Zee, Jacob Austin, Sebastian Goodman, Livio Baldini
  Soares, Haitang Hu, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jasmijn Bastings, Jannis
  Bulian, Xavier Garcia, Jianmo Ni, Andrew Chen, Kathleen Kenealy, Jonathan H. Clark, Stephan
  Lee, Dan Garrette, James Lee-Thorp, Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Marvin Ritter, Maarten Bosma,
 Alexandre Passos, Jeremy Maitin-Shepard, Noah Fiedel, Mark Omernick, Brennan Saeta, Ryan
  Sepassi, Alexander Spiridonov, Joshua Newlan, and Andrea Gesmundo. Scaling up models and
  data with t5x and seqio. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17189, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2203.17189.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  Melbourne, Australia, July 2018.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks
 and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q Tran, Xavier Garcia, Dara Bahri, Tal Schuster, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Neil Houlsby, and Donald Metzler. Unifying language learning paradigms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.05131, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
  Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023.


                                                12
