Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Duolando: F OLLOWER GPT WITH O FF -P OLICY R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING FOR DANCE ACCOMPANIMENT

 Li Siyao1       Tianpei Gu2∗       Zhengyu Lin3      Zhitao Yang3     Ziwei Liu1
 Henghui Ding1      Lei Yang3,4 B      Chen Change Loy1 B
 1
   S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Lexica 3 SenseTime 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
 https://lisiyao21.github.io/projects/Duolando


Figure 1: Example of Duolando’s results. The female avatar (red arrow) is driven by the proposed method to
accompany real human’s (white) dancing.

                                              A BSTRACT
          We introduce a novel task within the field of 3D dance generation, termed dance
          accompaniment, which necessitates the generation of responsive movements from
          a dance partner, the "follower", synchronized with the lead dancer’s movements
          and the underlying musical rhythm. Unlike existing solo or group dance generation
          tasks, a duet dance scenario entails a heightened degree of interaction between the
          two participants, requiring delicate coordination in both pose and position. To sup-
          port this task, we first build a large-scale and diverse duet interactive dance dataset,
          DD100, by recording about 117 minutes of professional dancers’ performances.
          To address the challenges inherent in this task, we propose a GPT-based model,
          Duolando, which autoregressively predicts the subsequent tokenized motion condi-
          tioned on the coordinated information of the music, the leader’s and the follower’s
          movements. To further enhance the GPT’s capabilities of generating stable results
          on unseen conditions (music and leader motions), we devise an off-policy rein-
          forcement learning strategy that allows the model to explore viable trajectories
          from out-of-distribution samplings, guided by human-defined rewards. Based on
          the collected dataset and proposed method, we establish a benchmark with several
          carefully designed metrics.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Duet dancing is an interactive art involving coordination between two individuals’ body movements
under background music. In the context of ballroom dancing, the duet dancers typically comprise a
leader and a follower: the leader is responsible for initiating and guiding the movements, while the
follower responds to the leader’s cues and follows his/her lead. Developing a computational model
that enables virtual agents to accompany the dance with the user-controlled leader has great potential
in a wide range of virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) applications.
Although the dance accompaniment task has broad academic and practical value, there is no currently
available duet dance data in public. To facilitate this task, we build a large-scale dataset named
DD100 (DuetDance100). Specifically, we record data of 10 different genres of ballroom dancing,
including 5 kinds of Latin (Cha Cha, Rumba, Samba, Paso Doble and Jive), 4 Moderns (Foxtrot,
Tango, Quickstep and Waltz) and Pas de Deux of ballet performed by 5 pairs of professional dancers
under unique background music. For each genre, the performers play 10 distinct clips, within a
duration of 36 to 107 seconds, resulting in a total duration of around 117 minutes. As duet dances
usually involve significant parts of occlusion and rotations, we collect the 3D motion data using
professional MoCap equipment to ensure data quality. The final data consists of SMPL-X (Pavlakos
et al., 2019) sequences, with body poses reconstructed from the point clouds by and hand gestures
    B
        Corresponding authors. * Work mostly completed at UCLA.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Rumba
           Cha cha Samba
  Latin
           Paso Doble Jive
  Ballet
           Waltz
           Foxtrot Quickstep Tango
  Modern


Figure 2: Samples of DD100 dataset. The leader and the follower are colored in green and red, respectively.
DD100 contains 10 dance genres, featuring a diverse range of poses and interactions, with intricate hand gestures.


deduced from meta glove records. DD100 provides a rich context of interactive coordination between
two dancers, including either physical connections (such as steps with hand holding) or strong
semantic relations (such as leader-centered surrounding), which serves as a fundamental basis for the
study of related to duet interactive dance.
Despite having a high-quality duet dance dataset, the dance accompaniment task cannot be solved by
applying existing solo dance methods (Ren et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2021b; Siyao et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022; Tseng et al., 2023). As an interactive art, a duet
dance not only requires the follower to maintain the aesthetics and the sense of rhythm of his/her
own movements, but also demands a high level of interactive coordination with the leader. Such
requirements make existing works on solo dancing inadequate for this task as they lack the scope of
the partner. Meanwhile, generating a single agent’s motion in response to a pre-conditioned leader’s
movement presents more significant challenges than simultaneously synthesizing multiple agents (Le
et al., 2023), since the latter can retrieve well-coordinated motion patterns from the training data,
which simplifies the task.
In this paper, we propose a two-stage framework to generate follower motion in harmony with
both the background music and the leader’s movements. In the first stage, we train VQ-VAEs
to embed and quantize the dance movements of different body parts and the relative translation
between the two dancers. Then, in the second stage, we devise an interaction-coordinated GPT to
autoregressively predict the next token, conditioned on the amalgamated information of the music
signal, the leader’s motion, and the previous follower sequence. Stability issues arise when confronted
with unheard music or unseen leader motion patterns. A common observation is that the lower body
movement appears incompatible with the global displacement, resulting in skating artifacts. To
address this challenge, we introduce an off-policy reinforcement learning strategy for GPT, enabling
our method to handle out-of-distribution instances robustly based on human-defined rewards. The
above modules contribute to Duolando, which can generate reasonable movement responding to the
leader’s movement and serves as a strong baseline of dance accompaniment.
The contributions of our paper are three-fold: (1) We introduce a novel multi-modal task, dance
accompaniment, and provide a large-scale and diverse dataset for both training and testing purposes.
Leveraging this data, we establish a new benchmark with metrics reflecting both the quality of isolated
dancers and the interaction between partners. (2) We construct a GPT-based network capable of
generating motion sequences, taking into account the coordination between partners, which serves
as a robust baseline for this task. (3) We introduce an off-policy reinforcement learning strategy for
GPT to address out-of-distribution challenges, and demonstrate its successful application in our task.

                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison with human-human interaction and music-to-dance datasets. HHI denotes Human-
Human Interaction, where S represents Strong
                                          ==
                                                 interaction with physical contact while W means Weak interaction
like repeated motion in group dance. ˇ “ ˇ “ indicates whether having accompanied music modality.        denotes
whether having hand (finger-level) motions. # Subj. denotes the number of performers. T denotes average
duration and T is the total duration of all sequences. MV stands for capturing with multi-view cameras. Genres
for human-human interaction dataset means the type of interactions, while it indicates the music and dance styles
for music-to-dance datasts. n/a means that the exact information is missed in the original paper. *Interactions
without physical contact appear in partial data (Showcase, Cypher and Battle) in AIST++.
                                                  ==
    Dataset                                HHI   ˇ“ˇ“       # Genres   # Subj.    T        T      Acquisition     GT
    CMU-MoCap (interactive) (cmu)          W     ✗      ✗     10          8      5.2s    285.5s     MoCap       3D Joints
    UMPM (Van der Aa et al., 2011)         W     ✗      ✗      7         30      222s     2.2h      MoCap       3D Joints
    NTU-RGB+D 120 (Liu et al., 2020)       S     ✗      ✗     26        106      2.7s    0.47h      Kinect      3D Joints
    You2Me (Ng et al., 2020)               S     ✗      ✗      4         10      120s     1.4h    MV & Kinect   3D Joints
    InterHuman (Liang et al., 2023)        S     ✗      ✗     11        n/a      3.9s    6.56h       MV          SMPL
    DanceNet (Zhuang et al., 2022)         ✗     ✓      ✓      2          2       n/a    0.96h      MoCap       3D Joints
    Dancing2Music (Lee et al., 2019)       ✗     ✓      ✗      3        n/a        6s     71h       Pseudo      2D Joints
    DanceRevolusion (Huang et al., 2021)   ✗     ✓      ✗      3        n/a       60s     12h       Pseudo      2D Joints
    PMSD (Valle-Pérez et al., 2021)        ✗     ✓      ✓      3          1       n/a     3.1h      MoCap       3D Joints
    SMVR (Valle-Pérez et al., 2021)        ✗     ✓      ✗      2         8        n/a      9h     VR Tracker    3D Joints
    AIST++ (Li et al., 2021b)              W*    ✓      ✗     10         30       13s     5.2h      Pseudo       SMPL
    AIOZ-GDANCE (Le et al., 2023)          W     ✓      ✗     n/a      4000+     37.5s   16.7h      Pseudo       SMPL
    DD100                                   S    ✓      ✓     10         10      70.2s   1.95h      MoCap       SMPL-X



2      DD100: A L ARGE - SCALE D UET DANCE M OCAP DATASET
Data Statistics. To facilitate research in the dance accompaniment task, a large-scale dataset of
duet dances, named DD100, was collected. DD100 comprises ten distinct genres of duet dances, all
featuring strong interaction between the dancers. The genres include five Latin dances (Cha Cha,
Rumba, Samba, Paso Doble, and Jive), four Modern (a.k.a. Standard) dances (Foxtrot, Tango, Quick-
step, and Waltz), and Pas-de-Deux ballet. The dances were performed by five pairs of professional
dancers, while each dance sequence was accompanied by unique background music. Each dance
genre was recorded by ten distinct clips, with clip durations ranging from 49 to 96 seconds, resulting
in a total duration of approximately 1.9 hours (or approximately 115.4 minutes). In the experiment,
we randomly split the dataset into the 80% training set and 20% test set, with the training set of
168,176 frames (5605.9 seconds) and the test set of 42,496 frames (1416.5 seconds). During the
recording, nearly 80% sequences are performed twice. If counting these duplicated takes, the total
duration will be 3.24 hours. Considering the diversity in moving direction and difference in motion
details at each take, we use all these data for training and testing in practice.
Data Collection. To obtain high-quality data, we used 20 optical MoCap cameras to capture body
data for two dancers at 120 FPS. The raw Mocap data consist of the 3D positions of 53 marker points
on body surface in each frame. To process these data into SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019) format, we
first select a clip for each dancer to fit his/her body shape parameters (beta), following the pipeline
of SOMA (Ghorbani & Black, 2021). Then, we use the pre-processed body shape to assist pose
parameters (theta) regression in each frame after filtering out those invisible points with confidence
scores lower than a threshold to keep the robustness of the regression results. During this procedure,
we do not fit the hand movement. Since the hands are prone to self-occlusion or inter-occlusions
between two individuals, we employed inertial motion capture gloves (meta gloves) to capture these
data. The raw data of meta gloves are stored in BioVision Motion Capture (BVH) format, describing
hierarchical rotations of finger joints in Euler angles. We transfer those Euler angles to axis angles
aligning the MANO (Romero et al., 2022) model initialized with “flat” gestures for both hands. As
the “flat” pose of MANO differs from the initial one in BVH format with fingers apart in specific
angles, we subtract this difference while mapping from BVH to MANO. Finally, we combine the
body and hand parameters with the wrist rotations from MoCap regression. Each dance clip data in
DD100 consists of the SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019) sequences for both the leader and follower,
along with the corresponding music within an average rhythmical beat of 118 beat per minute (BPM)
from 72 BPM to 163 BPM.
Comparison to Related Datasets. As shown in Table 1, DD100 stands out from existing datasets by
simultaneously incorporating the following distinct features: (1) Complex and Strong Interaction.
Existing solo dance datasets (Zhuang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021; Valle-
Pérez et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022) overlook the element of interaction, while existing group dance


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                        1D CNNs
                                                         Codebook Z
                                                                   …                      DP
                                    1D CNN                    01   K-1
                                                                                                  3D joint positions p̂
                                      E                                                                T ⇥J ⇥3
                                                              quantize
          3D joint positions p               feature f                         z
                                                                                          DM
               T ⇥J ⇥3                        T0 ⇥ C                         T0 ⇥ C
                                                 (a) Motion VQ-VAE                                Joint rotation matrix M̂
                                                                                                        T ⇥J ⇥9
                                                          Codebook Z tr
                                                                   …
                                    1D CNN                    01       K-1              1D CNN

                                      ET                                                  DT
                                                              quantize
          Relative translation tr            feature f   tr
                                                                               z   tr                                   ˆ
                                                                                                  Relative translation tr
                  T ⇥3                        T0 ⇥ C                         T0 ⇥ C                       T ⇥3
                                           (b) Relative Translation VQ-VAE
Figure 3: (a) Structures of Motion VQ-VAEs and (b) Relative Translation VQ-VAE. The quantization is to
substitute a encoded feature to the most similar one zk in the codebook Z such that zk = arg minz∈Z ∥fi − z∥.

datasets (Le et al., 2023) primarily emphasize group movement coordination with similar motions
replicated to different agents with minimal physical contact. Furthermore, current human-human
interaction datasets (cmu; Van der Aa et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2020) typically feature simpler actions
and weaker interactions, such as handshakes and hugs. In contrary, as depicted in Figure 2, duet
dances in DD100 involve more complex motions and intense interactions between various body parts.
(2) Multimodal. Unlike datasets (Ng et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2023) focusing on human-human
interaction, DD100 incorporates a musical modality, which is a crucial factor to consider during the
generation process to ensure synchrony with the music. (3) Extended Duration. Many existing
human motion datasets feature short durations. For example, dances in AIST++ (Li et al., 2021b)
typically last around 10 seconds. In contrast, each dance clip in DD100 extends over one minute.
This not only supplies a higher-level choreography reference for model training but also poses the
proposed dance accompaniment problem to be more realistic and challenging.

3     O UR A PPROACH
To address the dance accompaniment task, we propose a baseline method, Duolando, a GPT-based
network enhanced with off-policy reinforcement learning to improve its generalization ability.

3.1   Q UANTIZING M OTION AND R ELATIVE T RANSLATION

Previous studies (Siyao et al., 2022; Ng et al., 2022) has viewed dance as a sequential combination of
reusable dance positions, capturing the essence of movement in a rhythmic context. To efficiently
distill and quantize these basic dance components into a deep feature space in an unsupervised manner,
we draw on VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). This provides a tokenized and interpretable
representation of the dance motion sequence. Our approach incorporates a 1D CNN-based VQ-VAE
to preserve the spatio-temporal continuity of dance movement. Inspired by Siyao et al. (2022), we
use four VQ-VAEs to encode and quantize the motion of four body parts (upper half body, lower half
body, left hand, and right hand) into code sequences z up , z down , z lhand , and z rhand . Additionally,
we employ another VQ-VAE VQtr to model the relative translation tr between the follower and
leader. This allows the GPT model to explicitly output the relative positions of the follower by
subtracting the root point of the follower from that of the leader. Please see Figure 3 for details.
In the case of motion VQ-VAEs, a T × J × 3 sequence of 3D joint positions is fed into a 1D-
CNN encoder E, where T is the frame length and J is the joint count. This is then translated to
                                                     ′
a temporally downsampled deep feature f ∈ RT ×C , where T ′ = T /d and C is the number of
channels. Subsequently, deep feature f is quantized into code sequence z by replacing each element
fi with an element zk in codebook Z that shows the smallest difference ∥fi − zk ∥. For training the
motion VQ-VAE, we use two decoders, DP and DM , which translate the quantized code back to
3D joint positions p̂ and rotation matrix M̂ , respectively, allowing us to generate rotations that can
directly animate avatars without the need for inverse kinematics. The training loss of the motion


                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                             One-hot Cross-Entropy Loss

             0 T        10T                                                                1…T       1…T       1…T       1…T       1…T


                   …
                                                               Interaction coordinated GPT

           Coordinated Att.   0…T-1       0…T-1        0…T-1       0…T-1       0…T-1       0…T-1     0…T-1     0…T-1     0…T-1     0…T-1

            0      L    T+L     f
                                m          ze up       ze down ze lhand ze rhand            z up z down z lhand z rhand z tr
                                                                                                 6         7         8         9           10

                               LAT         LAT          LAT        LAT          LAT
                                                                                                 follower sequence             translation
                              0,…,T+L-1 0,…,T+L-1 0,…,T+L-1 0,…,T+L-1 0,…,T+L-1

           Look-Ahead Att.       m         z up        z down z lhand z rhand
                                      1           2            3           4           5

                               music                  leader sequence
Figure 4: Structure of follower GPT. The GPT takes ten inputs and autoregressively predicts the subsequent
tokens of follower’s motion and the relative translation. Preconditions (music signals and leader’s motion) are
integrated with Look-Ahead Transformers (LAT).

VQ-VAE is computed as follows:

                   LV Q = Lrec (p̂, p) + Lrec (M̂ , M ) + ∥sg(f ) − z∥ + λ∥f − sg(z)∥,                                                          (1)
where Lrec is the sum of l1 -reconstruction losses for the values, the first (velocity) and the second
derivatives (acceleration) of the reconstructed motion sequence and the ground truth. p and M
denote the ground-truth 3D joint positions and rotation matrix, respectively, while “sg” denotes “stop
gradient” (Chen & He, 2021) and λ is the trade-off “commitment” parameter (Dhariwal et al., 2020;
Siyao et al., 2022). The training loss of the relative translation VQ-VAE follows the same formula
                                                                   ˆ
but only includes one reconstruction loss, specifically Lrec (tr, tr).

3.2   I NTERACTION C OORDINATE GPT

Formulation. With the pretrained VQ-VAE, the 3D dancing movement can be transferred into a
sequence of quantized code numbers. The goal of using GPT is to generate the follower’s dance
sequence in the quantized code domain with the maximum likelihood:
   (z up♡ , z down♡ , z lhand♡ , z rhand♡ , z tr ) = arg max Pr (z|m, z up♠ , z down♠ , z lhand♠ , z rhand♠ ).                                  (2)
                                                                   z

We use shared VQ-VAEs to generate the code sequences for the dancers. The leader’s movement
is represented in green (z ♠ ) with notion ♠ while the follower’s movement is represented in pink
(z ♡ ) with notion ♡ . The generated code sequences are then decoded by DM (z ♡ ) to reconstruct
the 3D joint rotation and drive the follower’s motion with global root position q ♡ computed by
q ♡ = DT (z tr ) + q ♠ , where q ♠ is the root position of the leading dancer. For more details on the
follower GPT structure, refer to Figure 4.
Looking-Ahead Conditions. In a duet dance, the follower needs not only to respond to the leader’s
current movements but also to anticipate future changes in the dance dynamics. To fulfill this
requirement, we implement a look-ahead mechanism that allows the GPT to be aware of future
conditional signals. Specifically, when sampling the conditional inputs (music m and leader motion
z ♠ ), we extract an additional L tokens beyond the GPT’s block size T , leading to conditioning
sequences of length (T + L). These extended conditioning sequences are then processed through
Look-Ahead Transformers (LAT) to derive deep embeddings, denoted as m     f = LAT(m0,...,T +L−1 )
and ze♠ = LAT(z ♠ 0,...,T +L−1 ). Within the LATs, we use look-ahead attention layers to propagate
information from L future tokens to the current one, which is achieved through a banded mask of
attention with a window size of L. By incorporating future rhythms and leader movements, the GPT
predicts more synchronized and stable follower dance positions.
Interaction Coordination. After the look-ahead expansion is completed, we truncate the first T
              f and ze♠ , and use them together with the follower motion ze♡ and relative translation
embeddings of m
 tr
z indexed from 0 to T −1 as input for our model. The GPT then incrementally generates predictions


                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               encode                                        z0                                    one-hot labels
                                                                                                                     [at = zt+1 ]
                  …                                  z =
                                                   {z}
                                 E             {[z0 , ..., zT ]}                       GPT ✓                           LST
                                                                                                     at
            DDM100                                                          zT                 t                ⇡✓ (·|st )
                                              In-distribution                      1
           Training set                                                                            T ⇥ K prob.
                                                 data D            T ⇥ 1 input
                                                          (a) Supervised Training
                                                                                                                      rewards
                               generate                                      ẑ0                                     [r1 , ..., rT ]
           unheard music                           {ẑ
                                                    {ẑ}} ==
                                GPT            {[ẑ0 , ..., ẑT ]}                     GPT ✓                             Lo↵
                 …                                                                                        ât             RL

                                                                            ẑT                t                ⇡✓ (·|ŝt )
           unseen leader                                                           1
                                                OOD data D̂
              motion                                                               T ⇥ K prob.
                                               (b) Off-policy Reinforcement Learning

Figure 5: GPT’s supervised training (a) vs off-policy RL stage (b). For ST, supervising labels are sequences
{z} quantized from the in-domain data in training set. In RL stage, network weight is optimized based on
human-defined rewards (scores) on GPT’s generated samples {ẑ} on OOD conditions.

for subsequent tokens, which correspond to indices ranging from 1 to T . Formally,
                              z up♡         down♡       lhand♡      rhand♡     tr
                                1,...,T , z 1,...,T , z 1,...,T , z 1,...,T , z1,...,T

                                e 0,...,T −1 , zeup♠
                          = GPT(m                             edown♠
                                                 0,...,T −1 , z              elhand♠
                                                                0,...,T −1 , z              erhand♠
                                                                               0,...,T −1 , z 0,...,T −1 ,                             (3)
                                          up♡            down♡          lhand♡         rhand♡        tr
                                        z 0,...,T −1 , z 0,...,T −1 , z 0,...,T −1 , z 0,...,T −1 , z0,...,T −1 ).

To effectively integrate the information of the 10 input items in Equation 3, we use a 10-by-10
block-wise lower-triangular matrix as the mask of interaction-coordinated attention. Since the lower
triangular matrix masks off the future information, this preserves the causal order of inference,
ensuring that past tokens do not have access to future ones, and maintain the integrity and coherence
of these items during the prediction process.

3.3   O FF -P OLICY GPT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Although GPT is powerful, it is still prone to generate unsatisfactory results when confronted with
out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. In our task, specifically, when the leader presents unseen motion
patterns, the follower may displace to response without proper foot steps thus yielding skating artifacts.
To better adapt GPT models to this challenge, we employ an off-policy reinforcement learning (RL) to
finetune the network. Unlike the supervised training stage, there is no ground truth labels to regress in
RL stage. As shown in Figure 5, for RL, the inputs of GPT model are code sequences {ẑ} generated
by the GPT itself on OOD conditions, either using the current network weight or the past ones. The
network weight is then optimized according to a loss based on human-defined rewards.
From an RL standpoint, the act of predicting the next token at step t is construed as an action at ,
which involves selecting an appropriate token zt+1 from the dictionary. Concurrently, the GPT model
with weight θ is considered a policy network πθ that predicts a probability distribution πθ (·|st ) for
each candidate k ∈ Z at step t, with the state st perceived as the preceding sequence {z0 , z1 , ..., zt }.
At present, a majority of the publicly documented RL implementations (Ouyang et al., 2022; Siyao
et al., 2022) for GPT employ on-policy actor-critic (AC) strategy, where the update of the policy
network hinges on the sequences generated by the current GPT weight. Basically, AC uses a loss
function as follows:
                                                            T
                                                            X −1
                                          Lon
                                           AC (θ) =                  − log πθ (âθt |ŝθt ) · A,                                       (4)
                                                             t=0

where {âθt } denotes the trajectory sampled by the immediate GPT weight θ. The term A represents
the “advantage”, which reveals the increment after taking action aθt (see Appendix C.1). A positive
advantage increases the probability π(âθt |ŝθt ) of the currently sampled action âθt , whereas a negative
advantage reduces it. This indiscriminate mechanism of increasing or decreasing hinders the ability
of RL to reuse past data. For example, when the advantage of a previous sampling (ŝθt old , âθt old ) is
negative, the on-policy loss LonAC will persist in pushing associated values to decrease, regardless of
the current probability already being very small. Such misalignment is counter-logical and potentially
harmful to network training due to the misleading optimization target.


                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To address this issue, we extend the RL on GPT off policy by establishing an explicit optimization
target for the probability πθ (ât |ŝt ). Drawing from ideas in energy-based policy modeling (Haarnoja
et al., 2017; 2018), an equivalence can be established between the policy probability and the expected
reward income, implemented by a monotonic mapping σ : R → [0, 1]. This relationship can be
formulated as πθ (a|s) = σ(Q(s, a)), where the Q value represents the expected total future income
after executing action a at state s. In light of this equivalence, if an action a results in greater future
income Q(s, a), it should hold a larger probability σ(Q(s, a)) of being selected, which leads to an
explicit optimization reference to πθ (a|s). With this concept as our foundation, we construct a novel
learning strategy using a loss function defined as
                                 T
                                 X −1
                     Loff

                      RL (θ) =          − log 1 − abs πθ (ât |ŝt ) − σ (Q (ŝt , ât )) .             (5)
                                 t=0


The proposed learning strategy is off-policy since Loff RL can be reused on past data to guide the GPT
to learn a specific probability of ât . In practice, we set σ = sigmoid(α ∗ Q + β) and approximate
Q by two-step accumulation of rewards on sampled trajectory as Q̂ ≈ r(ŝt , ât ) + γr(ŝt+1 , ât+1 ).
Detailed algorithms pipeline is shown in the supplementary file.
Step-wise Rewards in Dance Accompaniment. In this implementation, we specifically address
the skating artifacts caused by the inconsistency between predicted translation and the lower body
movement. To this end, we design a step-wise reward for each predicted token. Specifically, we
train an additional velocity decoding branch, namely DV , for lower-body motion VQ-VAE in an
unsupervised manner, as per implementation by Siyao et al. (2022), to decode the predicted lower
body sequence z down♡ to velocity V by V = DV (z down♡ ). We then use V as a reference to judge
whether the follower’s global position q ♡ , calculated from translation, synchronizes with the lower
                                                         Pd−1
body movement by computing a difference δ as δ = u=0 ∥q̇ ♡ t·d+u − Vt·d+u ∥/d, where q̇ ♡ is the
first derivative approximated by subtraction between adjacent items. The reward rtdown for lower
body at step t is then defined as

                                                       1, if δ < threshold,
                                        rtdown =                                                        (6)
                                                        −η · δ, otherwise,

where η is a parameter to control the punishment magnitude. η is set to 100 and the threshold is 0.03
in our experiment. Rewards for other components (up, lhand, rhand and tr) are consistent to be 1.

4    E XPERIMENTS
Detailed descriptions and implementations of the VQ-VAE and GPT are in Appendix B.
Evaluation Metrics. We apply a series of quantitative metrics to evaluate the generated follower’s
movement in three distinct aspects: (1) the inherent quality of the follower’s motion, independent of
its interaction with the leader, (2) the follower’s interaction with the leader, and (3) the alignment of
the dance with the background music. For (1), we adopt metrics used in the solo dance benchmark
AIST++ (Li et al., 2021b). Specifically, we compute the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) between the
generated follower’s motion and the real dance in the whole DD100 dataset on kinematic (denoted as
“k”) (Onuma et al., 2008) and graphical (denoted as “g”) (Müller et al., 2005) features, and compute
the standard deviation between features of the generated follower sequences as the diversities Divk
and Divg that indicate the difference among those sequences. As to (2), the interactive quality, we first
extract a cross-distance (cd) feature from the duet dance sequences. Specifically, for each frame, we
calculate the pairwise distances between ten joints’ positions, including the pelvis, both knees, feet,
shoulders, the head, and two twists, of the leader and those of the follower to obtain a 100-dimension
(10 × 10) features. Then, we use these distances as an interactive feature and compute the FIDcd and
Divcd . Meanwhile, we compute contact frequency (CF) value to explicitly explore the strength of
interaction. CF is defined as the ratio of the number of frames in which two dancers are in physical
contact, where physical contact is defined as two SMPL-X models having a minimum absolute
mesh distance below a 2-cm threshold. Finally, we define Beat Echo Degree (BED) to evaluate the
consistency of dynamic rhythms of two dancers:
                                                   mintf ∈B f ∥tl − tf ∥2

                                  1 X
                                            exp  −                          ,                           (7)
                                 |B l | l l                2σ 2
                                        t ∈B



                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Quantitative benchmark for dance accompaniment. The first place and runner-up are highlighted
in bold and underlined, respectively. S denotes a solo dance generation model that does not take the leader into
condition, while D denotes that one does. *Since solo dance has no interaction, the cross-distance between two
agents are completely irregular, making the diversity particularly high.

                                                  Solo Metrics                                  Interactive Metrics            Rhythmic
 Method                             FIDk (↓)   FIDg (↓)   Divk (↑)       Divg (↑)   FIDcd (↓)   Divcd (↑)    CF(%)    BED(↑)   BAS(↑)
 Ground Truth                          6.56      6.37      11.31          7.61          3.41      12.35      74.25    0.5308    0.1839

  S Bailando (Siyao et al., 2022)    78.52      36.19      11.15          7.92      6643.31       52.50*      7.13    0.1831    0.1930
  S EDGE (Tseng et al., 2023)        69.14      44.58       8.62          6.35      5894.45       60.62*      6.82    0.1822    0.1875
  S Duolando w/o. RL tr IC           12.53      24.17      10.51          9.42      4803.20       42.72*      7.04    0.1826    0.1852
  D Duolando w/o. RL tr              62.29      27.95      13.16          8.53      7970.19       54.53*      7.76    0.2194    0.2002
  D Duolando w/o. RL                106.72      34.10      13.88          7.03        21.68        9.33      57.43    0.2795    0.2193
  D Duolando                         25.30      33.52      10.92          7.97         9.97       14.02      52.36    0.2858    0.2046


where B l = {tl } and B f = {tf } represent the timing of beats in the leader and follower movements,
respectively, while the motion beat time is calculated by finding the local minimum time of the
motion velocity; σ is a normalization parameter (σ = 3 in our experiments). The BED takes a
similar formulation as the Beat-Align Score (BAS) (Siyao et al., 2022), where the reference base is
substituted with leader’s dynamic beats instead of the music’s rhythmic beats. For (3), we adopt the
BAS defined by Siyao et al. (2022), to assess the correspondence between the generated motion and
the rhythm of the background music.
Baseline Setup. In addition to our proposed Duolando, we evaluate two state-of-the-art solo dance
generation methods, Bailando (Siyao et al., 2022) and EDGE (Tseng et al., 2023), to discern the
differences between solo dance and interactive duet dance. Considering the absence of existing
dance accompaniment methods conditioned on both music and a leader’s motion, we also perform
ablation studies using various Duolando variants. Specifically, we investigate the effectiveness of
reinforcement learning (RL), relative translation (tr), and interaction coordination (IC), through the
evaluation of variants "w/o. RL", "w/o. RL tr", and "w/o. RL tr IC", respectively. For the variant
without tr, we delete z tr from the input of GPT and predict the translation via the velocity decoding
branch DV , which is trained in an unsupervised manner, as detailed in Section 3.3 and (Siyao et al.,
2022). In the case of "w/o. RL tr IC", we further simplify the model’s input to m, z up♡ , z down♡ ,
z lhand♡ , and z rhand♡ , excluding the influence of the leading dancer, to observe the effectiveness of
interactive coordination in dance accompaniment. Along with these methods, we include the scores
of the ground truth test data as reference points. The quantitative benchmark is provided in Table 2.
Analysis. Given that the methods presented in Table 2 are organized in an order with incremental
addition of modules, we conduct a detailed pairwise analysis of each successive pair. Upon examina-
tion of the first two solo dance models, Bailando achieves FIDk and FIDg scores of 78.52 and 36.19,
respectively, while those of EDGE are 69.14 and 44.58. In contrast, the model “Duolando w/o. RL
tr IC” significantly improves upon these solo metrics, with scores increasing by 65.99 (84%) and
56.61 (72%) respectively. Compared to Bailando, this variant of Duolando includes a look-ahead
(LA) mechanism, which allows for the generation of more fluent and continuous dance movements
over long durations, contributing to the significant improvement of the FID scores. However, since
all solo dance methods lack the condition of a leader, they do not exhibit a noticeable change in poor
interactive values. By taking the leader’s movement into account and using the proposed interactive
coordination (IC), “Duolando (w/o. RL tr)” achieves a 20% improvement on BED, increasing
from 0.1826 to 0.2194, which can be attributed to better synchronization with the leader’s dynamics.
Nonetheless, when compared with “Duolando w/o. RL tr IC”, “Duolando w/o. RL tr” still shows
suboptimal performance in terms of FIDcd and Divcd . This is because the cd feature is strongly
affected by the relative translation between the two dancers. While the virtual follower can respond
to the leader’s motion pattern, it still fails with positioning itself in a reasonable location based on
unsupervised velocity prediction. Moreover, the low CF value of 7.76% indicates that the generated
follower rarely makes contact with the leader, contradicting the fundamental requirements of dance
accompaniment. With the introduction of explicit relative translation (tr) prediction via interactive
coordination, the FIDcd of “Duolando w/o. RL” reduces drastically from 7970.19 to 21.68, aligning
much more closer with the ground truth. Simultaneously, the CF value increases to 57.43% (a 7-fold
increment), and BED is raised to 0.27955 (27% ↑), indicating a higher level of interaction with


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a)                                                                           (b)
                                                                                         Duolando

                               Duolando w/o. RL tr IC



                                 Duolando w/o. RL tr



                                  Duolando w/o. RL                                                  tr
                                                                                                    tr



                                      Duolando

Figure 6: Qualitative results (a) and user study (b). In qualitative results, conditioning leader is colored in
gray while generated followers are in red. In boxplot of user study, triangles and colored lines are mean and
median values, respectively. Circles are outliers beyond 1.5× interquartile range (3σ in normal dist.).

the leader. However, the explicitly predicted translation can sometimes clash with the generated
movements, deteriorating the quality of the dance generated. Upon closer examination, compared to
“Duolando w/o. RL tr”, the FIDk value of “Duolando w/o. RL” drops significantly from 62.29 to
106.72 (71% ↑). Given that the kinetic features (Onuma et al., 2008) are computed based on motion
velocity, they are particularly susceptible to unreasonable global shifts like the so-called “skating
artifacts”. This issue is resolved by the proposed reinforcement learning mechanism, enabling the
full Duolando model to show a 81.42 (76%) improvement on FIDk compared to the variant without
RL. Moreover, the reinforcement learning mechanism contributes to an improvement in interactive
quality (11.71, 54% ↓), diversity (4.69, 50% ↑) and motion alignment (0.063, 22% ↑), demonstrating
its effectiveness in enhancing the performance of the full Duolando model. In conclusion, the
improvements of different metrics attest to the effectiveness of each proposed module, underscoring
their potential in producing more fluent, interactive, and diverse dance movements.
Qualitative Comparisons. To clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed module, we
provide several visualizations of results produced by different variations in Figure 6. In the case of
“Duolando w/o. RL tr IC”, the model lacks a condition for the leader, resulting in the virtual follower
operating independently and not responding to the “dance hold” (the pose holding arms) initiated by
the leader. Conversely, the follower in “Duolando w/o. RL tr” can pose responsively, but she still fails
to accurately follow the leader’s displacement, causing a unreasonable distance between the dancers.
The relative translation module allows the two dancers to interact closely in “Duolando w/o. RL”.
However, as highlighted in the red dotted box, the follower’s legs do not move appropriately when
shifting with the leader, leading to a noticeable skating artifact. With the integration of reinforcement
learning, the follower can alternate footwork, presenting a proper displacement of steps backwards.
User Study. To explore subjective judgments of quality, we conduct a user study wherein Duolando
is compared against each of its variants individually. As both Bailando and “Duolando w/o. RL tr
IC” are solo dance generation frameworks, we only conduct this study exclusively on the latter model,
which demonstrates higher performance quantitatively. Specifically, we recruit 15 participants, while
for each participant, we randomly display 40 pairs of dance clips, with each pair comprising one
Duolando result and one result from the comparison method. We then ask to indicate which one
dances better in response to the leader and the music. As depicted in Figure 6(b), the full Duolando
model outperforms the “w/o. RL tr IC”, w/o. RL tr”, and “w/o, RL” variants in 80%, 83%, and
62% of comparisons respectively, demonstrating the significance of each proposed module. However,
when compared to the ground truth, Duolando only surpasses it around 15% of the time, indicating
that dance accompaniment remains a challenging and open task for future works.

5         C ONCLUSION
We introduce a new task named dance accompaniment. To support this task, we first collect a
large-scale duet dance dataset DD100, and propose a baseline framework named Duolando, which
develops a follower GPT with off-policy reinforcement learning. We establish a benchmark with
several metrics to evaluate the dance quality, interaction, and alignment with music. Additionally,
DD100 has the potential to support more multi-modal human-human interaction tasks.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement The task we’re proposing - dance accompaniment - holds significant potential for
enhancing a multitude of VR/AR applications, including the prospect of virtually dancing alongside
AI. Furthermore, research into human-human interaction could substantially aid in improving the
immersive and interactive experiences offered by VR games. However, such applications or games
have a potential risk in the future that users might be addicted to interacting with virtual agent instead
of real-world social events, once the response of the virtual agent is developed to be charming and
real-looking enough. Meanwhile, the research on real-looking motion generation in response to
human may also lead to AI fraud, where the existing verifying methods could be more difficult to
judge whether it is fake based on response.
The data collection process (including contracts with actors) in our research was conducted ethically.
The data will be released without containing any personally identifiable information. Some audio
tracks in our dataset come from copyrighted musics. The inclusion of these tracks should be regarded
as ‘fair use’ provisions due to three reasons. (1) The music segments used are modified (shortened,
and partially slowed down), deviating from their original form. (2) The use of these tracks is solely
for model training/testing the model rather than entertainment. (3) The academic nature of this work
and the absence of public searchability (we won’t provide music info beyond the audio signals) avoid
potential commercial impact.
Acknowledgement This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under
its AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG-PhD/2021-01-031[T]). This study is supported
under the RIE2020 Industry Alignment Fund Industry Collaboration Projects (IAF-ICP) Funding
Initiative, as well as cash and in-kind contribution from the industry partner(s). It is also supported by
Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 2 (MOE-T2EP20221-0011) and AcRF Tier 2 (MOE-T2EP20221-0012).
We sincerely thank Mingyang Song, the PM in SenseTime, for helping kick off this project and thank
Judy for organizing the dancers. We also appreciate Lai Jiang, Zhijie Cao, Tinghao Liu and Quan
Wang for their significant help during data pre-processing. Siyao is grateful to Mr. Zhuo Sun and
Dr. Chen Qian for their indispensable supports. The Mocap data are collected through services of
QINGMU TECH LTD., Shanghai.


R EFERENCES
Cmu mocap. http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu/.

Tenglong Ao, Qingzhe Gao, Yuke Lou, Baoquan Chen, and Libin Liu. Rhythmic gesticulator:
  Rhythm-aware co-speech gesture synthesis with hierarchical neural embeddings. In SIGGRAPH
  Asia, 2022.

Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Teach: Temporal action
  composition for 3d humans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04066, 2022.

Zhongang Cai, Mingyuan Zhang, Jiawei Ren, Chen Wei, Daxuan Ren, Jiatong Li, Zhengyu Lin, Haiyu
  Zhao, Shuai Yi, Lei Yang, et al. Playing for 3d human recovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07588,
  2021.

Zhongang Cai, Daxuan Ren, Ailing Zeng, Zhengyu Lin, Tao Yu, Wenjia Wang, Xiangyu Fan, Yang
  Gao, Yifan Yu, Liang Pan, et al. Humman: Multi-modal 4d human dataset for versatile sensing
  and modeling. In ECCV, 2022.

Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In CVPR, 2021.

Prafulla Dhariwal, Heewoo Jun, Christine Payne, Jong Wook Kim, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Jukebox: A generative model for music. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00341, 2020.

Nima Ghorbani and Michael J Black. Soma: Solving optical marker-based mocap automatically. In
  ICCV, 2021.

Anindita Ghosh, Rishabh Dabral, Vladislav Golyanik, Christian Theobalt, and Philipp Slusallek.
  Imos: Intent-driven full-body motion synthesis for human-object interactions. In Computer
 Graphics Forum, 2023.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kehong Gong, Dongze Lian, Heng Chang, Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Zihang Jiang, and Xinchao
  Wang. Tm2d: Bimodality driven 3d dance generation via music-text integration. In ICCV, 2023.
Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, and Li Cheng. Tm2t: Stochastic and tokenized modeling for the
  reciprocal generation of 3d human motions and texts. In ECCV, 2022.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In ICML, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML, 2018.
Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Avatarclip:
  Zero-shot text-driven generation and animation of 3d avatars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08535,
  2022.
Ruozi Huang, Huang Hu, Wei Wu, Kei Sawada, Mi Zhang, and Daxin Jiang. Dance revolution:
  Long-term dance generation with music via curriculum learning. In ICLR, 2021.
Sumit Jain and C Karen Liu. Interactive synthesis of human-object interaction. In SIGGRAPH, 2009.
Biao Jiang, Xin Chen, Wen Liu, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, and Tao Chen. Motiongpt: Human motion as a
  foreign language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14795, 2023.
Andrej Karpathy. https://github.com/karpathy/minGPT, 2020.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2014.
Nhat Le, Thang Pham, Tuong Do, Erman Tjiputra, Quang D Tran, and Anh Nguyen. Music-driven
  group choreography. In CVPR, 2023.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, Yu-Ding Lu, Ming-Hsuan Yang,
  and Jan Kautz. Dancing to music. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Sergey Levine. https://rail.eecs.berkeley.edu/deeprlcourse/.
Buyu Li, Yongchi Zhao, Shi Zhelun, and Lu Sheng. Danceformer: Music conditioned 3d dance
  generation with parametric motion transformer. In AAAI, 2022.
Jing Li, Di Kang, Wenjie Pei, Xuefei Zhe, Ying Zhang, Zhenyu He, and Linchao Bao. Audio2gestures:
   Generating diverse gestures from speech audio with conditional variational autoencoders. In ICCV,
   2021a.
Quanzhou Li, Jingbo Wang, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Task-oriented human-object interactions
  generation with implicit neural representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13129, 2023.
Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music conditioned
  3d dance generation with aist++. In ICCV, 2021b.
Han Liang, Wenqian Zhang, Wenxuan Li, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Intergen: Diffusion-based
  multi-human motion generation under complex interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05684,
  2023.
Jun Liu, Amir Shahroudy, Mauricio Perez, Gang Wang, Ling-Yu Duan, and Alex C Kot. Ntu rgb+d
  120: A large-scale benchmark for 3d human activity understanding. IEEE TPAMI, 42(10), 2020.
Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F Troje, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black.
  Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In ICCV, 2019.
Brian McFee, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel P Ellis, Matt McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and Oriol
  Nieto. librosa: Audio and music signal analysis in python. In Proceedings of the 14th python in
  science conference, 2015.
Qianhui Men, Hubert PH Shum, Edmond SL Ho, and Howard Leung. Gan-based reactive motion
  synthesis with class-aware discriminators for human–human interaction. CG, 102, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Meinard Müller, Tido Röder, and Michael Clausen. Efficient content-based retrieval of motion
 capture data. In SIGGRAPH. 2005.
Evonne Ng, Donglai Xiang, Hanbyul Joo, and Kristen Grauman. You2me: Inferring body pose in
  egocentric video via first and second person interactions. In CVPR, 2020.
Evonne Ng, Hanbyul Joo, Liwen Hu, Hao Li, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Shiry Ginosar.
  Learning to listen: Modeling non-deterministic dyadic facial motion. In CVPR, 2022.
Kensuke Onuma, Christos Faloutsos, and Jessica K Hodgins. Fmdistance: A fast and effective
  distance function for motion capture data. In Eurographics, 2008.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. NeurIPS, 2022.
Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios
  Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single
  image. In CVPR, 2019.
Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis
 with transformer vae. In ICCV, 2021.
Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Temos: Generating diverse human motions from
 textual descriptions. In ECCV, 2022.
Xuanchi Ren, Haoran Li, Zijian Huang, and Qifeng Chen. Self-supervised dance video synthesis
  conditioned on music. In ACM MM, 2020.
Javier Romero, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Embodied hands: Modeling and capturing
  hands and bodies together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02610, 2022.
Yonatan Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit H Bermano. Human motion diffusion as a
  generative prior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01418, 2023.
Li Siyao, Weijiang Yu, Tianpei Gu, Chunze Lin, Quan Wang, Chen Qian, Chen Change Loy, and
  Ziwei Liu. Bailando: 3d dance generation by actor-critic gpt with choreographic memory. In
  CVPR, 2022.
Guofei Sun, Yongkang Wong, Zhiyong Cheng, Mohan S Kankanhalli, Weidong Geng, and Xiangdong
  Li. Deepdance: music-to-dance motion choreography with adversarial learning. TMM, 23, 2020.
Jiangxin Sun, Chunyu Wang, Huang Hu, Hanjiang Lai, Zhi Jin, and Jian-Fang Hu. You never stop
   dancing: Non-freezing dance generation via bank-constrained manifold projection. In NeurIPS,
   2022.
Taoran Tang, Jia Jia, and Hanyang Mao. Dance with melody: An lstm-autoencoder approach to
  music-oriented dance synthesis. In ACM MM, 2018.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916, 2022.
Jonathan Tseng, Rodrigo Castellon, and C Karen Liu. Edge: editable dance generation from music.
  In CVPR, 2023.
Guillermo Valle-Pérez, Gustav Eje Henter, Jonas Beskow, Andre Holzapfel, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and
  Simon Alexanderson. Transflower: probabilistic autoregressive dance generation with multimodal
  attention. ACM TOG, 40(6), 2021.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. NeurIPS, 2017.
NP Van der Aa, Xinghan Luo, Geert-Jan Giezeman, Robby T Tan, and Remco C Veltkamp. Umpm
 benchmark: A multi-person dataset with synchronized video and motion capture data for evaluation
 of articulated human motion and interaction. In ICCVW, 2011.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashish Vaswani, Noam M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. ArXiv, abs/1706.03762, 2017.
Edward Vendrow, Satyajit Kumar, Ehsan Adeli, and Hamid Rezatofighi. Somoformer: Multi-person
  pose forecasting with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14023, 2022.
Sicheng Yang, Zhiyong Wu, Minglei Li, Zhensong Zhang, Lei Hao, Weihong Bao, Ming Cheng, and
  Long Xiao. Diffusestylegesture: Stylized audio-driven co-speech gesture generation with diffusion
  models. In IJCAI, 2023a.
Zhitao Yang, Zhongang Cai, Haiyi Mei, Shuai Liu, Zhaoxi Chen, Weiye Xiao, Yukun Wei, Zhongfei
  Qing, Chen Wei, Bo Dai, et al. Synbody: Synthetic dataset with layered human models for 3d
  human perception and modeling. In ICCV, 2023b.
Hongwei Yi, Chun-Hao P Huang, Dimitrios Tzionas, Muhammed Kocabas, Mohamed Hassan, Siyu
  Tang, Justus Thies, and Michael J Black. Human-aware object placement for visual environment
  reconstruction. In CVPR, 2022.
Hongwei Yi, Chun-Hao P Huang, Shashank Tripathi, Lea Hering, Justus Thies, and Michael J Black.
  Mime: Human-aware 3d scene generation. In CVPR, 2023.
Jianrong Zhang, Yangsong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoli Huang, Yong Zhang, Hongwei Zhao,
   Hongtao Lu, and Xi Shen. T2m-gpt: Generating human motion from textual descriptions with
   discrete representations. In CVPR, 2023a.
Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei
 Liu. Motiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2208.15001, 2022.
Mingyuan Zhang, Xinying Guo, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Fangzhou Hong, Huirong Li, Lei Yang,
 and Ziwei Liu. Remodiffuse: Retrieval-augmented motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.01116, 2023b.
Kaifeng Zhao, Shaofei Wang, Yan Zhang, Thabo Beeler, and Siyu Tang. Compositional human-scene
  interaction synthesis with semantic control. In ECCV, 2022.
Wenlin Zhuang, Congyi Wang, Jinxiang Chai, Yangang Wang, Ming Shao, and Siyu Xia. Mu-
 sic2dance: Dancenet for music-driven dance generation. ACM TOMM, 18(2), 2022.

A     R ELATED W ORK
Recent years have witnessed numerous studies on conditional human motion synthesis. One one
hand, it can be classified according to conditions, such as text-to-motion (Petrovich et al., 2021; Guo
et al., 2022; Tevet et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022; Petrovich et al., 2022; Athanasiou et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022; 2023a;b), voice-to-gesture (Ng et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021a; Ao et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2023a) and music-to-dance (Li et al., 2021b; 2022; Siyao et al., 2022; Le et al., 2023). On the
other hand, it can be categorized based on the type of interaction, including single-human motion
synthesis (Huang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; Siyao et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; 2023b; Gong
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023), group human motion synthesis (Le et al., 2023; Vendrow et al., 2022),
human-scene interaction (Zhao et al., 2022; Yi et al., 2022; 2023), human-object interaction (Jain &
Liu, 2009; Ghosh et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023), and human-human interaction (cmu; Men et al., 2022;
Shafir et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023).

A.1    M USIC - TO -DANCE

Datasets. Music-to-dance represents a crucial category within the realm of conditional human
motion synthesis, where music serves as the input to generate a sequence of human body movements.
Previous studies have made significant strides in this field by developing several datasets (Tang et al.,
2018; Mahmood et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021b; Valle-Pérez et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022;
Cai et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023b; Le et al., 2023) either compiled through motion capture (MoCap)
systems or reconstructed from videos using automated algorithms. AIST++(Li et al., 2021b) is a


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dataset derived from multi-camera videos spanning 10 dance genres and 30 subjects, compiling a
total of 1408 sequences or 5.2 hours of content. AIOZ-GDANCE(Le et al., 2023) consists of 16.7
hours of paired music and 3D motion gathered from in-the-wild videos, featuring 7 dance styles and
16 music genres. Despite the advantage of an automated approach in terms of large-scale dataset
collection, the quality of reconstruction is often compromised, particularly when occlusions are
present or human poses are complex. To capture high-quality motions, professional motion capture
equipment is utilized. Dance Melody (Tang et al., 2018) employs the MoCap of 3D skeletons from
dancers, establishing a music-to-dance dataset with four types of dance. PMSD (Valle-Pérez et al.,
2021) uses an Optitrack system comprising 17 cameras to collect 142 minutes of casual dancing and
44 minutes of street dance. Notably, DanceFormer (Li et al., 2022) employs animators to manually
create high-quality dancing data. It took approximately 18 months for the animators to produce
the 300 dance animations, which underscores the scalability challenges inherent in this approach.
However, these datasets do not incorporate strong interactions between individuals, rendering them
unsuitable for either dance accompaniment or duet dance generation tasks.
Existing Methods. With the rapid development of datasets and benchmarks, numerous new methods
have emerged in this field. To generates 3D dance with input music, Dance Revolution (Huang
et al., 2021) formalizes music-conditioned dance generation as a sequence-to-sequence learning
problem and devise a seq2seq architecture. FACT (Li et al., 2021b) incorporates a deep cross-modal
transformer block with full-attention. Bailando (Siyao et al., 2022) proposes a two-stage procedure,
where the first stage applies a VQ-VAE to quantize dancing-style poses and the latter stage employs
an on-policy actor-crtic GPT to generate dancing motions, improving temporal coherency with
music. GDanceR (Le et al., 2023) is recently proposed to produce coherent group dance, with a
transformer music encoder and a group motion generator. The existing methods, however, focus
on either synthesizing solo dance motion or simultaneously generating multiple agents with weak
interactions, which is not suitable for the requirement to respond to preconditioned lead dancing
motion.
In contrast to previous datasets and methods, we propose a new task called dance accompaniment
that requires conditioning on both music and the leader’s dance movements. We collect a large-scale
and diverse duet dance dataset named DD100, which consists of both dancing sequences and the
music signals, and develop a baseline method on top of it, along with evaluation protocols.


A.2   H UMAN - HUMAN I NTERACTION


Datasets. As the quality of single-person motion generation improves, researchers are shifting their
focus to the human-human interaction task. An early attempt in this direction is CMU-MoCap (cmu),
which collects weak interactions like handshaking using motion capture equipment. Since then,
various multi-person motion datasets have been developed, including NTU-RGBD (Liu et al., 2020),
You2Me (Ng et al., 2020), and UMPM (Van der Aa et al., 2011). However, while these datasets
contain multi-person motion data, they are limited in interaction type and strength. A recent dataset,
InterHuman (Liang et al., 2023), also captures interactions through MocCap, and labels the motions
with textual descriptions. However, InterHuman does not provide music as a multi-modality condition,
which is not comprehensive enough for the task of dance accompaniment.
Existing Methods. With the availability of these datasets, several methods have been proposed for
generating human-human interaction motions. (Men et al., 2022) propose a seq2seq GAN system
that synthesizes the reactive motion of a character given the active motion from another character.
ComMDM (Shafir et al., 2023) devises a communication block to infuse interaction between two
generated motions, using a pretrained diffusion-based model as a generative prior. InterGen (Liang
et al., 2023) tailors the motion diffusion model to a two-person interaction setting, via two cooperative
transformer-based denoisers with mutual attention mechanism.
In contrast to these human-human interaction datasets and approaches, our dance accompaniment
introduces the music modality and requires adherence to both the rhythm of the music and the motion
from another person. Moreover, due to the unique nature of dance, it involves long-term strong
interaction between dancers.

                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B                       M ORE DETAILS
In this section we introduce statistics of the motion speed in different dance types, the detailed
network structures and training process of Duolando.

B.1                     S PEED S TATISTICS


                    6                                         Avg. speed per frame
                                                                                                                Root
                    5                                                                                           Hands
                                                                                                                Feet
 Speed (cm/frame)


                    4
                    3
                    2
                    1
                    0       Waltz   Jive     Tango   Ballet     Samba Rumba Paso Dobal Quickstep Foxtrot   Cha cha
                                                                  Dance type

Figure 7: Statistics of average speed values (cm per frame) for different dances. We present the speed
values of three kinds of joints: root (pelvis), hands and feet.

We calculated the average speed for each dance type by computing the average difference in 3D
coordinates between frames for the root (pelvis), hands, and feet, as shown in Figure 7. Typically,
Ballet involves many spinning in place, resulting in a low overall global (root) speed, while Quickstep,
known for its lightness and speed, exhibit a higher overall velocity. Meanwhile, some dances with
relatively low overall movement speed but expressive hand movements (like Jive and Cha Cha),
contrast with those that have smaller hand variations and primarily rely on footwork (such as Waltz
and Foxtrot).

B.2                     N ETWORK S TRUCTURES

VQ-VAEs. The encoder and decoders in Section 3.1 of the main paper are complied as 1D temporal
CNNs. The detailed structures are shown in Table 3. The encoder is designed to downsample the 3D
joint sequence 8 times into the encoding features, and therefore the learned quantized features are
aware of contextual poses in the dance sequence.
Separate VQVAEs are trained for the compositional upper-and-lower half bodies, respectively. The
joint number J of the upper half body is 15 and that of the lower is 9, while J = 1 in the global-
velocity branch.
GPT. We follow the fundamental structure of minGPT by Karpathy (2020). Specifically, the we
employ 12 Transformer layers with the block size T of 30 and feature dimension of 768, while the
LAT consists of three Transformer layers with the look-ahead length L of 29 (around 4 seconds).
The music features m are extracted from the audio signal using the public audio processing toolbox
Librosa (McFee et al., 2015), including mel frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC), MFCC delta,
constant-Q chromagram, onset strength and onset beat, which are 54-dimension in total, and are
mapped to the same dimension of GPT via a learned linear layer.

B.3                     T RAINING H YPER - PARAMETERS

In terms of hyper-parameters, we set the codebook capacity K to 512 for all quantized items (z up ,
z down , z lhand , z rhand , and z tr ). During VQ-VAE training, we segment motion sequences into
4-second (T = 120) slices with a batch size of 64. The encoder’s temporal downsampling rate d is
set to 4, and the commitment trade-off λ is 0.1. We adopt a learning rate of 3 × 10−5 to train the
VQ-VAE for 500 epochs, with a decay of 0.1 after both the 200th and 300th epochs. Throughout
the supervised training state of GPT, we adopt cross-entropy loss with a learning rate of 10−4 for


                                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Architectures of VQ-VAE encoder and decoders. (Section 3.1). “Conv” and “TransConv”
represent 1D temporal the convolution and transpose-convolution operations, respectively, and their
arguments represent the input channel number, the output channel number, the kernel size, the
convolution stride, the padding size on both ends of input data, and the dilation number in turn. RB
denotes Residual Block. J denotes the 3D joint number.

                                                                        DP
                                                                        Input: 0, Argument: J
                                                                1       RB(p = 9, d = 9)
              Residual Block                                    2       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
              Input: 0; Argument: p, d                          3       RB(p = 3, d = 3)
         1    ReLU, Conv(512, 512, 3, 1, p, d)                  4       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
         2    ReLU, Conv(512, 512, 1, 1, 0, 1)                  5       RB(p = 3, d = 3)
              Output: 0 + 2                                     6       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
              Encoder E                                         7       Conv(512, J × 3, 3, 1, 1, 1)
              Input: 0, Argument: J                                     Output: 7
         1    Conv(J × 3, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)                              DM
         2    RB(p = 1, d = 1)                                          Input: 0, Argument: J
         3    Conv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)                        1       RB(p = 9, d = 9)
         4    RB(p = 3, d = 3)                                  2       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
         5    Conv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)                        3       RB(p = 3, d = 3)
         6    RB(p = 9, d = 9)                                  4       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
              Output: 6                                         5       RB(p = 3, d = 3)
                                                                6       TransConv(512, 512, 4, 2, 1, 1)
                                                                7       Conv(512, J × 9, 3, 1, 1, 1)
                                                                        Output: 7



                                                                                        −5
500 epochs. For the reinforcement learning stage, we apply Loff
                                                             RL learning rate of 3 × 10    for 50
epochs. The OOD dataset D̂ is compiled on the sequences generated by GPT conditioned on the
music and leader motion in test set, without using any ground-truth follower information. During
the entire training process, we employ the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with β1 = 0.9
and β2 = 0.99. The training is conducted on four NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs, taking approximately
seven days in total.


C     R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING D ETAILS
C.1   D ERIVATION TO O N -P OLICY ACTOR -C RITIC L OSS

Here we derive the on-policy actor-critic loss LAC from the initial reinforcement learning objective.
The derivation is mainly based on the instruction of Levine.
From an RL standpoint, GPT predicting the next token at step t is construed as an action at , which
involves selecting an appropriate token zt+1 from the dictionary. As such, the cross-entropy loss in
the supervised stage can be reformulated as
                                                 T
                                                 X −1
                                  LST (θ) =             − log (πθ (at |st )) .                            (8)
                                                 t=0


For RL, the object J(θ) is to maximize the total income Eτ ∼πθ (τ ) [r(τ )], while it can be reframed as

                                                                X
                              J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ (τ ) [r(τ )] =              πθ (τ )r(τ ),                     (9)
                                                                all τ

where θ denotes the weights of the policy making network, τ represents a string of actions τ =
       −1                                QT −1
{at }Tt=0 and πθ (τ ) is the probability t=0 πθ (at |st ) that the policy network predicts to take such
                                                            PT −1
trajectory; r(τ ) is the total income taking trajectory τ as t=0 r(at , st ).


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Off-Policy RL in Duolando
Require: pertained GPT weights θ, OOD conditions {(m̂, ẑ)}, Epoch number E
 1: ϵ ← 0
 2: D̂ ← ∅
 3: while ϵ < E do
 4:    generate sequence {ẑ ϵ , tr  ˆ ϵ } ← GPTθ (m̂, ẑ)
 5:                                ˆ ϵ )}
       D̂ ← D̂ ∪ {(m̂, ẑ, ẑ ϵ , tr                               ▷ Reuse past generated data
 6:                     ˆ ∈ D̂ do
       for (m̂, ẑ, ẑ, tr)
 7:                                    ˆ 0...T −1 )
           ŝ ← (m̂, ẑ, ẑ 0...T −1 , tr
 8:                         ˆ
           â ← (ẑ 1...T , tr1...T )
 9:        Compute r1...T as described in Sec. 3.3
10:        Compute Loff   RL by Eq. (4) (main paper)
11:        θ ← θ − ∇θ Loff    RL
12:    end for
13:    ϵ←ϵ+1
14: end while


One approach to maximize J is to optimize the network weight θ along the gradient ∇θ J as
θ ← θ + α∇θ J. Since
                                       ∇θ π θ
                           ∇ θ πθ = πθ         = πθ ∇θ log πθ ,                       (10)
                                         πθ
we can rewrite ∇θ J into          X
                          ∇θ J =      ∇θ πθ (τ )r(τ )
                                                 τ
                                                X
                                           =         πθ ∇θ (τ ) log πθ (τ )r(τ )                        (11)
                                                 τ
                                           = Eτ ∼πθ (τ ) [∇θ log πθ (τ )r(τ )] .
                  QT −1
Since πθ (τ ) =    t=0    πθ (at |st ), we have
                                                         T
                                                         X −1
                                   ∇θ log πθ (τ ) =             ∇θ log πθ (at |st ).                    (12)
                                                          t=0

Hence,
                      ∇θ J = Eτ ∼πθ (τ ) [∇θ log πθ (τ )r(τ )]
                                    " T −1                     !              T −1
                                                                                                   !#
                                       X                                      X
                      = Eτ ∼πθ (τ )        ∇θ log πθ (at |st )                       r(at , st )
                                               t=0                             t=0                      (13)
                                         "T −1                          T −1
                                                                                           !#
                                          X                             X
                         = Eτ ∼πθ (τ )           ∇θ log πθ (at |st )           r(au , su )         .
                                          t=0                           u=0

For on-policy reinforcement learning, ∇θ J is estimated on simultaneously sampled sectional trajec-
tories {(âθt , ŝθt )}, such that the equation above is approximated to be
                                         T −1                        T −1
                                                                                       !
                                         X                           X
                                                           θ θ                θ     θ
                                ∇θ J ≈        ∇θ log πθ (ât , ŝt )      r(âu , ŝu ) .     (14)
                                         t=0                           u=0

Note that the optimization of the policy making network for policy (at , st ) is not expected to be
influenced by the past trajectories, i.e., the rewards before t. Therefore, Equation (14) is reframed as
                                   T −1                           T −1
                                                                                      !
                                   X                              X
                          ∇θ J ≈         ∇θ log πθ (âθt , ŝθt )      r(âθu , ŝθu ) ,            (15)
                                         t=0                           u=t
       PT −1
where u=t r(âθu , ŝθu ) is the expected total future income after taking âθu under state ŝθu , or to say,
the expected “reward to go” which is formally named as the Q-value Q(âθt , ŝθt ).


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 4: Ablation studies for music input.                 represents random music input.

                                        Solo Metrics                               Interactive Metrics            Rhythmic
      Method             FIDk (↓)    FIDg (↓)   Divk (↑)    Divg (↑)   FIDcd (↓)   Divcd (↑)    CF(%)    BED(↑)   BAS(↑)
      Ground Truth         6.56        6.37      11.31        7.61       3.41        12.35       74.25   0.5308    0.1842
      Ground Truth ( )     6.56        6.37      11.31        7.61       3.41        12.35       74.25   0.5308    0.1760
      Duolando            25.30       33.52      10.92        7.97       9.97        14.02       52.36   0.2858    0.2046
      Duolando ( )        23.73       35.91      10.95        8.36       7.77        13.96       51.77   0.2582    0.2072



To avoid the bias of rewards, e.g., all rewards are positive, the Q-value item in Equation (15) is
normalized by an expected “reward to go” on state st , i.e., the critic value Vt = Eat [Q(at , st )], such
that
                           T
                           X −1

                   ∇θ J ≈       ∇θ log πθ (âθt , ŝθt ) Q(âθt , ŝθt ) − V (ŝθt )
                                      t=0
                                                                                                                             (16)
                              T
                              X −1

                          =          ∇θ log πθ (âθt , ŝθt ) r(âθt , ŝθt ) + V (ŝθt+1 ) − V (ŝθt ) ,
                            t=0

where r(ât , ŝt ) + V (ŝt+1 ) − V (ŝθt is summarized as an “advantage” A. Looking closely to Equa-
          θ θ              θ

tion (16), if A is positive, to increase J, the policy making network will be optimized to enhance
the probability of action âθt under state ŝθt . In our proposed framework, the actions are within
finite selections of the choreographic memory. Hence, the optimization along with Equation (16) is
equivalent to the the optimization via an weighted cross-entropy loss on the in-time self predictions
of the policy making network:
                                                   T
                                                   X −1

                                        Lon
                                         AC =              − log πθ (âθt |ŝθt ) · A.                                       (17)
                                                    t=0


C.2     A LGORITHM P IPELINE OF P ROPOSED O FF -P OLICY RL

The detailed pipeline of proposed off-policy RL is shown in Algorithm 1.

D     M ORE A BLATION S TUDIES
D.1     M USIC

To explore the case when the music and the leader are not aligned, we randomize the music input
during the test phase. The experimental results are shown in Table 4, where the random music
input are noted with . Interestingly, the BAS of Duolando ( ) even increases by 0.0026 (1.3%)
compared to that from the correct musics, while BED score decreases by 0.0276 (10%), implying the
music signal have a significant impact on the rhythm of generated follower’s motion in our proposed
framework.

D.2     L OOKING A HEAD

We conduct an ablation study on the looking-ahead mechanism, and we train a variant “Duolando w/o.
RL LA” where the LAT is substituted to single linear layer to map each token’s embedding to the
same dimension as LAT (see Table 5). As to the effect of looking ahead, compared with “Duolando
w/o. RL”, the variant without LAT shows a salient drop on FIDk (26.01, 20%) while the interactive
metrics do not significantly change (less than 7%). We observe that lacking the ability to look ahead
could lean to some sudden changes in the motion flow, making the movement less smooth.

D.3     S KATING E FFECT

To assess the severity of the skating effect in generated follower motion, we introduce a new metric,
the skating ratio (SR), which represents the proportion of frames exhibiting skating. Specifically,
if the speeds of the motions of both legs (represented by the vector from the ankle to the pelvis)
are less than a threshold χ1 , and the global speed at root (pelvis) is greater than a threshold χ2 , we


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Table 5: Ablation study on looking ahead (LA).
                                          Solo Metrics                              Interactive Metrics            Rhythmic
     Method                 FIDk (↓)   FIDg (↓)   Divk (↑)   Divg (↑)   FIDcd (↓)   Divcd (↑)    CF(%)    BED(↑)   BAS(↑)
     Ground Truth              6.56      6.37      11.31      7.61          3.41      12.35      74.25    0.5308    0.1839
     Duolando w/o. RL LA    132.73      40.22      12.94      6.70         20.80       9.92      55.81    0.2775    0.2121
     Duolando w/o. RL       106.72      34.10      13.88      7.03         21.68       9.33      57.43    0.2795    0.2193


Table 6: Skating ratio (SR) of different methods. The SR is calculated as the percentage of the number of
frames with negligible leg movement but significant global displacement.

                           Method                                                         SR (% ↓)
                           Ground Truth                                                       0.00
                           Bailando (Siyao et al., 2022)                                      0.00
                           EDGE (Tseng et al., 2023)                                          0.06
                           Duolando w/o. RL tr IC                                             0.00
                           Duolando w/o. RL tr                                                0.01
                           Duolando w/o. RL LA                                                1.24
                           Duolando w/o. RL                                                   1.06
                           Duolando                                                           0.33


consider this count as a skating frame. It’s worthy to note that in calculating global movement, we
only consider movement on the x − y plane to account since there exist reasonable vertical shifts
(e.g., jumping or lifting) that don’t need stepping. Based on the statistics in Figure 7, we set χ1 to
1 cm per frame and χ2 to 3 cm per frame. As shown in Table 6, due to the high quality of mocap
collection, the ground truth statistically does not exhibit skating. Meanwhile, the SRs of methods like
Bailando, “Duolando w/o. RL tr IC” and “Duolando w/o. RL tr” that directly predict displacement
based on steps, are also near to zero. In contrast, after introducing tr, the frequency of skating steps
in “Duolando w/o. RL” increases to 1.06%. Despite the follower’s position being more coordinated
with the leader in this variant, the skating effect becomes a significant drawback. To address this
issue, we employ RL to align the lower body movement to global shift. As a result, the SR was
significantly reduced by 0.73 (69%), demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed off-policy RL.

E    U SER S TUDY S CREENSHOTS
We conduct our user study through Google Form. The screenshot is shown in Figure 8.

F    DATA L ICENCE
Code and data will be publicly available upon acceptance. The dataset contains the dance sequences
in SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019) format stored in .npy files and the corresponding music clips in
.mp3 format. To protect performers’ facial information, we do not release the original raster videos
following the contracts with performers.

G    V IDEO D EMO
We provide data examples and generated results in the demo.


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 8: Screenshot of user study.


                                               20
