Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AUTOMATIC F UNCTIONAL D IFFERENTIATION IN JAX
 Min Lin
 Sea AI Lab
 linmin@sea.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         We extend JAX with the capability to automatically differentiate higher-order
         functions (functionals and operators). By representing functions as a generaliza-
         tion of arrays, we seamlessly use JAX’s existing primitive system to implement
         higher-order functions. We present a set of primitive operators that serve as foun-
         dational building blocks for constructing several key types of functionals. For
         every introduced primitive operator, we derive and implement both linearization
         and transposition rules, aligning with JAX’s internal protocols for forward and
         reverse mode automatic differentiation. This enhancement allows for functional
         differentiation in the same syntax traditionally use for functions. The result-
         ing functional gradients are themselves functions ready to be invoked in python.
         We showcase this tool’s efficacy and simplicity through applications where func-
         tional derivatives are indispensable. The source code of this work is released at
         https://github.com/sail-sg/autofd.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In functional analysis, functions can be characterized as continuous generalizations of vectors.
Correspondingly, the principles of linear algebra, derivatives, and calculus for vectors can be extended
to the spaces of functions. Based on this generalization, we can build higher-order functions
whose domain/codomain are function spaces. These higher-order functions are traditionally called
functionals or operators. For example, definite integral is a functional that maps a function to a
scalar, and the differential operator is an operator that maps a function to its derivative function. The
generalization of gradient descent to functionals is particularly interesting to the machine learning
audiences. Like we optimize a function by moving the input in the gradient direction, a functional
can be optimized by varying the input function using the functional derivative. Gradient descent
for functionals has been used for a long history in science and engineering, named the calculus of
variations. Well known examples include the least action principle in Lagrangian mechanics, and the
variational method in quantum mechanics.
While the theoretical framework for functional differentiation is established, there remains a notable
gap in computational tools tailored to automatically compute functional derivatives. To this date,
functional differentiation with respect to functions are usually done in one of the following ways: (1)
manually derived by human and explicitly implemented (Zahariev et al., 2013; Gonis, 2014); (2) for
semi-local functionals, convert it to the canonical Euler-Lagrange form, which can be implemented
generally using existing AD tools (Hu et al., 2023; Cranmer et al., 2020). In stark contrast, the domain
of automatic differentiation (AD) for functions that maps real tensors has seen significant advancement
recently and widespread application in various domains, e.g. robotic simulation (Freeman et al.,
2021), cosmology (Piras & Mancini, 2023) and molecular dynamics (Schoenholz & Cubuk, 2021).
Like AD has transformed several fields and industries, we believe automatic functional differentiation
(AutoFD) holds the potential to catalyze a similar wave of innovation.
Based on the idea that functions can be represented as a generalization of arrays, we propose that
AutoFD can be implemented in the same vein as AD. Building AutoFD in this way avoids the
complexity of symbolic approaches that depends on analytical integrals. JAX provides an elegant
machinery for supporting both forward mode and reverse mode AD without redundant code. The
forward mode differentiation is implemented via linearization rules, also called jacobian vector
product (JVP) rules for each primitive computation. The reverse mode differentiation consists of
three steps (Radul et al., 2023), 1. perform forward mode AD on a function; 2. unzip the linear and


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


nonlinear part of the function; 3. transposition of the linear part. Therefore, to make a primitive
computation differentiable in JAX, it is crucial that the primitive is implemented with a JVP rule and
a transpose rule. Similarly, AutoFD for an operator relies on higher-order generalizations of JVP and
transpose rules, which are well defined in mathematics. The Fréchet derivative extends the idea of
derivative to higher-order functions whose inputs and outputs are functions. And the adjoint operator
generalizes the concept of transposition from function to higher order functions.
Having introduced the fundamental mechanisms for AutoFD, we now delve into the specific operators
we include in this work. We motivate the choice of operators from the types of operators and
functionals that are commonly used, which we summarize as non-linear semi-local functionals and
linear non-local operators. These two types cover the most used functionals in various applications,
for instance, the majority of exchange-correlation functionals in density functional theory fall under
semi-local or linear non-local functional categories (Perdew & Schmidt, 2001). It turns out that to
build any functional described in Section 2, there is a set of five essential operators, namely, compose,
∇, linearize, linear transpose and integrate. These operators, along with their JVP and transpose rules,
are detailed in Section 3.2. To ensure the completeness of the operator set, we also introduce some
auxiliary operators in Section 3.3. We discuss the applications of AutoFD in Section 4, presenting
both opportunities for new methods and improvements on the coding style.

2    O PERATORS AND F UNCTIONALS
By convention, we define operators as mappings whose domain and codomain are both functions.
For example, the ∇ operator when applied on a function returns the derivative of that function.
Functionals are mappings from functions to scalars. To distinguish them from plain functions that
map real values, we denote both functionals and operators with capital letters, with an extra hat
for operators. We use round brackets to denote the application of operators on functions as well
as the application of functions on real values. e.g. Ô(f )(x) means application of operator Ô on
function f , and apply the resulting function on x. Without loss of generality, we write integrals
without specifying the domain. For simplicity, we present the results on scalar functions when there
is no ambiguity. The actual implementation supports functions that map arbitrarily shaped tensors or
nested data structure of them. The operators we aim to support can be categorized into three different
types based on their property.
Local operator generalizes element-wise transformation in finite dimensional vector spaces. Consider
the input function f : X → Y , with any function ϕL : X × Y → Z, a local operator Φ̂L needs to
satisfy
                                 Φ̂L (f ) : X → Z; x 7→ ϕL (x, f (x)).                               (1)
Semilocal operator extends local operator by introducing extra dependencies on the derivatives of
the input function up to a finite maximum order n.
               Φ̂S (f ) : X → Z; x 7→ ϕS (x, f (x), ∇f (x), ∇(2) f (x), · · · , ∇(n) f (x)).         (2)

This type of operator is called semilocal because Φ̂S (f )(x) not only depend on the value of f (x) at
the point x, but also on the function values in the infinitesimal neighborhood, i.e. f (x + δx), via the
knowledge of the derivatives.
Nonlocal operators are the operators that are neither local nor semilocal. Although they do not need
to assume any specific forms, one of the most interesting nonlocal operator is the integral transform,
                                                    Z
                            Φ̂I (f ) : U → Y ; u 7→ ϕI (u, x)f (x)dx.                              (3)

The function ϕI : U × X → Y is called the kernel function. Integral transform generalizes finite
dimensional matrix vector product; therefore it is a linear mapping of f . The Schwartz kernel
theorem (Ehrenpreis, 1956) states that any linear operators can be expressed in this form.
Integral functionals are functionals that conform to the following form:
                                                   Z
                                 F : F → R; f 7→ Φ̂(f )(x)dx.                                        (4)


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Correspondingly, integral functionals are called local, semilocal or nonlocal depending on the property
of operator Φ̂. The components used to build functional approximators in existing works belong
to one of the above types. For example, the fourier neural operator (Li et al., 2020) is a direct
generalization of multilayer perceptron, the linear layers are nonlocal integral transforms, while the
nonlinear activation layers are pointwise transformation that follows the form of local operator. The
lagrangian neural networks (Cranmer et al., 2020) is implicitly a composition of a integral functional
with a learnable semilocal operator. In applications like density functional theory, most empirically
developed functionals belongs to the semi-local family. Recently, non-local functionals are also
introduced for better treatments of electron correlation (Margraf & Reuter, 2021).

3     I MPLEMENTATION
3.1   G ENERALIZED A RRAY

In JAX, array is a fundamental data structure that corresponds to vector, matrix and tensor in
mathematics. Primitives are algebraic operations for transforming the arrays. Following the notation
of JAX, we use f[3,5] to describe an float array of shape 3 by 5. To represent functions as generalied
arrays, we first generalize the notations. The shape of a function is represented as a list of its return
value and each arguments in the format of F[ret,arg0,· · · ]. For example, F[f[],f[3],f[2,3]]
describes a function: R3 × R2×3 → R. In AutoFD, this abstract information is implemented as a
custom class and it is registered via jax.core.pytype_aval_mappings[types.FunctionType] to
make JAX recognize and convert python functions into generalized arrays when tracing higher order
function.

3.2   P RIMITIVE O PERATORS

The primitive operators considered in this work are focused to realize the most used types of operators
and functionals described in Section 2. To enable functional derivatives for these primitives, as
mentioned in the introduction, we need to define a JVP rule and a tranpose rule for each of them.
Here we only make connections between the programming notation and math notation of the JVP and
tranpose rules, which should be enough for understanding the implementation of AutoFD. For formal
definitions, we refer the readers to Section II.5 in Sternberg (1999) for tangent/cotangent vectors, and
Definition 3.6.5 in Balakrishnan (2012) for Fréchet derivative.
The JVP function in JAX is defined as
                                    x , |{z}
                        jax.jvp(f, |{z}  δx ) = Jf (x)δx = D(f )(x)(δx) .                                (5)
                                                           |    {z    }
                                    primal tangent                Fréchet notation

Where Jf (x) = ∂f
               ∂x x is the jacobian of function f at point x. The JVP function is also called the
forward mode gradient, it evaluates change of function f at point x along the direction δx. However,
backward mode gradient is what we usually use in backpropagation. In JAX, the function associated
with backward gradient is vector jacobian product (VJP), VJP means vector is on the left hand side of
the jacobian, but we usually transpose it instead to obtain a column vector.
                                            x )( δy ) = Jf (x)⊤ δy
                                jax.vjp(f, |{z}
                                                 |{z}
                                            primal    cotangent

Usually, forward mode and backward mode are implemented separately. However, Radul et al. (2023)
introduces that idea that the VJP is simply the linear transposition of JVP. Here we introduce the
notations of linear transpose in programming and in math. With f (x) = M x; f ⊤ (y) = M ⊤ y,
                                    x )(
           jax.linear_transpose(f, |{z}                y ) = f ⊤ (y) =         T (f )(x)(y)              (6)
                                                      |{z}                     | {z }
                                          primal     cotangent           our own Fréchet like notation

It can be easily seen that when we apply linear transposition to JVP: δx 7→ Jf (x)δx, it results in the
VJP: δy 7→ Jf (x)⊤ δy. Therefore, in JAX, each primitive is given a JVP rule and a transpose rule,
together they are used to derive the backward mode gradient in JAX.
The JVP and transpose rules can be generalized to higher order functions. We use the Fréchet
derivatives D and ∂i to denote JVP rules and partial JVP rules. D(Ô)(f )(δf ) denotes the JVP of


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


operator Ô with the primal value f and tangent value δf . We add a δ prefix for functions from the
tangent and cotangent space. Similarly to the Fréchet notation, we introduce the symbol T and Ti
to denote transpose and partial transpose rules. Note that although transpose rules generally do not
require a primal value, partial transposes do sometimes need the primal values when the operator is
not jointly linear on the inputs. Therefore, we explicitly write out the primal values for transpose
rules for consistency; i.e. Tf (Ô)(f, g)(δh) denotes transposition of the operator Ô with respect to f ,
with the primal values f , g and cotangent value δh. The generalization of transposition to operators
is the adjoint of the operator T (Ô) = Ô∗ , satisfying ⟨Ôf, g⟩ = ⟨f, Ô∗ g⟩.
To support high order derivative, the JVP and transpose rules need to be implemented using primitives
exclusively, which means any operator used in the right hand side of the JVP and transpose rules
needs to be implemented as a primitive themselves. For example, the JVP rule (7) of the compose
operator uses the linearize operator L̂, which is described in Section 3.2.3. To save space, we leave
the proof of these rules to the Appendix.

3.2.1   T HE C OMPOSE OPERATOR
Function composition is a frequently used operator, with g : X → Y ; f : Y → Z. The compose
operator is defined as f ◦ g : X → Z; x 7→ f (g(x)). Here the compose operator ◦ is written as an
infix operator, alternatively, we can use the symbol Ĉ to represent the compose operator, and Ĉ(f, g)
to denote the composition of f and g. The compose operator can be generalized to more than two
functions. For example, Ĉ(f, g1 , g2 ) describes the function x 7→ f (g1 (x), g2 (x)). Implementation
of compose in python is simple

 def compose_impl(f, g):
   return lambda *args: f(g(*args))

The JVP and transpose rules of compose are derived as follows:
                ∂g (Ĉ)(f, g) : δg 7→ Ĉ(L̂(f ), g, δg).                                              (7)
                ∂f (Ĉ)(f, g) : δf 7→ Ĉ(δf, g).                                                      (8)
                                  δh 7→ Ĉ(δh, g −1 )| det ∇(g −1 )| if g is invertible.

                Tf (Ĉ)(f, g) :                                                                       (9)
                                  undefined                           otherwise.

                                  δh 7→ Ĉ(T̂ (f ), δh) if f is linear.
                Tg (Ĉ)(f, g) :                                                                      (10)
                                  undefined              otherwise.
As can be seen, the implementation of the compose operator requires two auxiliary operators
L̂(linearize) and T̂ (transpose), which will be defined independently in Section 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. The
function inverse on the right hand side of the Tf (Ĉ) rule is not implemented because currently a
general mechanism for checking the invertibility and for defining inversion rules of the primitives
are not yet available in JAX. The compose operator is the basis for all local operators defined in (1).
Replacing the dependency on x with an identity function I, all local operators can be composed
with Ĉ(ϕL , I, f ) : x 7→ ϕL (I(x), f (x)). A large number of common operators can be defined via Ĉ,
for example, we overload the infix operators in python to support the syntax f + g which converts
to Ĉ((x, y) 7→ x + y, f, g). All direct algebraic operations on functions in our code examples are
supported in a similar way.

3.2.2   T HE ∇ ( NABLA ) OPERATOR
The ∇ operator converts a function to its derivative function. In JAX, the corresponding transforma-
tions are jax.jacfwd and jax.jacrev. Its JVP and transpose rules are:
                                      D(∇)(f ) : δf 7→ ∇(δf ).                                       (11)
                                      T (∇)(f ) : δh 7→ −∇ · δh.                                     (12)
The implementation of the ∇ operator is readily available in JAX as jax.jacfwd and jax.jacrev.
The JVP rule is the same as the primal computation because ∇ is a linear operator. The transpose


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rule uses ∇ as the divergence operator, which can be implemented as Ĉ(trace, ∇(δh)). We provide a
quick proof of the transpose rule here for scalar variable functions, the full derivation is provided in
Appendix   C.2. To see the transpose rule, we write the ∇ operator in the Schwartz kernel form, i.e.
∇ = dy δ ′ (x
      R
             R − y). Like finite dimensional linear transposition swaps the axis that is contracted,
the T (∇) = dx δ ′ (x − y) simply changes the variable under integration, using integral by parts,
we can verify that
                  Z                                              Z
 T (∇)(f )(y) = dx δ ′ (x − y)f (x) = δ(x − y)f (x)|+∞    −∞  −    dy δ(x − y)f ′ (x) = −∇(f )(y).

The ∇ operator can be used for constructing semilocal operators together with the Ĉ operator, i.e.
semilocal operator in the form of (2) can be implemented as Ĉ(ϕS , I, f, ∇f, · · · , ∇(n) f ), where
I : x 7→ x is the identity function, and ∇(n) is the repeated application of ∇ for n times.

3.2.3   T HE L INEARIZE O PERATOR
The linearize operator has the same meaning as the Fréchet derivative D. Except that D can be used
with any higher-order functions, while we reserve the symbol L̂(f ) : x, δx 7→ ∇(f )(x)δx for the
linearization of functions. The linearize operator is necessary for the completeness of local operators,
as it is used in the JVP rule (7) of the compose operator. The JVP and transpose rules of the linearize
operator are defined as following:
                                   D(L̂)(f ) : δf 7→ L̂(δf ).                                      (13)
                                   T (L̂)(f ) : δh 7→ −∇Iˆy (yδh(·, y)).                           (14)
The Iˆy symbol used in the transpose rule represents integration over the variable y. The corresponding
function transformation implemented in JAX is jax.jvp.

3.2.4   T HE L INEAR T RANSPOSE O PERATOR
The linear transpose operator can be applied only on linear functions. It is easy to see that the operator
itself is also linear. We only manage to derive a general form for the adjoint of the transpose operator
when the cotangent function is invertible.
                       D(T̂ )(f ) : δf 7→ T̂ (δf ).                                                   (15)
                                                −1        −1

                                        δh 7→ δh | det ∇δh | if δh is invertible.
                        T (T̂ )(f ) :                                                                 (16)
                                        undefined               otherwise.
The corresponding transformation defined in JAX for linear transposition is jax.linear_transpose.

3.2.5   T HE I NTEGRATE FUNCTIONAL
The integrate functional indispensable component for building functionals. It is required in the
integral functionals (4), for constructing nonlocal operators (3), and used in the transpose rule (14)
of the linearize operator. The integrate functional is called an integrate operator when we perform
integration over only part of the variables. We use Iˆ for integrate operator,
                                                                            R with a subscript for the
variable under integration. For a function of two variables, Iˆx (f ) : f 7→ f (x, y)dx. The JVP rule
and transpose rules are:
                                  D(Iˆx )(f ) : δf 7→ Iˆx (δf )                                   (17)
                                      ˆ
                                  T (Ix )(f ) : δh 7→ (x, y 7→ δh(y))                             (18)
Only a limited subset of functions admit analytical integrals, the Risch algorithm provides a robust
mechanism for determining the existence of an elementary integral and for computing it. In practical
applications, numerical integration techniques are more commonly employed. These techniques are
rooted in the concept that a function can be expanded in a series of integrable functions. Methods of
numerical integration often hinge on a designated grid of integration points associated with respective
weights. For example, the Fourier series converts to summation over a uniform grid, and the Gaussian
quadrature induces points that are the roots of the Legendre/Laguerre polynomials. With the grids
and corresponding weights, integration of a function converts to a weighted summation over a finite
set of points. We implement the integrate operator by supplying a numerical grid for the integrand
function.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   C OMPLETENESS OF THE PRIMITIVES

Besides the above listed operators, a few other operators are needed for completeness. For example,
the operator to permute the order that arguments are passed to a function: PermuteArgs21 (f) :
x, y 7→ f (y, x), the operator to zip together two functions: Zip(f, g) : x, y 7→ f (x), g(y). We
can inspect whether these rules forms a closed set by examining whether the right hand side of the
rules (7) to (18) can be implemented with these primitives themselves. Most of the rules are readily
implementable with the primitives, with a few exceptions:
1. Rule (9) and rule (16) requires the inverse of a function, which is not implemented because the
   general mechanism to invert a function is not available in JAX. When the function is a non-
   invertible map, the transpose rules can still exist mathematically (Equation 25). However, it has to
   be implemented case by case based on specific properties of the mapping.
2. Rule (14) involves an integral, as discussed in Section 3.2.5, there is no general rule for integration
   for any functions. Therefore, the accuracy of the integral is limited by the chosen numerical grid.

3.4   E FFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION

There are a few practical issues considered in our system. Firstly, chain of function composition is
expensive, if we have a function h, and we compose with the expression f ◦ h + g ◦ h. In python
code this is lambda x: f(h(x)) + g(h(x)), without proper treatment, h(x) will be invoked twice.
The situation is exacerbated when the resulting function is again composed with other functions
multiple times. Although in JAX, common sub-expression elimination (CSE) is performed to remove
redundant computations during the JIT compilation, we find in practice that the computation graph
could grow to a prohibitively large size before we could JIT it. To resolve this problem, we add
a cache for the function calls. When the same function is invoked several times with the same
argument, the cached output is directly returned. With a large amount of redundant computations,
this optimization greatly reduced the computation time of the resulting function (Appendix D).
Another performance issue hides in the ∇ operator. For one, the reverse mode derivative approxi-
mately doubles the nodes in the computation graph, the size of the graph grows quickly when we
perform higher order derivatives. Moreover, it is quite common in applications that we need to per-
form various orders of differentiation on different variables, e.g. ∇y (∇x (f ))(x, y) and ∇y (f )(x, y).
It is worth noting that the inner differentiation of the first expression ∇x (f ) shares computation
graph with the second expression. Again, it could be prohibitively expensive for the tracing phase.
This issue is not specific to our system but in general exists in JAX. We can see an opportunity for
optimization using our system because we build a graph made of ∇ operators and functions without
actually executing it. It is desirable to compile mixed order differentiation of functions into efficient
programs, for example, Faà di Bruno mode differentiation (Bettencourt et al., 2019). We leave this
optimization as a future work.

4     A PPLICATIONS
In numerous application scenarios, function approximation problems are often transformed into
parameter fitting tasks, such as using neural networks or linear combinations of function bases.
Gradients in the function space may appear unnecessary, as our ultimate optimization takes place in
the parameter space. In this section, we focus on application cases where functional derivative plays
a crucial role.

4.1   S OLVING VARIATIONAL P ROBLEM

Variational problems are problems R that search for the optima of a functional. We consider local
functional of the form F (y) = I(y θ (x), ∇y θ (x))dx. Conceptually, we just need to compute
the functional derivative δF
                          δy and perform gradient descent for functionals. In practice, to make it
implementable, we usually introduce a parametric function y θ (x). For optimization, we can directly
compute the gradient w.r.t. θ,
                                           Z
                               ∂      θ       ∂
                                  F (y ) =       I(y θ (x), ∇y θ (x))dx                         (19)
                               ∂θ             ∂θ


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Optimized Curve                                             Functional Gradient
          0.0                                 groundtruth                                                     groudtruth
                                              minimize F              102                                     minimize F
          0.2                                 minimize FD             101                                     minimize FD
                                              minimize F via FD                                               minimize F via FD
          0.4                                                         100
                                                                        0
          0.6                                                         100
          0.8                                                         101
          1.0                                                         102
                                                                      103
          1.2
                0.0   0.2     0.4     0.6        0.8        1.0             0.0   0.2      0.4      0.6          0.8        1.0


                        Figure 1: Brachistochrone curve fitted with different loss


While the above is the most straightforward method for this problem, with the introduction of
functional gradient, we enable a few more options. One of the new options is to perform chain
rule through the functional gradient, namely, we compute the functional derivative δTδy(y) first, then
pointwisely backpropagate the gradient to the parameter,
                                               δT (y θ )     ∂y θ (x)
                                           Z
                                ∂      θ
                                  F (y ) =               (x)          dx                          (20)
                               ∂θ               δy θ           ∂θ
Notice that in Equation (20) the functional derivative can be explicitly expanded using the Euler-
Lagrange formula. With some derivation (Appendix E), we can see that Equation (20) and (19) are
two different estimators for the gradient of θ, though they share the same expectation.
One more choice we have is to directly minimize the magnitude of the functional gradient based on
the fact that at the optimal, functional gradient should be zero.
                                                 δT (y θ )
                                            Z
                                       min ∥               (x)∥2 dx                          (21)
                                         θ         δy θ
We apply the above methods on the classic brachistochrone problem. The brachistochrone curve
represents the optimal path that minimizes the travel time for a particle moving between two
points in the gravitational field. Assume the initial position x, y = 0, 0, and the end position
x, y = 1, −1.    The travel p time can be represented as a functional of the curve, denoted as
          R1p
F (y) = 0 1 + ∇y(x)2 / −y(x)dx. The numerator calculates the length of the curve, the
denominator is the speed of particle. We use y θ (x) = nnθ (x) sin(πx) − x as the approximator, where
nnθ is an MLP and the other terms are used to constrain the initial and end positions. More details of
the experimental settings can be found in Appendix G
Instead of implementing Equation (20) explicitly, we illustrated below the simplicity of using AutoFD
to compose the functional and compute functional gradient. The results are summarized in Figure
1, the methods (19), (20) and (21) are named minimize F, minimize F via FD and minimize FD
correspondingly. It is worth highlighting that the directly minimize in the parameter space is limited
by the numerical integration, it easily overfits to the numerical grid. Meanwhile, the functional
derivative involved in the other two methods seems to provide a strong regularization effect, leading
to curves close to the groundtruth. Better functional optimal are found as can be seen in Figure 1
(right) that the functional gradient is closer to zero. Whether Equation (20) is better than Equation
(19) in a general context needs further investigation.

 from autofd.operators import integrate, sqrt, nabla

 def y(params, x):
   ...

 def F(y: Callable) -> Callable:
   return integrate(sqrt(1+nabla(y, argnums=1)**2)/sqrt(-y))
 fd = jax.grad(F)(y)



                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   D ENSITY F UNCTIONAL T HEORY

Density functional theory (DFT) is widely used for calculating electronic structures. Although the
DFT theory proves the existence of a functional that maps electron density to the ground state energy,
the accuracy of DFT in practice relies heavily on approximated exchange-correlation (XC) energy
functionals with the general form
                                             Z
                                  Exc (ρ) = ρ(r)ϵxc (ρ)(r)dr                                     (22)

Where ρ is the electron density function, and ϵxc (ρ) is the XC energy density which is dependent
on ρ. A comprehensive list of XC functionals are maintained in LibXC (Lehtola et al., 2018), its
JAX translation is introduced in JAX-XC (Zheng & Lin, 2023). In the Self-Consistent Field (SCF)
update of the DFT calculation, the effective potential induced by the XC functional is computed as its
functional derivative Vxc = δEδρ
                               xc (ρ)
                                      . Traditionally, the Vxc is derived via the Euler-Lagrange equation.
Its implementation is often done in the parameter space of ρ and entangled with the numerical integral
scheme. With automatic functional differentiation, the computation of Vxc can be decoupled from
the choice of parameterization and integral schemes. In the code example below, gga_x_pbe is
implemented as an semilocal operator using the primitives defined in this work. Vxc can be obtained
by calling jax.grad on Exc .

 from autofd.operators import integrate
 # a point in 3D
 r = jnp.array([0.1, 0.2, 0.3])
 # Exc, exchange-correlation energy functional
 def exc(rho: Callable) -> Float:
   epsilon_xc = gga_x_pbe(rho)
   return integrate(epsilon_xc * rho)
 # Vxc is the functional derivative of Exc
 vxc = jax.grad(exc)(rho)
 # Vxc is itself a function callable with r as input
 vxc(r)


4.3   D IFFERENTIATING N ONLOCAL F UNCTIONALS

Both the brachistochrone and DFT shown in previous sections are examples of integral functionals
with semi-local functionals that conforms to 2. In this section, we explore a more interesting
case where a nonlocal operator is involved. We consider the higher order version of multilayer
perceptron
R           (MLP), where the input is a R → R function. The ith linear layers follows fi (x) =
  k(x, y)fi−1 (y)dy + b(x), where k is the kernel function resembling the weights in MLP, and b acts
as the bias. Activation functions are applied pointwise after the linear layer. For the last layer, we
don’t apply any activation, but compares the the output with a target function t with L2 loss. This is
often called neural operator or neural functional, or which the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) is a
special case where the integral is done via fourier series.
To learn a neural operator, traditionally we use parameterized neural networks as k θ (x, y) and bϕ (x)
where θ, ϕ are network parameters. The gradient descent is directly done in the parameter space, it
seems like we can’t apply AutoFD here. There is, however, an expensive way to do it, we can directly
subtract the functional gradient from the old function, i.e. k ← k − η δL(k)
                                                                         δk , where η is the learning
                    δL(k)
rate and both k and δk are functions. It is expensive because the new k expands in the computation
graph. The purpose of this experiment is only to show that AutoFD is capable of handling such
complex computations. We show in Appendix H that our proposed update moves in the direction of
smaller losses, though each step gets more expensive and yields more complex k.

5     R ELATED W ORKS

AD has a long history of wide applications across various domains in science and engineering. More
recently, the success of deep learning has brought automatic differentiation to a focal point in machine


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


learning. In the world of machine learning, several differentiable programming frameworks backed
by highly optimized vectorized implementations are proposed in the past few years, for example,
Theano (Bastien et al., 2012), Mxnet (Chen et al., 2015), Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016), Jax (Frostig
et al., 2018) and Torch (Paszke et al., 2019). All of these frameworks focus on AD of functions
that map real values. Differentiation of functionals and operators, however, has been mostly derived
analytically and implemented case by case. There are a number of works that studies AD in the
context of higher-order functionals (Pearlmutter & Siskind, 2008; Elliott, 2018; Shaikhha et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2019; Huot et al., 2020; Sherman et al., 2021). They mainly focus on how AD can be
implemented more efficiently and in a compositional manner when the code contains high-order
functional transformations, which is related to but distinct from this work. For example, Elliott
(2018) studies how D(f ◦ g)(x) can be implemented more efficiently using the algebraic relation
of D(f ◦ g)(x) = D(f )(g(x)) ◦ D(g)(x); while in this work, we study the differentiation of the
higher-order function ◦ itself, namely D(◦)(f ).
The most closely related works are Birkisson & Driscoll (2012) and Di Gianantonio et al. (2022).
Birkisson & Driscoll (2012) computes the Fréchet derivative of operators by representing functions as
linear combination of Chebyshev basis functions. Di Gianantonio et al. (2022) describes a language
called Dual PCF which is capable of evaluating forward mode directional derivatives of functionals.
The method is based on dual numbers and there is no reverse mode support mentioned. There
are also implementations of functional derivatives in symbolic math packages. For example, Both
Mathmematica (Wolfram Research) and SymPy (Meurer et al., 2017) implement the semi-local
functional derivative in the canonical Euler-Lagrange form. In Maple (Maplesoft), there is also the
FunDiff command, which relies on the calculus of Dirac delta function and its derivatives based on
the provided information. Their implementation differs from the AD approach we take in this work,
and they do not support vectorized execution on modern hardwares.

6   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we introduce AutoFD, a system to perform automatic functional differentiation. We take
a novel approach to functional differentiation by directly reusing the AD machinery for higher order
functions. We implemented a core set of operators that covers various useful types of functionals. We
discuss several limitations here as potential directions for future work.
Completeness: As discussed in Section 3.3, in several of the rules, the inversion operator is required.
It would rely on a systematic mechanism to register the invertibility and inverse function for the
primitives, at the time of writing, such mechanism is not implemented in JAX.
Analytical integration: It is desirable in applications like quantum chemistry to use analytical
functions and integrate them analytically. While integrating symbolic packages like SymPy to
JAX (Kidger) could provide this functionality, it is limited to scalar functions. Automatically de-
vmapping the vectorized primitive to scalar functions could be one potential path to generally bring
analytical integral to JAX.
Static shape: AutoFD requires accurate annotation of functions using jaxtyping. This is a design
choice to allow early raising of errors as it is more informative than delayed to the execution of
resulting functions. However, this not only adds extra work but also limits the flexibility of using
AutoFD. Further exploration is required for a better trade-off.
Programming in mixed order: For example, the partial transformation in python is a mixed order
operator that binds an argument to a function (both considered inputs to the partial operator). While it
is possible to support gradients for both the argument and the function. Complications emerge during
the just in time compilation, jitting a mixed computation graph is not possible because the operator
primitives are pure python and do not support lowering. Ultimately we would like to remove this
constraint and program differentiably for real values as well as any order of functions.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
 Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. {TensorFlow}: a system for
 {Large-Scale} machine learning. In 12th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and
 implementation (OSDI 16), pp. 265–283, 2016.
Alampallam V Balakrishnan. Applied Functional Analysis: A, volume 3. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.
Frédéric Bastien, Pascal Lamblin, Razvan Pascanu, James Bergstra, Ian Goodfellow, Arnaud Bergeron,
  Nicolas Bouchard, David Warde-Farley, and Yoshua Bengio. Theano: new features and speed
  improvements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.5590, 2012.
Jesse Bettencourt, Matthew J Johnson, and David Duvenaud. Taylor-mode automatic differentiation
  for higher-order derivatives in jax. In Program Transformations for ML Workshop at NeurIPS
  2019, 2019.
Asgeir Birkisson and Tobin A Driscoll. Automatic fréchet differentiation for the numerical solution
  of boundary-value problems. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 38(4):1–29,
  2012.
Tianqi Chen, Mu Li, Yutian Li, Min Lin, Naiyan Wang, Minjie Wang, Tianjun Xiao, Bing Xu,
  Chiyuan Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Mxnet: A flexible and efficient machine learning library for
  heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.01274, 2015.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04630, 2020.
Pietro Di Gianantonio, Abbas Edalat, and Ran Gutin. A language for evaluating derivatives of
  functionals using automatic differentiation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06095, 2022.
Leon Ehrenpreis. On the theory of kernels of schwartz. Proceedings of the American Mathematical
  Society, 7(4):713–718, 1956.
Conal Elliott. The simple essence of automatic differentiation. Proceedings of the ACM on Program-
  ming Languages, 2(ICFP):1–29, 2018.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http:
  //github.com/google/brax.
Roy Frostig, Matthew James Johnson, and Chris Leary. Compiling machine learning programs via
  high-level tracing. Systems for Machine Learning, 4(9), 2018.
A Gonis. Functionals and functional derivatives of wave functions and densities. World Journal of
  Condensed Matter Physics, 2014, 2014.
Zheyuan Hu, Tianbo Li, Zekun Shi, Kunhao Zheng, Giovanni Vignale, Kenji Kawaguchi, YAN
  Shuicheng, and Min Lin. Neural integral functionals. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Physics for
  Machine Learning, 2023.
Mathieu Huot, Sam Staton, and Matthijs Vákár. Correctness of automatic differentiation via diffeolo-
 gies and categorical gluing. In FoSSaCS, pp. 319–338, 2020.
Patrick Kidger. sympy2jax. https://github.com/google/sympy2jax.
Susi Lehtola, Conrad Steigemann, Micael JT Oliveira, and Miguel AL Marques. Recent developments
  in libxc—a comprehensive library of functionals for density functional theory. SoftwareX, 7:1–5,
  2018.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew
  Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maplesoft. functional differentiation. URL https://www.maplesoft.com/support/help/maple/
 view.aspx?path=Physics%2FFundiff.
Johannes T Margraf and Karsten Reuter. Pure non-local machine-learned density functional theory
  for electron correlation. Nature communications, 12(1):344, 2021.
Aaron Meurer, Christopher P. Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondřej Čertík, Sergey B. Kirpichev, Matthew
  Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K. Moore, Sartaj Singh, Thilina Rathnayake, Sean
  Vig, Brian E. Granger, Richard P. Muller, Francesco Bonazzi, Harsh Gupta, Shivam Vats, Fredrik
  Johansson, Fabian Pedregosa, Matthew J. Curry, Andy R. Terrel, Štěpán Roučka, Ashutosh
  Saboo, Isuru Fernando, Sumith Kulal, Robert Cimrman, and Anthony Scopatz. Sympy: symbolic
  computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e103, January 2017. ISSN 2376-5992. doi:
 10.7717/peerj-cs.103. URL https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.103.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Barak A Pearlmutter and Jeffrey Mark Siskind. Reverse-mode ad in a functional framework:
  Lambda the ultimate backpropagator. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems
  (TOPLAS), 30(2):1–36, 2008.
John P Perdew and Karla Schmidt. Jacob’s ladder of density functional approximations for the
  exchange-correlation energy. In AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 577, pp. 1–20. American
  Institute of Physics, 2001.
Davide Piras and A Spurio Mancini. Cosmopower-jax: high-dimensional bayesian inference with
  differentiable cosmological emulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06347, 2023.
Alexey Radul, Adam Paszke, Roy Frostig, Matthew J Johnson, and Dougal Maclaurin. You only
  linearize once: Tangents transpose to gradients. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
  Languages, 7(POPL):1246–1274, 2023.
Samuel S Schoenholz and Ekin D Cubuk. Jax, md a framework for differentiable physics. Journal of
  Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2021(12):124016, 2021.
Amir Shaikhha, Andrew Fitzgibbon, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, and Simon Peyton Jones. Efficient
 differentiable programming in a functional array-processing language. Proceedings of the ACM on
 Programming Languages, 3(ICFP):1–30, 2019.
Benjamin Sherman, Jesse Michel, and Michael Carbin. Computable semantics for differentiable
  programming with higher-order functions and datatypes. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
  Languages, 5(POPL):1–31, 2021.
Shlomo Sternberg. Lectures on differential geometry, volume 316. American Mathematical Soc.,
  1999.
Fei Wang, Daniel Zheng, James Decker, Xilun Wu, Grégory M Essertel, and Tiark Rompf. Demysti-
  fying differentiable programming: Shift/reset the penultimate backpropagator. Proceedings of the
  ACM on Programming Languages, 3(ICFP):1–31, 2019.
Inc. Wolfram Research. Variationald. URL https://reference.wolfram.com/language/
  VariationalMethods/tutorial/VariationalMethods.html.
Federico Zahariev, Sarom Sok Leang, and Mark S Gordon. Functional derivatives of meta-generalized
  gradient approximation (meta-gga) type exchange-correlation density functionals. The Journal of
  Chemical Physics, 138(24), 2013.
Kunhao Zheng and Min Lin. Jax-xc: Exchange correlation functionals library in jax. In Workshop
  on”Machine Learning for Materials”ICLR 2023, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XAMPLE OF I MPLEMENTATION
To clarify how the math are correspondingly implemented as extension to JAX, we show a minimal
implementation of the operator ∇. We restrict the implementation to take only scalar function, so that
the divergence ∇ · δh is equal to the gradient ∇δh. With this simplification, the JVP and transpose
rules are
                                     D(∇)(f ) : δf 7→ ∇(δf ).                                    (23)
                                     T (∇)(f ) : δh 7→ −∇δh.                                     (24)

Here’s a list of mappings between math symbols and the code.

       • f: f
       • δf : df
       • δh: dh
       • ∇: nabla
       • D(∇)(f )(δf ): nabla_jvp_rule((f,), (df,))
       • T (∇)(f )(δh): nabla_transpose_rule(dh, f)

We first implement ∇ as a JAX primitive.

 nabla_p = core.Primitive("nabla")

 def nabla(f):
   return nabla_p.bind(f)

 @nabla_p.def_impl
 def nabla_impl(f):
   return jax.grad(f)

 @nabla_p.def_abstract_eval
 def nabla_abstract_eval(f):
   # f has scalar input and output
   # jax.grad(f) has same signature as f
   return f.shape

 def nabla_jvp_rule(primals, tangents):
   # nabla is a linear operator
   f, df = primals[0], tangents[0]
   return nabla(f), nabla(df)

 def nabla_transpose_rule(cotangent, primal):
   # According to the transpose rule in math
   dh = cotangent
   # we assume here negation on a function
   # is already implemented by the compose operator
   return -nabla(cotangent)

 # we register the jvp and transpose rules.
 jax.interpreters.ad.primitive_jvps[nabla_p] = nabla_jvp_rule
 jax.interpreters.ad.primitive_transposes[nabla_p] = nabla_transpose_rule


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we define some random functions as primal, tangent and cotangent values.

 def f(x):
   return jnp.sin(x)

 def df(x):
   return x ** 2

 def dh(x):
   return jnp.exp(x)


Finally, we show how the operator can be invoked, and how to perform automatic functional differen-
tiation on the operator.

 # We can use nabla directly on f,
 nf = nabla(f)
 # triggers nabla_impl, nf: jnp.cos

 # Or, we can compute the jvp of nabla, remember nabla is an operator
 # jax.jvp here is computing the forward mode gradient for an operator!
 nf, ndf = jax.jvp(nabla, primals=(f,), tangents=(df,))
 # triggers nabla_jvp_rule, nf: jnp.cos, ndf: lambda x: 2x

 # Since nabla is an linear operator, we can transpose it.
 tnabla = jax.linear_transpose(nabla, primals=(f,))
 # linear transpose of an operator is still an operator,
 # we apply this new operator tnabla on the function dh.
 tndh = tnabla(dh)
 # triggers nabla_transpose_rule, tndh: lambda x: -jnp.exp(x)

 # Or, we can do the backward mode gradient on nabla
 primal_out, vjp_function = jax.vjp(nabla, f)
 # invoke the vjp function on the cotangent dh
 vjp_dh = vjp_function(dh)
 # this triggers both nabla_jvp_rule and nabla_transpose_rule
 # vjp_dh: lambda x: -jnp.exp(x)



B    P ROOFS OF JVP RULES

JVP rules are trivial for linear operator, for a linear operator Ô, the JVP rule are always simply
applying the same operator on the tangent function,


                                       D(Ô)(f ) : δf 7→ Ô(δf )

For our core set of operators, ∇, L̂ and T̂ are all linear operators that need no extra proof for the JVP
rules. We give here a step by step derivation for the JVP rules of the Ĉ operator.


                                              f (g(x) + τ δg(x)) − f (g(x))
              ∂g (Ĉ)(f, g)(δg)(x) = lim
                                       τ →0                 τ
                                      d
                                   =    f (g(x) + τ δg(x)) |τ =0 = ∇(f )(g(x)) · δg(x)
                                     dτ
                                   = Ĉ(L̂(f ), g, δg)(x)


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    f (g(x)) + τ δf (g(x)) − f (g(x))
                    ∂f (Ĉ)(f, g)(δf )(x) = lim
                                               τ →0                  τ
                                             = δf (g(x))
                                             = Ĉ(δf, g)(x)

C     P ROOFS OF TRANSPOSE RULES
Given an operator Ô the adjoint of an operator Ô∗ satisfies (Ôu, v) = (u, Ô∗ v).

C.1    C OMPOSE
                                                                      R
The Schwartz kernel form of compose operator is Ĉ(f, g) =                δ(x − g(y))f (x)dx.

                                  Z       Z
               ⟨Ĉ(f, g), δh⟩ =    dyδh(y) dxδ(x − g(y))f (x)
                                Z        Z
                              = dxf (x) dyδ(x − g(y))δh(y)
                                   Z
                              = ⟨f, dyδ(x − g(y))δh(y)⟩                                            (25)
                                Z        Z
                              = dxf (x) dz| det ∇(g −1 )(z)|δ(x − z)δh(g −1 (z))
                                Z
                              = dxf (x)| det ∇(g −1 )(x)|δh(g −1 (x))

                              = ⟨f, Ĉ(δh, g −1 )| det ∇(g −1 )|⟩

Therefore, transposition of Ĉ w.r.t. f is,

                            Tf (Ĉ)(f, g)(δh) = Ĉ(δh, g −1 )| det ∇(g −1 )|.
In the case where f is linear, we can write f (x) as Jf x where Jf is the jacobian matrix of f . We omit
the case where f is nonlinear, as transposition is only defined and implemented for linear operators.
Transposition w.r.t. g is simple
                                                  Z
                                ⟨Ĉ(f, g), δh⟩ = (F g(y))⊤ δh(y)dy
                                                  Z
                                                = g ⊤ (y)F ⊤ δh(y)dy

                                                    = ⟨g, Ĉ(T̂ (f ), δh)⟩
Therefore, transpose of Ĉ w.r.t. g is,
                                      Tg (Ĉ)(f, g)(δh) = Ĉ(T̂ (f ), δh)

C.2    NABLA

A brief proof for single variable function was given in the main text, here we expand to the multi-
variate case.
                                 XZ              Z
                      ⟨∇f, g⟩ =         dygij (y) dxδ ′ (xj − yj )fi (y∼j , xj )
                                      ij
                                      XZ                             Z
                                                ′
                                =           dyδ (xj − yj )gij (y)         fi (y∼j , xj )dx
                                      ij

                                = ⟨f, −∇ · g⟩


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3   L INEARIZE
                                    ZZZ
                   ⟨L̂(f ), δh⟩ =     dzδ ′ (z − x)f (z)δx · δh(x, δx)dxdδx
                                 Z           Z         Z
                               = dzf (z) · dδx δx dxδ ′ (z − x)δh(x, δx)
                                 Z             Z
                               = dzf (z) · − δx∇δh(·, δx)dδx
                                      Z
                               = ⟨f, − δx∇δh(·, δx)dδx⟩

Therefore,                                              Z
                               T (L̂)(f )(δh) = −            δx∇δh(·, δx)dδx


C.4   L INEAR T RANSPOSE

Linear transpose of linear transpose operator sounds interesting. Since linear transpose can only
be applied to linear functions, we write the function being transposed as x 7→ Jf x, transpose of
T (f ) : y 7→ Jf⊤ y. We’re only able to derive the adjoint of T̂ when δh is an invertible mapping.
                                        Z
                         ⟨T̂ (f ), δh⟩ = (Jf⊤ y) · δh(y)dy
                                        Z
                                       = y ⊤ Jf δh(y)dy
                                        Z
                                       = δh−1 (x)⊤ Jf xdδh−1 (x)
                                        Z
                                       = | det ∇(δh−1 )(x)|δh−1 (x)⊤ Jf xdx

                                     = ⟨f, | det ∇(δh−1 )|δh−1 ⟩
Therefore,
                          T (T̂ )(f )(δh) = T̂ ∗ (δh) = | det ∇(δh−1 )|δh−1

C.5   I NTEGRAL O PERATOR
                                             Z          Z
                          ⟨Iˆi (f ), δh⟩ =       dx∼i        dxi f (xi , x∼i )δh(x∼i )
                                             Z
                                       =               ¯
                                                 f (x)δh(x)dx        ¯
                                                              = ⟨f, δh⟩

Where δh¯ is xi , x∼i 7→ δh(x∼i ). Therefore the adjoint of the integral operator is simply augmenting
the cotangent function δh with unused arguments to match the domain of the f .


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    C OMMON S UBEXPRESSION E LIMINATION VIA C ACHING


In Section 3.4, we introduced the composition f ◦ h + g ◦ h. We can recursively nest this composition
by setting hi = f ◦ hi−1 + g ◦ hi−1 . The redundant computations are then exponential to the depth
of the composition. Specifically, we use the following code for measuring the execution cost for
different nested depth, with and without function call caching.



 # we use sin, exp, tanh for h, f, g respectively.
 def F(h):
   for _ in range(depth):
     h = f(h) + g(h)
   return h

 # Fh is h = f(h) + g(h) nested to depth times
 Fh = F(h)
 # time the execution
 t1 = time.time()
 jax.jit(Fh)(0.)
 t2 = time.time()
 cost = t2 - t1



When the above nested function composition are implemented naively, the time cost of computation
grows exponentially with the nest depth, because there are two branches f(h) and g(h) at each
composition. However, when function call caching is used, at each level one branch can reuse the
cached result of the other branch, resulting in a linear time cost with respect to the nest depth. We
plot the time cost vs the nest depth in Figure 2.


                                                  Execution time vs nest depth
                                                                              w/o cache
                                                                              w/ cache
                                   101
              Execution time (s)


                                   100


                                   10 1

                                          0   5        10        15    20      25     30
                                                            Nest depth
            Figure 2: Function call caching significantly improves execution efficiency.


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    C OMPARING G RADIENT E STIMATORS
Subtracting Equation (19) and (20) we get:
                                       ∂∇y θ (x)                 ∂y θ (x)
                        Z
                                ∂I                         ∂I
                                                   +∇                       dx
                             ∂∇y θ (x)    ∂θ            ∂∇y θ (x) ∂θ
                                         ∂y θ (x)                ∂y θ (x)
                        Z
                                ∂I                         ∂I
                     =                 ∇           +  ∇                     dx
                             ∂∇y θ (x)     ∂θ           ∂∇y θ (x) ∂θ
                                             ∂y θ (x)
                           Z
                                     ∂I
                        = ∇                             dx
                                  ∂∇y θ (x) ∂θ
                                             ∂y θ (x)
                             Z
                                     ∂I
                        =∇                              dx = 0                                  (26)
                                  ∂∇y θ (x) ∂θ
In Equation (26), the integral evaluate to a constant that is not dependent on x; therefore taking ∇
on the integral yields 0. This proves Equation (19) and (20), when the integrals are discretized, are
different estimators of the same quantity.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   H IGHER O RDER F UNCTIONAL D ERIVATIVE IN L IB XC


      Figure 3: Many terms are involved in constructing higher order functional derivatives.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS FOR B RACHISTOCHRONE
For the brachistochrone experiment, the initial position is at (x0 , y0 ) = (0, 0) and the end position is
(xT , yT ) = (1, −1). The functional we minimize is

                                         Z 1p            p
                               F (y) =       1 + ∇y(x)2 / −y(x)dx
                                          0
We aim to find
                                          y ∗ = arg min F (y)
                                                        y

We use y(x) = MLP(x) sin(πx) − x to ensure that it passes through (0, 0) and (1, −1). The MLP is
a multi-layer perceptron that maps R → R, with hidden dimensions as {128, 128, 128, 1}. All layers
uses the sigmoid function as the activation function, except for the last layer which has no activation
function.
For the integration, we use a uniformly sampled grid of 50 points, the starting point is at 0.01 and
the ending point is at 1. The reason we choose
                                             p a non-zero starting point is because 0 is a singular
point for the integrand, i.e. the denominator −y(0) = 0. For the optimization process, since it is a
toy problem, we use out of the box adam optimizer from optax, with fixed learning rate 1e−3 and
optimize for 10000 steps.
It is worth noting that this is not the optimal setting for doing integration, one can either use a more
densely sampled grid or use Monte Carlo integration for a better fitted brachistochrone curve. We
choose this setting to show that Equation (19) and Equation (20) are very different estimators, and
that Eqation (20) could have a regularizing effect on the scale of functional derivative (Figure 1) due
to the fact that functional derivative is explicitly used.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    N ONLOCAL N EURAL F UNCTIONAL WITH F UNCTIONAL G RADIENT
     D ESCENT
We describe our precedure of optimizing the nonlocal neural functional in more detail here. The
neural functional we use has two linear operator layers, the first layer uses a ‘tanh‘ activation function,
while the second layer uses no activation. The final output function is compared with the target
function via L2 loss. We take a learning rate of 0.1 for 4 steps. The code of this experiment is
presented below.

 import autofd.operators as o

 def f(x: Float32[Array, ""]) -> Float32[Array, ""]:
   return jnp.sin(4 * x * jnp.pi)

 def b(x: Float32[Array, ""]) -> Float32[Array, ""]:
   return jnp.sin(x * jnp.pi)

 def y(x: Float32[Array, ""]) -> Float32[Array, ""]:
   return jnp.cos(x * jnp.pi)

 def k(y: Float32[Array, ""], x: Float32[Array, ""]) -> Float32[Array, ""]:
   return jnp.sin(y) + jnp.cos(x)

 def layer(k, b, f, activate=True):
   # here k @ f is syntatic sugar for
   # o.integrate(k * broadcast(f), argnums=1)
   g = k @ f + b
   if activate:
     a = o.numpy.tanh(g)
     return a
   else:
     return g

 def loss(params, f, t):
   # two layer mlp
   k1, b1, k2, b2 = params
   h1 = layer(k1, b1, f, activation=True)
   h2 = layer(k2, b2, h1, activation=False)
   return o.integrate((h2 - t)**2)

 # initialize both k1, k2 to k, b1, b2 to b
 param = (k, b, k, b)

 # perform gradient steps
 l = loss(param, f, t)
 print(f"initial loss: {l}")
 for i in range(3):
   grad = jax.grad(loss)(param, f, t)
   param = jax.tree_util.tree_map(lambda x, dx: x - 0.1 * dx, param, grad)
   l = loss(param, f, t)
   print(f"loss at step {i}: {l}")

As can be seen, in the limited number of steps we take, the loss steadily goes smaller (Figure 4). We
visualize the prediction from the neural functional vs the target function in Figure 5, and the kernel
k(x, y) from the first layer of the neural functional in Figure 6. The reason we only takes 4 steps of
descent is because the learned kernel function gets prohibitively large. We show the JAXPR graphs
of k(x, y) from the first neural functional layer for each step in Figure 7, notice that the graph for
step 4 is too big that we failed to render it.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Functional Loss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Step

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 4: Loss vs Step for the nonlocal functional training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Step 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Step 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Step 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Step 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Step 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   predicted function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            predicted function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          predicted function
    1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       target function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         target function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           target function
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.75
    1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
    0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.50
    0.5
                 predicted function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        predicted function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.75
    1.0          target function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        target function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.00
           0.0     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                0.8          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 5: Predicted function vs target function at each step.
                       k(x,y) at step 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k(x,y) at step 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k(x,y) at step 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k(x,y) at step 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k(x,y) at step 4
     0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0

     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2

     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y
     0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6

     0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8

     1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.0
        0.0       0.2                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                                         0.8                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 6: Visualize kernel k(x, y) from the first layer at each step.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               float32[100]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[100]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                               float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                            mul                                                                        sin                                                          cos                                                                  mul                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                         cos                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                               sin                                                             sin                                                     cos                                                          float32[]                                                                      mul                                                             cos                                                                     mul                                                     sin                                                                  sin                                                              cos                                                         float32[]                                                                           cos                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                           sin                                                                                            cos                                                                           sin                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                            sin                                                                cos                                                                                          sin                                                                                               cos                                                                     mul                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                              sin                                                                                                     cos                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin                                                                                                         cos                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                          mul                                                                          mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sin                                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                               mul                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                              mul                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                       mul                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                    mul                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                                                                  sin                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                          add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                sin                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  float32[100]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                     dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[100]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sin                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cos                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 integer_pow                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                            float32[]


          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                      dot_general                                                                                       float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                              float32[]                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               float32[]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                  cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                          sin                                                                                                                                       mul                                                            float32[]                                                                                                      add_any                                                                                                                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                    integer_pow                                                                                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                                                                float32[]                                                                                                              mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                   add                                                      cos                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                      convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                        convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       float32[]                                                                                   convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                    mul



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                         convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                       float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                             sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                              integer_pow                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                                                                                                         convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general                                                                                                          sin


                 sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                            dot_general
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                      mul                                                                   float32[]                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                  dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sin                                                   mul                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                            tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cos                                                                                      sub                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                              add                                                sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                    convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add_any                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       float32[]                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                      convert_element_type                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 convert_element_type



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                         cos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                  convert_element_type



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                                                                                                                                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  integer_pow                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                          add
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                            add                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]               float32[]           float32[]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            cos                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cos              mul               mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                          mul                                                                                      add                          mul               mul



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                      dot_general                                                                convert_element_type               sin           sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                 mul       float32[]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                               add_any                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                            mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add_any                                                                                                                                     convert_element_type               sub



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                               float32[]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul            float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                convert_element_type
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sub


                                                                                                                                             out_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            out_0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           out_0


                 (a) step 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) step 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (c) step 2


                                                                                 float32[]                            float32[]                                                                                                                                     float32[]                       float32[]          float32[]                                                                                                 float32[]                               float32[]                                                                                                         float32[]                             float32[]                                                                                                            float32[]                             float32[]                float32[]                                       float32[]                                                                                                                              float32[]                       float32[]               float32[]             float32[]                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                 float32[]          float32[]          float32[]                                                                    float32[]                               float32[]                                                                                                     float32[]                              float32[]                                                                                                   float32[]                          float32[]            float32[]         float32[]                          float32[]                                                                                                               float32[]                      float32[]              float32[]                                                                                                                                    float32[]                    float32[]           float32[]            float32[]                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                           float32[]          float32[]                                                                                          float32[]                                float32[]                       float32[]                                float32[]                                                                                                                                           float32[]                            float32[]                    float32[]                                                                                                                                  float32[]                             float32[]                float32[]                                                                                float32[]                                                                                                                                              float32[]                    float32[]           float32[]           float32[]                                                                                     float32[]                              float32[]                                                            float32[]                                                                                                                                   float32[]                              float32[]                                                                                                                                      float32[]                               float32[]                           float32[]                                                                 float32[]                                 float32[]                                                                                         float32[]                                  float32[]                                                                                                   float32[100]             float32[]                         float32[]                      float32[]                                   float32[]                                                                                                                           float32[]                                float32[]                                                                                                    float32[]                           float32[]        float32[]                                                                                                           float32[]                                 float32[]                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                  float32[]              float32[]                                                                                                       float32[]                                   float32[]   float32[]                              float32[]                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                                           float32[]                        float32[]                float32[]            float32[]                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                            float32[]            float32[]                                  float32[]                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                  float32[]                              float32[]                 float32[]                                                                                              float32[]                                  float32[]                                                           float32[]                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                                                     float32[]                            float32[]           float32[]                                 float32[]                                                                                                      float32[]                           float32[]               float32[]                                   float32[]                        float32[]                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                            float32[]            float32[]                                                                                                  float32[]                                     float32[]                                                        float32[]                                                                   float32[]                                                                                         float32[]                       float32[]           float32[]                float32[]                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                          float32[]          float32[]                                                                                                                    float32[]                           float32[]                float32[]                                                               float32[]                                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                        float32[]   float32[]                                                                       float32[]                            float32[]                                              float32[]


                                  cos            sin         cos        sin        mul             float32[]               mul                                                                  cos                          sin         cos            sin           mul            float32[]            mul          mul                     cos                sin                 cos                     sin                  mul               float32[]             mul               sin            cos                cos            sin                 cos          sin           mul          float32[]                mul                                             cos                sin                cos               sin           mul           float32[]              mul                         mul          cos               sin           mul            float32[]                                                          cos            sin           cos        sin             mul            float32[]            mul             mul                    mul                  float32[]                                           cos                 sin                cos                   sin              mul             float32[]                   mul              mul              mul         cos           sin                cos               sin             mul               float32[]             mul             sin          cos              cos                   sin         cos             sin           mul              float32[]             mul                                         cos              sin                 cos          sin           mul          float32[]             mul                   mul        mul             cos          sin          mul              float32[]                                 cos                sin            cos               sin       mul          float32[]          mul               mul                                                       cos                             sin                    cos           sin             mul         float32[]             mul              mul              mul              cos           sin            cos               sin           mul             float32[]                       sin                         cos                  cos                sin           cos         sin            mul             float32[]              mul                mul                        sin           cos             sin              cos         sin       mul                float32[]             mul                             mul           cos          sin           mul               float32[]                                                           cos                 sin         cos              sin          mul              float32[]             mul                        mul                                             cos                              sin                         cos               sin            mul               float32[]         mul                     mul                  cos                  sin               cos          sin               mul           float32[]                       sin                       cos                  cos                sin         cos        sin           mul            float32[]           mul           mul         mul                                  cos                   sin              cos         sin           mul                float32[]           mul                                     cos            sin           mul             float32[]                                                 cos                   sin            cos            sin           mul              float32[]                mul                                                                cos                     sin             cos                 sin          mul              float32[]                mul                                 mul                cos         sin          cos         sin             mul           float32[]                   mul               sin       cos             cos           sin              cos         sin          mul               float32[]              mul                                                            cos                    sin           cos           sin           mul              float32[]             mul                            mul           cos            sin            mul          float32[]                                        cos                  sin                cos                sin        mul                float32[]             mul                                       cos           sin                cos              sin              mul               float32[]            mul        mul                                              cos                     sin             cos                sin          mul               float32[]             mul                 cos               sin                  cos               sin             mul              float32[]                 sin                cos                  cos              sin              cos               sin              mul                   float32[]             mul                 mul                           sin             cos                   sin           cos             sin           mul                   float32[]             mul         mul          cos          sin          mul             float32[]         cos                  sin                  cos            sin                mul          float32[]                 sin                cos                           cos            sin           cos          sin            mul                float32[]            mul                mul             mul                  cos                 sin                                                 cos                  sin                 cos               sin         mul            float32[]            mul                     mul           cos         sin           mul        float32[]        cos                  sin               cos            sin               mul             float32[]                   sin               cos                  cos                 sin              cos               sin              mul              float32[]             mul                       mul            sin                cos                  sin           cos                 sin           mul                 float32[]              mul                                 cos               sin           mul           float32[]                             cos         sin               mul    float32[]             sin                cos                cos                  sin                   cos               sin         mul                float32[]        mul                    mul          cos            sin         mul            float32[]                       cos            sin             cos           sin               mul             float32[]              mul                mul                   cos            sin      mul           float32[]          mul            cos            sin               cos             sin                  mul            float32[]                      sin                  cos                  cos                  sin              cos             sin             mul            float32[]           mul                  mul                    sin             cos                  sin              cos                sin        mul                   float32[]               mul                                  cos           sin           mul            float32[]                    cos                 sin           mul        float32[]                         cos            sin           cos        sin        mul               float32[]           mul           mul                    mul               cos                 sin               sin                   cos                       cos                  sin                 cos              sin            mul              float32[]            mul           mul                                            cos                    sin                cos                sin                mul             float32[]              mul                mul                                 cos                sin                 mul                float32[]                 cos                   sin                 cos                 sin               mul                       float32[]                       sin                  cos                   cos            sin            cos         sin           mul                float32[]        mul    mul             sin          cos           sin         cos         sin            mul             float32[]            mul                       cos            sin           mul           float32[]


                       broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim            mul                                                               broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          mul                                 broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim                mul                    broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim              mul                                       broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim              mul                                       broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim         mul                                                broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim            mul                                      mul                                                  broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim          mul                                          broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                 mul                       broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim               mul                                   broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim            mul                                    broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim          mul                                 broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         mul                                                               broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim            mul                                 broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim              mul                    broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim              mul                                                broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim                 mul                                           broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim                  mul                                                  broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim            mul                                                               broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim          mul                                    broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim               mul                 broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim            mul                                                     broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                 mul                                         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim               mul                                    broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim               mul                                                      broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim               mul                                         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim           mul                  broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                mul                                                       broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim               mul                                         broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim          mul                                     broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim               mul                                           broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim            mul                                                    broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim          mul                     broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          mul              broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim             mul                                                      broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim              mul                       broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim          mul        broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         mul           broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim                  mul                                      broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim                                broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim             mul                                   broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim     mul       broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim         mul              broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim            mul                                              broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim                 mul                                         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim              mul                    broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim     mul           broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim           mul                                broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim          mul                    broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim            mul                                      broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim            mul               broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim            mul             broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          mul                                                  broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim                     mul                                       broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim            mul                    broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          mul                    broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim             mul                                    broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim            mul                                                      broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                  broadcast_in_dim            mul                                               broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                   mul            broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim               mul                   broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim          mul                          broadcast_in_dim   broadcast_in_dim    broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         mul                           broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim         mul


                                                add                                          add                sin                                                                                                add                                              add                 sin                                                                                                                                                              add               sin                                                                                                       add           add                sin                                                                            add                                                       add                  sin                                                                              add                sin                                                                                   add                                              add                 sin                                                                                                                                                                                  add          add                 sin                                                                                                                                                                                      add         sin                                                                             add               add                sin                                                                add                                                    add                  sin                                                                        add                sin                                                                        add                                              add                 sin                                                                                            add                                             add                     sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add            sin                                    add           add                 sin                                                                                     add                                           add                      sin                                                            add                           sin                                                                                               add                                                add                  sin                                                                                                       add                                                      add                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add           sin                                add           add                  sin                                                                                               add                                             add                    sin                                                                 add                                 sin                                                                      add                                                add                    sin                                                                                       add                                                 add                   sin                                                                                                                                      add           sin                                                                                   add                                               add                     sin                                                                 add                                                     add                       sin                                                                               add                             sin                                                                       add                                 add                            sin                                                                 add                                                     add                                       sin                                                                                            add                                             add                   sin                                                         add         sin                                                                                                                         add                                                   add                           sin                                                                               add                                                          add                                   sin                                                add                            sin                                                              add            sin                                                                                                           add                                              add                                        sin                                                                                                                                                    add                                add                            sin                                                   add                        sin                                                                      add           sin                                                                                                              add                                            add                                 sin                                                               add                                                    add            sin                                                                                                     add                     sin                                       add               sin                                                                                          add                                       add                sin                                                                                                                                                            add                           add                        sin                                                                           add                         sin                                                                    add            sin                                                                                                                         add                                        add                              sin                                                                add                                                         add                                sin                                                                          add                       sin                             add                   sin                    add         add              sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                    add                             sin                                                                       add          add               sin                                                   add             sin                                       add            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                    add                  sin                                                       add                                          add                             sin                                                          add                    sin


                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim            sin                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim               sin                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim               sin                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                sin                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                  broadcast_in_dim           sin                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                 sin                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                  sin                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                               sin                                                  float32[]                             broadcast_in_dim                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                        sin                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                              float32[]                          broadcast_in_dim                                     broadcast_in_dim                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim              sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                 float32[]                     broadcast_in_dim                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                      float32[]                             broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                            mul                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                    sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                               mul                 sin                                                                                                                                                   mul                             sin                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                     float32[100]                 mul                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                    sin                                                  mul                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                      mul                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                  sin                                                                                                       mul                                                                                   mul               sin                                                                mul                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                    mul                            mul                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                          mul          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                    mul                            sin                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                               mul                           mul                                                       mul                                                    mul                     sin                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                              mul                            mul                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                   sin                                                                                                   mul                                                           mul                            mul


                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general               sin                                                                                                                               dot_general              sin                                                sin            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general                 sin                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                                                                                                            dot_general             sin                                           sin            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                  dot_general              sin                                                                                                                           dot_general            sin                             sin           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                         dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dot_general                                                                                                                                                    dot_general              sin                                  dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                             dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general              sin                                                               dot_general                                    dot_general                                                               sin                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                                                                                                      dot_general          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                          dot_general            sin                       dot_general                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dot_general                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                     dot_general                                                         dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dot_general                     sin                                                                         dot_general                                dot_general                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                                                                          dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                         sin                                                                        dot_general           sin                       dot_general                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                         dot_general                                                                                  dot_general         sin                        dot_general           sin                                                                               dot_general                                                                        dot_general                   sin                           dot_general                                                             sin


                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                   add                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                   add                                              add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          add                                                                                                                                                                                                                          add                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                           add                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                                                                                                    add                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                              add                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                              add                                          add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                        add                                            add                                                                                                       add                                                                                    add                                                 add


                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                   tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tanh                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                                                   tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tanh                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                  tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tanh                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                                   tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                   tanh                                                                                       tanh                                                                                                                                                     tanh                                                                                   tanh


                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                     float32[]                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim            float32[]                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                    float32[]                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                       float32[]                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                    float32[]                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                 float32[]                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                      float32[]                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                         float32[]                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                   broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                             mul               float32[]                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                   mul              float32[]                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                         mul                       mul                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                        mul                          float32[]                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                 mul                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                              mul                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                      mul                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                mul                                                         float32[]                                mul                                                                                                                                                    mul                           float32[]                                           mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general           sin           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general      sin            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general              sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                                                                                                                                               dot_general           sin                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general    sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general      sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general            sin                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general          sin           mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                 add        cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          add    cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                                                                                                                    add          cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add          cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general                                                                     add                       cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                   add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dot_general                                                                                               add                                 add               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add            cos


                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                                                           cos                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                 add                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dot_general                                          add                                        sub                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                        sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                               integer_pow                  cos                                                         dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                         integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                                                    float32[]                                                  integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]             add                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]         add                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        float32[]          add                                               integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                         integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                            integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               float32[]                                                                                                                       integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                      integer_pow


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                             mul                                               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                    mul                                                           mul                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general                                                                             mul                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                           mul                                                                           mul                                                                                                                            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                       add                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                          mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin                                                 mul                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general                       sin                                         mul                               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sin                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general          sin                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general             sin                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sin                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general           sin                                                          mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                 cos                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                    cos      dot_general                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                             dot_general                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                  broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul              tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                                                                                                                          mul              tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin                                                                                               mul             tanh            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                      mul         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul             tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul               tanh                                                                    mul              tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general           sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            float32[]                                                                                                               dot_general           sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                         dot_general           sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dot_general              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                       dot_general             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                                                          dot_general                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                      dot_general              sub                                                                          dot_general             sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                float32[]                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                float32[]                                 float32[]                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul            float32[]                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                  mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul          cos                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                mul                       broadcast_in_dim         dot_general                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                            mul                              float32[]                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                      cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                  mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                                                                                       add_any                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                                                                                                                                       add_any                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                add_any                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin                                                                                                               mul                                                                                             add_any                float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sin                                                                                                                                                                       add_any                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                                                            add_any                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                            sin                       mul                                                                                                    add_any                               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                  add_any                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sin                                                                                                                                                         add_any                             float32[]                                                           add_any                               float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim         broadcast_in_dim                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                        broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                cos                                                             broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                broadcast_in_dim                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim                               mul                         broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim                                 mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul             float32[]                           sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul             float32[]                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                 float32[]                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                               mul                float32[]                       sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul              float32[]                                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul             float32[]                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sub                                                                         mul                float32[]                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                  mul               float32[]                                sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                 float32[]                                 sub                                        mul               float32[]                                    sub


                                                                      cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                           cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin                                               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      integer_pow                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                 float32[]                                                       mul              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                              mul                  broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                       cos                                                                                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                        sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                             cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                               sub              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin                        mul                                                                     sub                                                                                                                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                      sub                  broadcast_in_dim                                                         sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos                                                                             dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                          cos                                                                                                     dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                            cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                          tanh                 mul                                                                     mul                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                       dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add             cos                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                        mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                                                                                                                          dot_general                float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cos                                                                                                                                   dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                dot_general                              mul                                                                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sub                                                                         dot_general                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                       dot_general


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                      float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cos                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                      mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   float32[]                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul            float32[]                              add                   sub                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         integer_pow                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                                                                              add                                                                             add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                              sin                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dot_general                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                     sin            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul           float32[]                                                                 broadcast_in_dim         dot_general           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add                                                                                                          mul              tanh                                                                                                                                                          sin       dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cos                                                                                          mul                                       tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add            cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                       tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add        cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                   add   cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                          add      cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       float32[]                                                                                                 tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add           cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                      add            cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                   tanh                    mul                              broadcast_in_dim                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                     float32[]                                                                                                                       sub                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                       sub                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                float32[]                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add_any                                   sin                                                 float32[]                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                            float32[]


                                                                                                               mul               float32[]                       sin                                       cos                                                        integer_pow                                                             sin                                                                                            mul            float32[]                                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin                   mul             float32[]                                  sin                                      cos                                                      integer_pow                                                                                 sin                                                      mul                float32[]                                      sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul           float32[]                                sin                               cos                                                      integer_pow                                                        sin                                                                  mul               float32[]                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sin                                 mul                                                                                                                                                sin                   mul         float32[]                      sin                                               cos                                              integer_pow                                                                        sin                                                                   mul            float32[]                           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                           mul                                                                                                                                                                     mul             float32[]                      sin                               cos                                             integer_pow                                    sin                                                             mul                  float32[]                     sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                   cos                mul               float32[]                  sin                                                                                    sin                                   cos                                                       integer_pow                                                                                               mul             float32[]                           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim                   mul                                                                                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sin                            mul


                                                                                                                                   mul             convert_element_type                        convert_element_type                                                       mul                                                    convert_element_type                                                                                                            mul                     convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           convert_element_type                    mul                      convert_element_type                          convert_element_type                                                       mul                                                                       convert_element_type                                                                      mul                          convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                cos                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                   convert_element_type                convert_element_type                                                     mul                                             convert_element_type                                                                mul                      convert_element_type               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                cos                                                                                                                                           convert_element_type                mul                       convert_element_type                           convert_element_type                                              mul                                                                 convert_element_type                                                                            mul                        convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                 cos                                                                                                                                                                   mul                  convert_element_type                               convert_element_type                                         mul                            convert_element_type                                                                mul                        convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add           cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                     convert_element_type                                                                          convert_element_type                    convert_element_type                                                   mul                                                                                                                  mul                         convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                    cos


                                                                                                                                             sin           add                                      mul          add                                                mul                                                                                                                             mul                                                          sin             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sin              add                                  mul             add                                              mul                                                                                                                    mul                                                  sin               add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                sin              add                                       mul            add                                                   mul                                                                                                                                   sin                add                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                     sin                  add                  mul                                    add                                     mul                                                                                                               mul                                                      sin              add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                   sin                    add                     mul                                 add                                   mul                                                                                                                       sin                add                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sin            add                         mul                                                                                                                add                                                           mul                                                       mul                                                                 sin              add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                          tanh                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                              add              cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub


                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                   sin                                                                   mul                                                                                                              sin                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                           sin                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                           mul                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                          sin                                                      mul                                                                                                             sin                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           integer_pow                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                sin                                               mul                                                                                                                                   mul                          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     integer_pow                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                mul                                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sub              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       float32[]            add_any                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     integer_pow


                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                   dot_general                                                                                                                                                                              dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general            convert_element_type                                                                   dot_general                                                                                                                      convert_element_type                   dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                    convert_element_type                                                                                                                                        dot_general                                                              dot_general                       convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                       convert_element_type                                                             dot_general                                                                                                                        convert_element_type               dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                               dot_general                    convert_element_type                                                                                                               dot_general                                                          dot_general           convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                        dot_general              convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                         dot_general                                                                                   dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                           mul            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                           integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul


                                                                                                                                                             dot_general                 convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                   mul                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh             mul                                                                                     float32[]                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh          mul                                                                                  float32[]                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tanh                        mul                                                                       float32[]                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                                       sub               add                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul            float32[]          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh                        mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                          add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim             broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                         tanh                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sub                                           float32[]                                                                                              convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                  float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sub                                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            float32[]                                              sub                                                    cos                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       float32[]                                                                                                                                                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                       float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                      tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                 float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                mul                float32[]                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         add                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul         float32[]                                                     mul                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                              mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                             sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul          float32[]                                              mul                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                add                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                           mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general              sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                     mul            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                          add          cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                          add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                              add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                              mul                                                                                                                add      cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add            cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                               sub                                                                                           dot_general                                                          add                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub                                                       float32[]                                                                                                                                          mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        add_any                                                  sin          add                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sin               add                                       add_any                                                                                                                                                                  sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    add_any                                            sin                                                                                                                                     cos                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                            sin                                                       add_any                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sin                                                                                                                                            add_any                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                                                                                                sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                           mul                                                                                                                                                             mul                    broadcast_in_dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add_any                                sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                float32[]                     convert_element_type                                                                                                         integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul             float32[]                   convert_element_type                                                                                                                      integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                     integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dot_general                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add        cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dot_general                           sub                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                        add_any                                      mul                   tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                  mul          float32[]                    convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                      convert_element_type                                  cos                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                           mul                                                      float32[]                  convert_element_type                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                    mul                              convert_element_type                            convert_element_type                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                    convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim                              dot_general             sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                       sin            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                 mul                                                                   float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub                                                        mul                                tanh                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sub                                                                mul                         convert_element_type              tanh                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sub                                                     mul                                                 tanh                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                        mul                                                               tanh                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sub               mul           sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                   mul                                            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                     mul                float32[]                                             mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                         sub                             convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                        sub                                                                                                                       mul         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                 mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                          sub                                                                                                                                     mul                float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                     sub                                                                                                                   mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                         sub                                                   convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 integer_pow                                                                      mul                                                               mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                      add                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul        float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general                             convert_element_type                  add                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dot_general                                                convert_element_type                           add                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dot_general                                convert_element_type                         add                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                convert_element_type                            add                                                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general         convert_element_type                                                      add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul         float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tanh          mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                          sub                                               add_any               float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sin                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                  sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add                                                                                                                                sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                                                       sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add                                                                                                                  sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                        add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                 mul               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tanh               mul                    broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim                                                              mul                          mul                       float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       add            cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sub         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                       tanh                                                                           mul                          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul              float32[]                 mul             broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim              dot_general            sub                       mul                                                                               tanh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                        mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dot_general        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul          float32[]                                                                                                                                                                            float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general           sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general         sub                                                                                     sin                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                 mul               float32[]                           add                                                                                                          dot_general         sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                  dot_general                 sub                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                 add                                                                                                                                 mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                  add           cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dot_general                                      sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sub                                                                 mul                                   tanh                                                                                                                                           mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                convert_element_type               sin                 cos                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   add                                                                                                                          sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul              sin                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                          sub                                                                                                                                 mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                     convert_element_type               tanh                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul             float32[]                  sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                             add_any                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul             float32[]               sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add_any          convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add_any                         convert_element_type                                                                                   integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  add_any


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                    add                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mul                                              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         convert_element_type                               float32[]                         convert_element_type                                                                                                                                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dot_general                               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 convert_element_type


                                                                                                                     sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general                                                                                add                                                                                      mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                   convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mul                         mul                                                                                  tanh                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sin                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 add                                                                                                                                                                                     mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            add                                                                                                                                  sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           convert_element_type                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sub             sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tanh                                                                               sin               mul                                                   mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul           float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add         cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sub                                                                                                                                                                               sub


                                                                                                                                             float32[]             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mul                       tanh                                    float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul              convert_element_type                                    add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             add               cos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul           mul              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    integer_pow                float32[]                                                                                                                                       convert_element_type                                        float32[]


                                                                                                                                                          cos           mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dot_general     sub                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                      dot_general                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 convert_element_type                                                                                                                              sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sub             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                    integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                        float32[]                 mul                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul


                                                                                                                                                             add                  mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul                                       mul                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                         add                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sin                                                                                                                                    integer_pow                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                   sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mul


                                                                                                                                                                                   sin                                                                                                                      convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mul                            sin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                            tanh               mul                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                               sin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mul             float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      add_any                 convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              convert_element_type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                               mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                    cos             broadcast_in_dim                                             broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim          broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dot_general           sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                       mul              float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convert_element_type                                                                    mul               float32[]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                     mul               float32[]                                                                                        broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              add                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           add                                                                                                       mul                                                                                                        tanh                                                                                                                                                                                               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                                      sub                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                                                                              broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim                 broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                 broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim        broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                      tanh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sub                                                                                                                                                                                                                      broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim               broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim       broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    broadcast_in_dim              broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                           broadcast_in_dim     broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       broadcast_in_dim      broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   broadcast_in_dim                    broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sub                                                                                                                     broadcast_in_dim           broadcast_in_dim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               add_any                                              convert_element_type


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mul           float32[]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             out_0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d) step 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 7: Jaxpr graph of k(x, y) at each step.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
