Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TANGO: T IME - REVERSAL L ATENT G RAPH ODE FOR
M ULTI -AGENT DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT

             Learning complex multi-agent system dynamics from data is crucial across many
             domains, such as in physical simulations and material modeling.Extended from
             purely data-driven approaches, existing physics-informed approaches such as
             Hamiltonian Neural Network strictly follow energy conservation law to introduce
             inductive bias, making their learning more sample efﬁciently. However, many
             real-world systems do not strictly conserve energy, such as spring systems with
             frictions. Recognizing this, we turn our attention to a broader physical principle:
             Time-Reversal Symmetry, which depicts that the dynamics of a system shall re-
             main invariant when traversed back over time. It still helps to preserve energies
             for conservative systems and in the meanwhile, serves as a strong inductive bias
             for non-conservative, reversible systems. To inject such inductive bias, in this pa-
             per, we propose a simple-yet-effective self-supervised regularization term as a soft
             constraint that aligns the forward and backward trajectories predicted by a contin-
             uous graph neural network-based ordinary differential equation (GraphODE). It
             effectively imposes time-reversal symmetry to enable more accurate model pre-
             dictions across a wider range of dynamical systems under classical mechanics. In
             addition, we further provide theoretical analysis to show that our regularization
             essentially minimizes higher-order Taylor expansion terms during the ODE inte-
             gration steps, which enables our model to be more noise-tolerant and even applica-
             ble to irreversible systems. Experimental results on a variety of physical systems
             demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Particularly, it achieves an
             MSE improvement of 11.5 % on a challenging chaotic triple-pendulum systems1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Multi-agent dynamical systems, spanning applications from physical simulations (Battaglia et al.,
2016; Kipf et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020) to robotic control (Li et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2017), are
challenging to model due to intricate and dynamic inter-agent interactions. Traditional simulators
can be very time-consuming and require domain knowledge of the underlying dynamics, which
are often unknown (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2021). Therefore, directly learning
a neural simulator from the observational data becomes an attractive alternative. A popular line
of research involves using GraphODEs (Huang et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2023; Zang & Wang, 2020),
where Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) serve to learn the time integration of the ordinary differential
equations(ODEs), for continuous pairwise interactions among agents. Compared with discrete GNN
methods (Kipf et al., 2018; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), GraphODEs show superior performance
in long-range predictions and can handle irregular and partial observations (Jiang et al., 2023).
However, the intricate nature of multi-agent systems often necessitates vast amounts of training data.
Vanilla data-driven neural simulators trained on limited datasets tend to be less generalizable, and
can violate physical properties of a system such as energy conservation. As depicted in Figure 1
(a.1), the learned energy curve of a baseline model (LG-ODE) (Huang et al., 2020) is prone to ex-
plosion, even though the ground-truth energy remains constant. One promising strategy to mitigate
this data dependency is to incorporate physical inductive biases (Raissi et al., 2019; Cranmer et al.,
2020). Existing works like Hamiltonian- Neural Nets and ODE (Greydanus et al., 2019; Sanchez-
Gonzalez et al., 2019) strictly enforce the energy conservation law, leading to more accurate pre-
    1
        Code implementation can be found at here.


                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                          Energy-Conservative

                                                                                                             Time-Reversible
                                                                                                             Dynamical Systems under
                                                                                                             Classical Mechanics
                                                                                                     (b.1) Dynamical System Properties

     𝑑𝑞!   𝑝!                       𝑑𝑞!    𝑝!                            𝑑𝑞!    𝑝!
         =                              =                                    =                                              𝑑𝑅(𝑧)
     𝑑𝑡    𝑚                        𝑑𝑡     𝑚     Periodic Force           𝑑𝑡    𝑚 Friction                                        = −𝐹(𝑅 𝑧 )
                                                                                                                             𝑑𝑡
     𝑑𝑝!                            𝑑𝑝!                                  𝑑𝑝!       𝑝!
                                        = −𝑘% cos 𝜔 𝑡                        = −𝛾                                           𝑧 = 𝑞, 𝑝
         = . −𝑘(𝑞! − 𝑞" )           𝑑𝑡                                   𝑑𝑡        𝑚
     𝑑𝑡
            "∈$!                        − ∑"∈$! 𝑘& (𝑞! − 𝑞" )                  − ∑"∈$! 𝑘(𝑞! − 𝑞" )   Identical              𝑅 𝑧 = (𝑞, −𝑝)
                                Non-conservative, Reversible                                         positions (𝑞)
     Conservative, Reversible                                     Non-conservative, Irreversible                                𝑡        forward
      (a.1) Simple Spring           (a.2) Forced Spring                (a.3) Damped Spring           (b.2) Time-Reversal Symmetry        backward



Figure 1: (a) Three n-body spring systems characterized by their energy conservation and time
reversal properties. p, q, m denote momentum, position and mass, respectively. Proof of energy
conservation and time reversal for these systems can be found in Appendix B (b) Classiﬁcation of
classical mechanical systems based on (Tolman, 1938; Lamb & Roberts, 1998)


dictions for some systems under classical mechanics, especially in data-scarce situations. However,
not all real-world systems adhere to strict energy conservation, especially those that have interac-
tion with external environments, i.e. non-isolated systems, such as n-body spring systems with
periodic external forces or frictions shown in Figure 1 (a.2) and (a.3). For these systems, applying
strict energy conservation constraint proposed by Greydanus et al. (2019); Sanchez-Gonzalez et al.
(2019) could lead to inferior performance. As shown in Figure 1(b.1), for classical and determinis-
tic mechanics such as Newtonian mechanics, energy-conservative systems also obey time-reversal
symmetry (Tolman, 1938). On the other hand, we note that the time-reversible systems also include
non-conservative systems such as Stokes ﬂow (Pozrikidis, 2001), which also has vital applications
in the real world (Kim & Karrila, 2013). Therefore, by ensuring that the system’s dynamics is ap-
proximately invariant under time reversal, we can enforce neural simulators to generate dynamical
systems that are more realistic, paving the way for more efﬁcient and physically coherent dynami-
cal system modeling. In light of these observations, we pivot towards a broader physical principle:
Time-Reversal Symmetry, which posits that a system’s dynamics should remain invariant when time
is reversed (Lamb & Roberts, 1998).
To incorporate such time-reversal inductive bias, we propose a simple-yet-effective self-supervised
regularization term as a soft constraint that aligns forward and backward trajectories predicted by our
model, which has GraphODE as its backbone. We name our model TANGO: Time-Reversal Latent
Graph ODE, which learns the system dynamics in the latent space. This time-reversal loss effec-
tively imposes time-reversal symmetry to enable more accurate model predictions across a wider
range of systems under classical mechanics. Besides its physical implication on beneﬁting learning
reversible systems, we also empirically observe that the time-reversal loss in general helps to learn
irreversible systems. Through theoretical analysis, we prove that from the numerical aspect, the
time-reversal loss actually minimizes higher-order Taylor expansion terms during the ODE integra-
tion steps, which enables our model to be more noise-tolerable and even applicable to irreversible
systems. Therefore, TANGO has the ﬂexibility to be applied to a wide range of dynamical systems
without requiring the systems to be strictly energy-conservative or time-reversible. We conducted
systematic experiments over four simulated datasets. Experimental results verify the effectiveness
of TANGO in learning system dynamics more accurately with less observational data.
The primary contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
       • We propose TANGO, a GraphODE model that incorporates time-reversal symmetry as a
         soft constraint and adeptly handles both energy-conservative and non-conservative systems.
       • We theoretically explain why the proposed time-reversal symmetry loss could in general
         help learn more ﬁne-grained and long-context system dynamics from the numerical aspect.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Our method achieves state-of-the-art results in multi-agent physical simulations. Particu-
         larly, it achieves an MSE improvement of 11.5 % on trajectory predictions on a challenging
         chaotic triple-pendulum system.

2     P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED W ORKS
We represent a multi-agent dynamical system as a graph G = (V, E), where V denotes the node set of
N agents2 and E denotes the set of edges representing their physical interactions, which for simplic-
ity we assumed to be static over time. We denote X(t) ∈ RN ×d as the feature matrix at timestamp
t for all agents, with d as the dimension of features. Model input consists of trajectories of such
feature matrices over K timestamps X(t1:K ) = {X(t1 ), X(t2 ), . . . , X(tK )} and the graph struc-
ture input G = (V, E). Note that the timestamps t1 , t2 · · · tK can have non-uniform intervals and be
of any continuous values. Our goal is to learn a neural simulator fθ (·) : X(t1:K ) → Y (tK+1:T ),
which predicts node dynamics Y (t) in the future based on observations. We use yi (t) to denote
the targeted dynamic vector of agent i at time t. In some cases when we are only predicting system
feature trajectories, Y (·) ≡ X(·).

2.1   G RAPH ODE FOR M ULTI - AGENT DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely used to model multi-agent dynamical systems
which approximate pair-wise node (agent) interaction through message passing to impose strong
inductive bias. The majority of them are discrete models, which learn a ﬁxed-step state transition
function such as to predict trajectories from timestamp t to timestamp t + 1. However, discrete
models (Battaglia et al., 2016; Kipf et al., 2018; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020) have two main
limitations: (1) they are not able to adequately model systems that are continuous in nature such as
n-body spring systems. (2) they cannot deal with irregular-observed systems, where the observations
for different agents are not temporally aligned and can happen at arbitrary time intervals.
Recently, researchers propose GraphODE models (Poli et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Zang &
Wang, 2020; Luo et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2022) which describe multi-agent dynamical systems
by a series of ODEs in a continuous manner. Speciﬁcally, they employ GNN as the ODE func-
tion and learn it in a data-driven way, making GraphODEs ﬂexible to model a wide range of real-
worldsystems (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2023). The state evolution
can be described as: żi (t) := dzdt    i (t)
                                              = g (z1 (t), z2 (t) · · · zN (t)), where zi (t) ∈ Rd denotes the
latent state variable for agent i at timestamp t and g denotes the message passing function that
drives the system to move forward. GraphODEs have been shown to achieve superior performance,
especially in long-range predictions and can handle data irregularity issues. They usually follow
an encoder-processor-decoder architecture, where an encoder ﬁrst computes the latent initial states
z1 (0), · · · zN (0) for all agents simultaneously based on their historical observations as in Eqn 1.
                                z1 (0), z2 (0), ..., zN (0) = fENC X(t1:K ), G)                            (1)
Then the GNN-based ODE predicts the latent trajectories starting from the learned initial states.
Given the initial states z1 (0), · · · zN (0) for all agents and the ODE, we can compute the latent state
zi (T ) at any desired time using a numerical ODE solver such as Runge-Kuttais (Schober et al.,
2019) as shown in Eqn 2.
                                                                         Z T

zi (T ) = ODE-Solver g, [z1 (0), z2 (0)...zN (0)], t = T ) = zi (0)+          g (z1 (t), z2 (t) · · · zN (t)) dt
                                                                             t=0
                                                                                                            (2)
Finally, a decoder extracts the predicted dynamics ŷi (1), ŷi (2), ..., ŷi (T ) based on the trajectory of
latent states zi (1), zi (2), ..., zi (T ).
                                            ŷi (t) = fDEC (zi (t))                                       (3)
However, vanilla GraphODEs can violate physical properties of a system such as energy conserva-
tion, resulting in unrealistic predictions. We therefore propose to inject physical inductive bias to
make more accurate predictions.
   2
     Following (Kipf et al., 2018), we use “agents” to denote “objects” in dynamical systems, which is different
from “intelligent agent” in AI.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2     T IME -R EVERSAL S YMMETRY

A system is said to have Time-Reversal Symmetry if its dynamics remain the same when the ﬂow of
time is reversed (Noether, 1971). Formally, let’s consider a multi-agent dynamical system described
in the matrix form dZ(t)
                      dt  = F (Z(t)), where Z(t) ∈ RN ×d is the time-varying state matrix of all
agents. The system is said to follow the Time-Reversal Symmetry if it satisﬁes
                                        dR(Z(t))
                                                 = −F (R(Z(t)),                                      (4)
                                           dt
where R(·) is a reversing operator3 .
Time-Reversal Symmetry indicates that after the reversing operation R(·), the gradient of any point
of the trajectory Z(t) will be reversed (in the opposite direction). For example, considering the
reversed trajectory of a ﬂying ball, the velocity (i.e., the derivative of position with respect to time)
at each position is the opposite.
Now we introduce a time evolution operator ϕτ : Z(t) 7→ ϕτ (Z(t)) = Z(t + τ ) for arbitrary
t, τ ∈ R, which satisﬁes ϕτ1 ◦ ϕτ2 = ϕτ1 +τ2 for all τ1 , τ2 ∈ R4 . The time evolution operator helps
us to move forward or backward through time, thus forming a trajectory. Based on Lamb & Roberts
(1998), we can integrate Eqn. 4 and have:
                                    R ◦ ϕt = ϕ−t ◦ R = ϕ−1
                                                        t ◦ R,                                       (5)
which means that moving forward t steps and then turning backward is equivalent to ﬁrstly turning
backward and then moving to the other direction t steps. Eqn. 5 has been widely used to describe
time-reversal systems in existing literature (Huh et al., 2020; Valperga et al., 2022; Roberts & Quis-
pel, 1992). Nevertheless, we propose the following lemma, which is more intuitive to understand
and more straightforward to guide the design of our time-reversal regularizer.
Lemma 1. Eqn 5 is equivalent to R ◦ ϕt ◦ R ◦ ϕt = I, where I denotes identity mapping.

Lemma 1 means if we move t steps forward and then turn backward and move for t more steps, it
shall restore back to the same state. The proof of the lemma is in Appendix A.1. It can be understood
as rewinding a video to the very beginning.
Time-Reversal Symmetry is one of the fundamental symmetry properties in many physical systems,
especially in classical mechanics (Lamb & Roberts, 1998; Huh et al., 2020). However, some systems
may not strictly obey the time-reversal properties due to situations such as time-varying external
forces, internal friction, and underlying stochastic dynamics. Therefore, a desired model shall be
able to ﬂexibly inject time-reversal symmetry as a soft constraint, so as to cover a wider range of
real-world dynamical systems such as the three spring systems depicted in Figure 1 (a).
One prior work TRS-ODE (Huh et al., 2020) also injects time-reversal symmetry into neural net-
works as a soft constraint based on Eqn 5. However, they cannot model multi-agent interactions and
work only for fully observable systems (with initial states as model input), while our method based
on GraphODE is well suited for modeling multi-agent and irregularly observed systems. We also
illustrate our implementation to achieve time-reversal symmetry can have a lower maximum error
compared to their implementation in Appendix A.3, supported by empirical experiments in Sec. 4.2.
Note that there are some literature discussing reversible neural networks Chang et al. (2018); Liu
et al. (2019). However, they do not resolve the time-reversal symmetry problem that we’re studying.
We highlight the detailed discussions in Appendix F.

3       M ETHOD
To incorporate Time-Reversal Symmetry in modeling multi-agent dynamical systems, we propose
TANGO, a novel GraphODE framework with a ﬂexible regularization based on Lemma 1. Accord-
ing to Lemma 1, we align the forward trajectory z fwd (t) and backward reversed trajectory z rev (T −t)
    3
     Taking a Hamiltonian system (q, p, t) as an example, where q, p denote position and momentum, the
reversing operator R : (q, p, t) 7→ (q, −p, −t) makes the momentum reverse and traverse back over time.
(Lamb & Roberts, 1998).
   4
     ◦ denotes composition


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Processor: GNN-based ODE
                          Encoder                          𝑂𝐷𝐸 𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒 𝐺𝑁𝑁, (𝑧! (0) … 𝑧" (0) , (𝑡# … 𝑡$ ))
               𝑧! (0)         𝑧( (0)   𝑧) (0)

                                                                                                                             Decoder
               Sequence Self-Attention                                                                                  𝑦9, 𝑡 = 𝑓-./ (𝑧, (𝑡))


               Spatial-Temporal GNN
                                                  Time-Reversal Symmetry Constraint
               𝑂"                                                        123                                            𝑂(
                         𝑂(                                            𝑦90       (0) Forward dynamics       123
                                                  𝑅 ∘ 𝜙+ = 𝜙%+ ∘ 𝑅                                        𝑦90     (𝑇)   𝑂!
                         𝑂!
          𝑂!
                         𝑂)                                                                                             𝑂)
                    𝑂#                                              𝑦90456 (𝑇)
                          𝑡%& 𝑡%* 𝑡%' 𝑡%( 𝑡%) 𝑡%! 𝑅 ∘ 𝜙 ∘ 𝜙 ∘ 𝑅 = id                                    𝑦90456 (0)
                                                       +      +                       Reversal dynamics                      𝑡# 𝑡! 𝑡$%!     𝑡$
                          Input 𝑿, 𝓖                                                                                          Output 𝒀
                                            Figure 2: Overall framework of TANGO


predicted by our model, where the backward trajectory starts from the ending state of the forward
one, traversed back over time. Here t denotes the relative time index of the trajectory’s starting point
and T denotes the total trajectory length. In our design, we use GraphODE to predict the above
forward and reversed trajectories. The difference of the two trajectories at time t and T − t should
be small, and thus is used as a regularizer. The weight of the regularization is also adjustable to
adapt different systems. The overall framework is depicted in Figure 2.

3.1   T IME -R EVERSAL S YMMETRY L OSS AND OVERALL T RAINING

Forward Trajectory Prediction and Reconstruction Loss. We utilize the GraphODE framework
described in Sec.2.1 to model multi-agent dynamical systems, which follows the encoder-processor-
decoder architecture. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst utilize a Transformer-based spatial-temporal GNN de-
scribed in Huang et al. (2020) as our encoder fENC (·) to compute the initial states from observed
trajectories. The implementation details of the encoder can be found in Appendix D.1. We then
utilize the GNN operator described in Kipf et al. (2018) as our ODE function g(·), which drives the
system to move forward and output the forward trajectories for latent states zifwd (t) at each contin-
uous time t and each agent i. Finally, we employ a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) as a decoder to
predict output dynamics based on the latent states. We summarize the whole procedure as:
                                           dzifwd (t)
                         żifwd (t) :=                = g(z1fwd (t), z2fwd (t), · · · zN
                                                                                       fwd
                                                                                           (t)),
                                               dt                                                                                                (6)
                         where         z0fwd (t) = fENC (X(t1:K ), G), ŷifwd (t) = fDEC (zifwd (t))

To train such a GraphODE from data, we can use the reconstruction loss that minimizes the L2
distance between predicted forward trajectories ŷifwd (t) and the ground truth trajectories yi (t).
                                                             X
                                                             N X
                                                               T                                            2
                                                Lpred =                      yi (t) − ŷifwd (t)                                                 (7)
                                                                                                            2
                                                             i=1 t=0


Reversed Trajectory Prediction and Regularization Loss. We now design a novel time-reversal
symmetry loss as a soft constraint to ﬂexibly regulate systems’ total energy to prevent it from chang-
ing sharply. Speciﬁcally, based on the deﬁnition of time-reversal symmetry in Lemma 1, we ﬁrst
compute the backward trajectories z rev starting from the ending state of the forward one, traversed
back over time:
                                  dz rev (t)
                     żirev (t) := i         = −g(z1rev (t), z2rev (t), · · · zN
                                                                               rev
                                                                                   (t)),
                                     dt                                                            (8)
                     where zirev (0) = zifwd (T ), ŷirev (t) = fDEC (zirev (t)).

Next, based on Lemma 1, if the system follows Time-Reversal Symmetry, the forward and backward
trajectories shall be exactly overlap. We thus design the reversal loss by minimizing the L2 distances


                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between model forward and backward trajectories:
                                        X
                                        N X
                                          T                                       2
                           Lreverse =              ŷifwd (t) − ŷirev (T − t)                                       (9)
                                                                                  2
                                        i=1 t=0


Finally, we jointly train TANGO as a weighted combination of the two losses:
                             X
                             N X
                               T                             2        X
                                                                      N X
                                                                        T                                     2
 L = Lpred + αLreverse =               yi (t) − ŷifwd (t)       +α             ŷifwd (t) − ŷirev (T − t)       , (10)
                                                             2                                                2
                             i=1 t=0                                  i=1 t=0

where α is a positive coefﬁcient to balance the two losses based on different targeted systems.

3.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF T IME -R EVERSAL S YMMETRY L OSS

We next theoretically show that the time-reversal loss also numerically helps to reduce the prediction
loss in general, which can be applicable to various systems under classical mechanics regardless of
their physical properties. Speciﬁcally, we show that it minimizes higher-order Taylor expansion
terms during the ODE integration steps.
Theorem 1. Let ∆t denote the integration step size in an ODE solver and T be the prediction
length. The reconstruction loss Lpred deﬁned in Eq 7 is O(T 3 ∆t2 ). The time-reversal loss Lreverse
deﬁned in Eqn 9 is O(T 5 ∆t4 ).

We prove Theorem 1 in Appendix A.2. From Theorem 1, we can see two nice properties of our
proposed time-reversal loss: 1) Regarding the relationship to ∆t, Lreverse is optimizing a high-
order term ∆t4 , which forces the model to predict ﬁne-grained physical properties such as jerk (the
derivatives of accelerations). In comparison, the reconstruction loss optimizes ∆t2 , which mainly
guides the model to predict the locations/velocities accurately. Therefore, the combined loss enables
our model to be more noise-tolerable; 2) Regarding the relationship to T , Lreverse is more sensitive
to total sequence length (T 5 ), thus it provides more regularization for long-context prediction, a key
challenge for dynamic modeling.
Besides the numerical advantage of TANGO, there are two additional remarks of our method.
Remark 1. We deﬁne the reversal loss Lreverse as the distance between model forward trajectories
and backward trajectories. There are other implementation choices. The ﬁrst is to minimize the dis-
tances between model backward trajectories and ground truth trajectories. When both forward and
backward trajectories are close to ground-truth, they are implicitly symmetric. The major drawback
is that at the early stage of learning when the forward is far away from ground truth, such implicit
regularization does not force time-reversal symmetry, but introduce more noise. Another implemen-
tation in TRS-ODE (Huh et al., 2020) follows Eqn 5, where a reverse ODE solves from the starting
point, but with opposite velocity. We show that our implementation can have a lower maximum
error compared to theirs in A.3. We show the empirical comparison of them in Sec. 4.2.
Remark 2. The computational time of the reversal loss Lreverse is of the same scale as the forward
reconstruction loss Lpred . As the computation process of the reversal loss is to ﬁrst use the ODE
solver to generate the reverse trajectories, which has the same computational overhead as computing
the forward trajectories, and then compute the L2 distances. The space complexity is only O(1) as
we are using the adjoint methods (Chen et al., 2018) to compute the reverse trajectories.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Dynamical Systems and Datasets. We conduct systematic evaluations over three different spring
systems (Kipf et al., 2018) and a complex chaotic pendulum system. For spring systems, we consider
three system settings: 1) conservative, i.e. no interactions with the environments, we call it Simple
Spring; 2) non-conservative with frictions, we call it Damped Spring; 3) non-conservative with
periodic external forces, we call it Forced Spring.
In addition to spring systems, we also consider a chaotic triple Pendulum system, which contains
three connected sticks in a 2D plane. This Pendulum is very sensitive towards initial states, such


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Evaluation results on MSE (10−2 ). Best results are in bold numbers and second-best results
are in underline numbers.
        Dataset                Simple Spring     Forced Spring      Damped Spring       Pendulum
        LatentODE                  5.2622            5.0277             3.3419           2.6894
        HODEN                      3.0039            4.0668             8.7950          741.2296
        TRS-ODEN                   3.6785            4.4465             1.7595          741.4988
        TRS-ODENGNN                1.4115            2.1102             0.5951          596.0319
        LGODE                      1.7429            1.8929             0.9718           1.4156
        TANGO                      1.1178            1.4525             0.5944           1.2527
           (—-Ablation of our method with different implementation of Lreverse —-)
        TANGOLrev =gt-rev     1.1313          1.5254           0.6171          1.6158
        TANGOLrev =rev2       1.6786          1.9786           0.9692          1.5631


that a slight disturbance on the initial states can result in very different trajectories (Shinbrot et al.,
1992; Stachowiak & Okada, 2006; Awrejcewicz et al., 2008). Its chaotic nature also results in highly
nonlinear and complex trajectories.
Towards physical properties, Simple Spring and Pendulum are conservative and reversible; Force
Spring is reversible but non-conservative; Damped Spring is irreversible and non-conservative. De-
tails of the datasets and generation pipeline can be found in Appendix C.
Task Setup. We evaluate model performance by splitting the trajectories into two halves: [t1 , tK ],
[tK+1 , tT ] where timestamps can be irregular. We condition the ﬁrst half of observations to make
predictions for the second half as in Rubanova et al. (2019). We generate irregular-sampled trajec-
tories for all datasets and set the number of training samples to be 20,000 and testing samples to
be 5,000 respectively. 10% of training samples are used as validation sets in our experiments. The
maximum trajectory prediction length is 60.
Baselines. We compare TANGO against three baseline types: 1) pure data-driven approaches in-
cluding LG-ODE (Huang et al., 2020) and LatentODE (Rubanova et al., 2019), where the ﬁrst one
is a multi-agent approach considering the interaction graph, and the second one is a single-agent ap-
proach that predicts each trajectory independently; 2) energy-preserving HODEN (Greydanus et al.,
2019); and 3) time-reversal TRS-ODEN (Huh et al., 2020).
The latter two are single-agent approaches and require initial states as given input. To handle missing
initial states in our dataset, we approximate the initial states for the two methods via linear spline
interpolation (Endre Süli, 2003). In addition, we substitute the ODE network in TRS-ODEN with
a GNN (Kipf et al., 2018) as TRS-ODENGNN , which serves as a new multi-agent approach, for
fair comparison. HODEN cannot be easily extended to the multi-agent setting as replacing the
ODE function with a GNN can violate the energy conservation property of the original HODEN.
Implementation details of all models can be found in Appendix D.2.
Finally, we conduct two ablation by changing the implementation of Lreverse : 1) TANGOLrev =gt-rev
, which computes the reversal loss as the L2 distance between ground truth trajectories to model
backward trajectories as discussed in Remark 1 of Sec. 3.2; 2) TANGOLrev =rev2 , which implements
the reversal loss based on Eqn 5, similar as TRS-ODEN but calculate over latent z.All implementa-
tion details is elaborated in Appendix D.2.

4.1   M AIN R ESULTS

Table 1 presents prediction performance across models measured by mean squared error (MSE).
TANGO consistently surpasses other models across datasets, highlighting its generalizability and
the efﬁcacy of its reversal loss. Speciﬁcally, it reports an improvement in MSE ranging from 11.5%
to 34.6% over the second-best baseline. We observe that multi-agent approaches (LG-ODE, TRS-
ODENGNN , TANGO) consistently outperform single-agent baselines (LatentODE, HODEN, TRS-
ODEN), showing the importance of capturing inter-agent interactions via the message passing of
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) encoding and ODE operations.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 2: Results of varying observation ratios on MSE (10−2 ).
  Dataset               Simple Spring       Forced Spring       Damped Spring                          Pendulum
  Observation Ratios     0.8       0.4       0.8       0.4       0.8     0.4                          0.8     0.4
  LG-ODE                          1.7054   1.6889       1.7554     2.0370     0.9305        1.0217   1.4314      1.7469
  TANGO                           1.1176   1.1429       1.3611     1.5109     0.6920        0.6964   1.2309      1.2110


              (a) Simple Spring            (b) Damped Spring            (c) Forced Spring              (d) Pendulum

                                     Figure 3: Varying α values across datasets.


When examining individual datasets, HODEN excels among single-agent models on Simple Spring,
indicating the beneﬁt of incorporating appropriate physical bias. However, its performance is no-
tably lower on Force Spring and Damped Spring. This suggests that wrongly applied inductive biases
can degrade performance. Consequently, while HODEN is suited for strictly energy-conservative
systems, TANGO offers versatility across diverse classical dynamics. Note that HODEN naively
forces each agent to be energy-conservative, instead of the whole system. Therefore, it still per-
forms worse than multi-agent baselines on energy-conservative systems.
The chaotic nature of the Pendulum system, with its sensitivity to initial states 5 , poses challenges
for dynamic modeling. This lead to pretty unstable predictions for models like HODEN and TRS-
ODEN, as these methods rely on linear spline interpolation (Endre Süli, 2003) to approximate miss-
ing initial states of agents, which can cause dramatic prediction errors. In contrast, latent models
like LatentODE, LG-ODE, and TANGO that utilize advanced encoders derive latent states from ob-
served data, yielding superior accuracy. TANGO maintains the most accurate predictions on such
complex Pendulum system, further showing its robust generalization capabilities. Finally, we con-
duct experiments on a real-world motion capture dataset in Appendix E.1.

4.2      A BLATION AND S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

Ablation on implementation of Lreverse . From the last block of Table 1, we can clearly see
that our implementation of reversal loss Lreverse achieves the best performance compared with
gt-rev and TRS-ODEN’s implementation (rev2). We also analytically show that our reversal loss
implementation is expected to achieve a smaller error than the one in TRS-ODEN in Appendix A.3.
Evaluation across prediction lengths. We vary the maximum prediction lengths from 20 to 60
across models as shown in Figure 4. As the number of prediction step increases, TANGO keeps the
best prediction performance, while other baselines have signiﬁcant error accumulations. Notably
for the chaotic pendulum dataset, which is highly nonlinear and has much more complex inter-agent
interactions, single-agent baselines (HODEN, TRS-ODEN) perform poorly even on short prediction
lengths. The performance gap between TANGO and baselines increases when making long-range
predictions, showing the superior ability of TANGO.
Evaluation across observation ratios. For LG-ODE and TANGO, the encoder computes the initial
states from observed trajectories. We randomly masked out 40% and 80% observations to study
models’ sensitivity towards data sparsity. As shown in Table 2, when changing the ratios from 80%
to 40%, we observe that TANGO has a smaller performance drop compared with LG-ODE, espe-
cially on the more complex Pendulum dataset (LG-ODE decreases 22.04% while TANGO decreases
1.62%). This indicates that TANGO is less sensitive toward data sparsity.
Evaluation across different α. We then vary the values of α deﬁned in Eqn 10, which balances the
prediction loss and the reversal loss. While prediction loss aims to match true trajectories, reversal
   5
       Visualization to show Pendulum is highly sensitive to different initial states can be found here


                                                               8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a) Simple Spring        (b) Damped Spring            (c) Forced Spring       (d) Pendulum


                          Figure 4: Varying prediction lengths across datasets (Pendulum MSE is in log values.).
                              Ground Truth        TANGO                   LG-ODE                HODEN         Energy
  (a) Simple Spring
(b) Damped Spring
(c) Forced Spring


                      Figure 5: Trajectory and energy visualization (trajectory starts from light colors to dark colors.)


 loss ensures time-reversal property with better numerical accuracy Figure 3 demonstrates optimal
 α values being neither too high nor too low. When the weight α is too small, the model tends to
 neglect the physical bias, reducing test performance; Conversely, very high weights can emphasize
 reversibility at the cost of accuracy Nonetheless, across various α values, TANGO consistently
 surpasses LG-ODE, showcasing its ﬂexibility in modeling diverse dynamical systems.

  4.3                     V ISUALIZATIONS

 Trajectory Visualizations. Model predictions and ground truth are visualized in Figure 5. As
 HODEN is a single-agent baseline that individually forces every agent’s energy to be constant over
 time which is not valid, the predicted trajectories is having the largest errors and systems’ total
 energy is not conserved for all datasets. The purely data-driven LG-ODE exhibits unrealistic energy
 patterns, as seen in the energy spikes in Simple Spring and Force Spring. In contrast, TANGO,
 incorporating reversal loss, generates realistic energy trends, and consistently produces trajectories
 closest to the ground truth, showing its superior performance. We also visualize the reversal loss
 over training epochs in Appendix E.3.


  5                      C ONCLUSIONS

 We propose TANGO, a time-reversible latent GraphODE for modeling multi-agent dynamical sys-
 tems. TANGO follows the GraphODE framework, with a novel regularization term to softly enforce
 time-reversal symmetry in the learned systems. Notably, TANGO does not necessitate systems to
 strictly adhere to energy conservation or reversibility. We unveiled the theoretical reason of this ﬂex-
 ibility from a numerical aspect, revealing that the time-reversal loss intrinsically minimizes higher-
 order terms in the Taylor expansion during the ODE integration. This reduces susceptibility to
 noise and improves the model’s robustness. Empirical evaluations on simulated datasets illustrate
 TANGO’s superior efﬁcacy in capturing real-world system dynamics.


                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement. TANGO is trained upon physical simulation data (e.g., , spring and pendulum)
and implemented by public libraries in PyTorch. During the modeling, we neither introduces any
social/ethical bias nor amplify any bias in the data. We do not foresee any direct social consequences
or ethical issues.

Reproducibility. To reproduce our model’s results, we provide our code implementation link here.
Dataset details can be found in Appendix C and we also provide simulator codes for public use. We
also show the implemenmtation details of TANGO and baselines in Apendix D.2.

Limitations and Future Work. Currently TANGO only incorporates inductive bias from the tem-
poral aspect, while there are still many important properties in the spatial aspect such as translation
and rotation equivariance Satorras et al. (2021). Future endeavors that combine biases from both
temporal and spatial dimensions could unveil a new frontier in dynamical systems modeling.

R EFERENCES
Jan Awrejcewicz, Grzegorz Kudra, and Grzegorz Wasilewski. Chaotic zones in triple pendulum
  dynamics observed experimentally and numerically. Applied Mechanics and Materials, pp. 1–17,
  2008.
Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and koray kavukcuoglu.
  Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and physics. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems. 2016.
Bo Chang, Lili Meng, Eldad Haber, Lars Ruthotto, David Begert, and Elliot Holtham. Reversible
  architectures for arbitrarily deep residual neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
  on artiﬁcial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Brandon Amos, and Maximilian Nickel. Learning neural event functions for
  ordinary differential equations. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tian Qi Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential
  equations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
CMU. Carnegie-mellon motion capture database. 2003. URL http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04630, 2020.
David F. Mayers Endre Süli. An Introduction to Numerical Analysis. Cambridge University Press,
  2003.
Samuel Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
  robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In IEEE international conference on
  robotics and automation (ICRA), 2017.
Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Yizhou Sun. Heterogeneous graph transformer. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 World Wide Web Conference, 2020.
Zijie Huang, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Learning continuous system dynamics from irregularly-
  sampled partial observations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Zijie Huang, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Coupled graph ode for learning interacting system dynam-
  ics. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
  Mining, 2021.
Zijie Huang, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Generalizing graph ode for learning complex system dy-
  namics across environments. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’23, pp. 798809, 2023.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Huh, Eunho Yang, Sung Ju Hwang, and Jinwoo Shin. Time-reversal symmetric ode network. In
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Song Jiang, Zijie Huang, Xiao Luo, and Yizhou Sun. Cf-gode: Continuous-time causal inference
  for multi-agent dynamical systems. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023.
Sangtae Kim and Seppo J Karrila. Microhydrodynamics: principles and selected applications.
  Courier Corporation, 2013.
Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. Neural relational
  inference for interacting systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04687, 2018.
Jeroen SW Lamb and John AG Roberts. Time-reversal symmetry in dynamical systems: a survey.
   Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, pp. 1–39, 1998.
Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Roberto Martín-Martín, Michael Lingelbach, Sanjana Srivastava, Bokui Shen,
  Kent Elliott Vainio, Cem Gokmen, Gokul Dharan, Tanish Jain, Andrey Kurenkov, Karen Liu, Hy-
  owon Gweon, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson 2.0: Object-centric simulation
  for robot learning of everyday household tasks. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot
  Learning, 2022.
Jenny Liu, Aviral Kumar, Jimmy Ba, Jamie Kiros, and Kevin Swersky. Graph normalizing ﬂows.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In The International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Xiao Luo, Jingyang Yuan, Zijie Huang, Huiyu Jiang, Yifang Qin, Wei Ju, Ming Zhang, and Yizhou
  Sun. HOPE: High-order graph ODE for modeling interacting dynamics. In Proceedings of the
  40th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Emmy Noether. Invariant variation problems. Transport theory and statistical physics, 1(3):186–
  207, 1971.
Jill North. Formulations of classical mechanics. Forthcoming in A companion to the philosophy of
   physics. Routledge, 2021.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter Battaglia. Learning mesh-based
  simulation with graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Junyoung Park, Atsushi Yamashita, Hajime Asama, and Jinkyoo
 Park. Graph neural ordinary differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07532, 2019.
Costas Pozrikidis. Interfacial dynamics for stokes ﬂow. Journal of Computational Physics, 169(2):
  250–301, 2001.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
John AG Roberts and GRW1173588 Quispel. Chaos and time-reversal symmetry. order and chaos
  in reversible dynamical systems. Physics Reports, 216(2-3):63–177, 1992.
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky TQ Chen, and David K Duvenaud. Latent ordinary differential equations for
  irregularly-sampled time series. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Victor Bapst, Kyle Cranmer, and Peter Battaglia. Hamiltonian graph
  networks with ode integrators. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter W.
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.
Michael Schober, Simo Särkkä, and Philipp Hennig. A probabilistic model for the numerical solu-
 tion of initial value problems. In Statistics and Computing, pp. 99–122. 2019.
Hochreiter Sepp and Schmidhuber Jürgen. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 1997.
Troy Shinbrot, Celso Grebogi, Jack Wisdom, and James A Yorke. Chaos in a double pendulum.
  American Journal of Physics, (6):491–499, 1992.
Tomasz Stachowiak and Toshio Okada. A numerical analysis of chaos in the double pendulum.
  Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, (2):417–422, 2006.
E. C. Tolman. The determiners of behavior at a choice point. Psychological Review, 45(1):1–41,
  1938.
Riccardo Valperga, Kevin Webster, Dmitry Turaev, Victoria Klein, and Jeroen Lamb. Learning
  reversible symplectic dynamics. In Proceedings of The 4th Annual Learning for Dynamics and
  Control Conference, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems. 2017.
Rui Wang, Karthik Kashinath, Mustafa Mustafa, Adrian Albert, and Rose Yu. Towards physics-
  informed deep learning for turbulent ﬂow prediction. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2020.
Song Wen, Hao Wang, and Dimitris Metaxas. Social ode: Multi-agent trajectory forecasting with
  neural ordinary differential equations. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2022.
Chengxi Zang and Fei Wang. Neural dynamics on complex networks. In Proceedings of the 26th
  ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2020.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
A.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. The deﬁnition of time-reversal symmetry is given by:
                                          R ◦ ϕt = ϕ−t ◦ R = ϕ−1
                                                              t ◦R                                          (11)
Here, R is an involution operator, which means R ◦ R = id.
First, we apply the time evolution operator ϕt to both sides of Eqn. equation 11:
                                          ϕt ◦ R ◦ ϕt = ϕt ◦ ϕ−1
                                                              t ◦R                                          (12)
Simplifying, we obtain:
                                               ϕt ◦ R ◦ ϕt = R                                              (13)

Next, we apply the involution operator R to both sides of the equation:
                                           R ◦ ϕt ◦ R ◦ ϕt = R ◦ R                                          (14)
Since R ◦ R = I, we ﬁnally arrive at:
                                              R ◦ ϕt ◦ R ◦ ϕt = I                                           (15)
which means the trajectories can overlap when evolving backward from the ﬁnal state.

A.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Let ∆t denote the integration step size in an ODE solver and T be the prediction length. The time
stamps of the ODE solver are {tj }Tj=0 , where tj+1 − tj = ∆t for j = 0, · · · , T (T > 1). Next
suppose during the forward evolution, the updates go through states z fwd (tj ) = (q fwd (tj ), pfwd (tj ))
for j = 0, · · · , T , where q fwd (tj ) is position, pfwd (tj ) is momentum, while during the reverse
evolution they go through states z rev (tj ) = (q rev (tj ), prev (tj )) for j = 0, · · · , T , in reverse order.
The ground truth trajectory is z gt (tj ) = (q gt (tj ), pgt (tj )) for j = 0, · · · , T .
For the sake of brevity in the ensuing proof, we denote z gt (tj ) by zjgt , z fwd (tj ) by zjfwd and z rev (tj )
by zjrev , and we will use Mathematical Induction to prove the theorem.

A.2.1    R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS (Lpred ) A NALYSIS .
                                  PT
First, we bound the forward loss j=0 kzjfwd − zjgt k22 . Since our method models the momentum and
position of the system, we can write the following Taylor expansion of the forward process, where
for any 0 ≤ j < T :
                     fwd
                                        j /m)∆t + (ṗj /2m)∆t + O(∆t ),
                                                                     2       3
                     q     = qjfwd + (pfwd               fwd
                                                                                            (16a)
                     j+1
                      pj+1 = pj + ṗj ∆t + O(∆t ),
                        fwd     fwd    fwd              2
                                                                                            (16b)
                    
                     fwd
                      ṗj+1 = ṗj + O(∆t),
                                fwd
                                                                                            (16c)
and for the ground truth process, we also have from Taylor expansion that
                      gt
                     
                       q     = qjgt + (pgt            gt
                                         j /m)∆t + (ṗj /2m)∆t + O(∆t ),
                                                                2         3
                                                                                                           (17a)
                      j+1
                        pgt       gt    gt
                          j+1 = pj + ṗj ∆t + O(∆t ),
                                                     2
                                                                                                          (17b)
                     
                     
                      ṗgt = ṗgt + O(∆t).                                                                (17c)
                            j+1       j


With these, we aim to prove that for any k = 0, 1, · · · , T , the following hold :
                                  (
                                    kqkfwd − qkgt k2 ≤ C2fwd k 2 ∆t2 ,                                     (18a)
                                                  gt
                                           kpfwd
                                             k − pk k2 ≤ C1 k∆t,
                                                          fwd
                                                                                                          (18b)

where C1fwd and C2fwd are constants.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Base Case k = 0: Based on the initialization rules, it is obvious that q0fwd − q0gt 2 = 0 and
        gt
  0 − p0 2 = 0, thus (18a) and (18b) both hold for k = 0.
 pfwd
Inductive Hypothesis: Assume (18a) and (18b) hold for k = j, which means:
                              ( fwd
                                kqj − qjgt k2 ≤ C2fwd j 2 ∆t2 ,                                       (19a)
                                               gt
                                        kpfwd
                                          j − pj k2 ≤ C1 j∆t,
                                                       fwd
                                                                                                      (19b)
Inductive Proof: We need to prove (18a) and (18b) hold for k = j + 1.
First, using (16c) and (17c), we have
               gt                 gt                              gt
       j+1 − ṗj+1 2 = ṗj − ṗj 2 + O(∆t) = ṗ0 − ṗ0 2 + O (j + 1)∆t = O(1),
     ṗfwd                fwd                              fwd
                                                                                                   (20)
where we iterate through j, j − 1, · · · , 0 in the second equality. Then using (17b) and (16b), we get
for j + 1 that
                          gt                                   gt     gt
                   j+1 − pj+1 2 =          j + ṗj ∆t − pj + ṗj ∆t + O(∆t )k2
                                                                                    2
                  pfwd                   pfwd      fwd

                                               gt                gt
                                 ≤ pfwdj − pj 2 + ṗj − ṗj 2 ∆t + O(∆t )
                                                         fwd                    2
                                      fwd
                                 ≤ C1 j + O(1) ∆t,
where the ﬁrst inequality uses the triangle inequality, and in the second inequality we use (19b) as
well as (20). We can see there exists C1fwd such that the ﬁnal expression above is upper bounded by
C1fwd (j + 1)∆t, with which the claim holds for j + 1.
Next for (18a), using (17a) and (16a), we get for any j that
            gt
     fwd
    qj+1 − qj+1 2
                  =       qjfwd + (pfwd              fwd
                                    j /m)∆t + (ṗj /2m)∆t )
                                                                  2

                         − qjgt + (pgt                gt
                                       j /m)∆t + (ṗj /2m)∆t
                                                                 2
                                                                     + O(∆t3 )k2
                                           1 fwd                     1
                    ≤ qjfwd − qjgt 2 +        pj − pgt   j 2 ∆t +       ṗfwd − ṗgt
                                                                                  j 2 ∆t + O(∆t )
                                                                                        2       3
                                           m                        2m j

                                    C1fwd
                    ≤ C2 j +
                           fwd 2
                                          j + O(1) ∆t2 ,
                                     m
where the ﬁrst inequality uses the triangle inequality, and in the second inequality we use (19a) and
(19b) as well as (20). Thus with an appropriate C2fwd , we have the ﬁnal expression above is upper
bounded by C2fwd (j + 1)2 ∆t2 , and so the claim holds for j + 1.
Since both the base case and the inductive step have been proven, by the principle of mathematical
induction, (18a) and (18b) holds for all k = 0, 1, · · · , T .
With this, we ﬁnish the forward proof by plugging (18a) and (18b) into the loss function:
                   X
                   T                           X
                                               T                            X
                                                                            T
                         kzjfwd − zjgt k22 =         kpfwd   gt 2
                                                       j − p j k2 +               kqjfwd − qjgt k22
                   j=0                         j=0                          j=0

                                                          2   X
                                                              T
                                                                                       2 X
                                                                                         T
                                         ≤ C1fwd                    j 2 ∆t2 + C2fwd        j 4 ∆t4
                                                              j=0                        j=0

                                         = O(T ∆t ). 3        2


A.2.2   R EVERSAL L OSS (Lreverse ) A NALYSIS .
                                  PT
Next we analyze the reversal loss j=0 kR(zjrev ) − zjfwd k22 . For this, we need to reﬁne the Taylor
expansion residual terms for a more in-depth analysis.
First reconsider the forward process. Since the process is generated from the learned network, we
may assume that for some constants c1 , c2 , and c3 , the states satisfy the following for any 0 ≤ j < T :
                    fwd                                             fwd,3
                   
                    q = qj+1fwd
                                 − (pfwd             fwd       2
                                      j+1 /m)∆t + (ṗj+1 /2m)∆t + remj     ,                          (21a)
                    j
                                                 fwd,2
                     pfwd    j+1 − ṗj+1 ∆t + remj
                          = pfwd     fwd
                                                       ,                                              (21b)
                   
                   
                       j
                    fwd     fwd         fwd,1
                     ṗj = ṗj+1 + remj ,                                                             (21c)

                                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the remaining terms remfwd,ij     2
                                           ≤ ci ∆ti for i = 1, 2, 3. Similarly, we have approximate
Taylor expansions for the reverse process:
                   rev
                  
                   q = qj+1 rev
                                  + (prev                 rev        2
                                       j+1 /m)∆t + (ṗj+1 /2m)∆t + remj
                                                                              rev,3
                                                                                    ,         (22a)
                   j
                      rev     rev     rev            rev,2
                    pj = pj+1 + ṗj+1 ∆t + remj ,                                             (22b)
                  
                  
                   rev                   rev,1
                    ṗj = ṗrev
                              j+1 + remj        ,                                             (22c)
where remrev,i
         j     2
                 ≤ ci ∆ti for i = 1, 2, 3.
We will prove via induction that for k = T, T − 1, · · · , 0,
                           
                            kR(qk ) − qk k2 ≤ C3 (T − k) ∆t ,
                                    rev    fwd          rev  3 3
                                                                                                 (23a)
                                kR(prev
                                     k ) − pk k2 ≤ C2 (T − k) ∆t ,
                                             fwd     rev      2   2
                                                                                                 (23b)
                              
                              
                                kR(ṗrev
                                     k ) − ṗk k2 ≤ C1 (T − k)∆t,
                                             fwd     rev
                                                                                                 (23c)
where C1rev , C2rev and C3rev are constants.
The entire proof process is analogous to the previous analysis of Reconstruction Loss.
Base Case k = T : Since the reverse process is initialized by the forward process variables at k = T ,
it is obvious that qTfwd − qTev 2 = pfwd
                                      T − pT 2 = ṗT − ṗT 2 = 0. Thus (23a), (23b) and
                                               rev          fwd     rev

(23c) all hold for k = 0.
Inductive Hypothesis: Assume the inequalities (23b), (23a) and (23c) hold for k = j + 1, which
means:
                      
                       kR(qj+1 ) − qj+1 k2 ≤ C3 (T − (j + 1)) ∆t ,
                              rev      fwd        rev              3  3
                                                                                         (24a)
                      
                        kR(pj+1 ) − pj+1 k2 ≤ C2 (T − (j + 1)) ∆t ,
                              rev      fwd         rev             2   2
                                                                                         (24b)
                      
                      
                        kR(ṗj+1 ) − ṗj+1 k2 ≤ C1 (T − (j + 1))∆t,
                              rev      fwd         rev
                                                                                         (24c)
Inductive Proof: We need to prove (23b) (23a) and (23c) holds for k = j.
First, for (23c), using (21c) and (22c), we get for any j that
                                               rev,1                 fwd,1
                   j ) − ṗj
               R(ṗrev                               ) − (ṗfwd
                           fwd
                               2
                                 = (ṗrev
                                      j+1 + remj            j+1 + remj     ) 2
                                                               rev,1
                                   ≤ R(ṗrev
                                         j+1 ) − ṗj+1 2 + kremj
                                                   fwd
                                                                     k2 + kremfwd,1
                                                                              j     k2
                                   ≤ C1rev (T − j − 1)∆t + 2c1 ∆t,
where the ﬁrst inequality uses the triangle inequality, and the second inequality plugs in (24c). Thus
taking C1rev = 2c1 , the above is upped bounded by C1rev (T − j)∆t, and (23b) holds for j.
Second, for (24b), using (21b) and (22b), we get
                                                     rev,2                          fwd,2
        j ) − pj
     R(prev                   − prev                         − pfwd
                                                                j+1 − ṗj+1 ∆t + remj       k2
               fwd                       rev                            fwd
                   2
                     =           j+1 + ṗj+1 ∆t + remj

                         ≤ R(prev
                              j+1 ) − pj+1 2 + R(ṗj+1 ) − ṗj+1 2 ∆t
                                       fwd         rev       fwd


                               + kremjrev,2 k2 + kremjfwd,2 k2

                         ≤ C2rev (T − j − 1)2 + C1rev (T − j − 1) + 2c2 ∆t2 ,
where the ﬁrst inequality uses the triangle inequality, and in the second inequality we use (24a) and
(24b). Thus taking C2rev = max{C1rev /2, 2c2 }, we have the ﬁnal expression above is upper bounded
by C2rev (T − j)2 ∆t2 , and so the claim holds for j.
Finally, for (24a), we use (21a) and (22a) to get
                                                                     rev,3
   R(qjrev ) − qjfwd 2 =      rev
                             qj+1 + (prev            rev       2
                                      j+1 /m)∆t + (ṗj+1 /2m)∆t + remj
                                                                                  fwd,3
                          − qj+1 fwd
                                      − (pfwd                fwd          2
                                            j+1 /m)∆t + (ṗj+1 /2m)∆t + remj              k2
                                                    1
                       ≤ R(qj+1rev
                                   ) − qj+1
                                         fwd
                                               2
                                                 +          j+1 ) − pj+1 2 ∆t
                                                         R(prev      fwd
                                                    m
                                1                                     rev,3
                          +              j+1 ) − ṗj+1 2 ∆t + kremj
                                     R(ṗrev       fwd       2
                                                                            k2 + kremfwd,3
                                                                                      j      k2
                             2m
                                                  C2rev                 C1rev
                       ≤ C3 (T − j − 1) +
                           rev               3
                                                        (T − j − 1) +
                                                                   2
                                                                              (T − j − 1) + 2c3 ∆t3 ,
                                                   m                    2m


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the ﬁrst inequality uses the triangle inequality, and in the second inequality we use (24a),
(24b) and (24c). Thus taking C3rev = max{C2rev /3m, C1rev /6m, 2c3 }, we have the ﬁnal expression
above is upper bounded by C3rev (T − j)3 ∆t3 , and so the claim holds for j.
Since both the base case and the inductive step have been proven, by the principle of mathematical
induction, (23b), (23a) and (23c) hold for all k = T, T − 1, · · · , 0.
With this we ﬁnish the proof by plugging (23b) and (23a) into the loss function:
          X
          T                                 X
                                            T                           X
                                                                        T
                 kR(zjrev ) − zjfwd k22 =         kR(prev
                                                      j ) − pj k2 +
                                                             fwd 2
                                                                              kR(qjrev ) − qjfwd k22
           j=0                              j=0                         j=0

                                                    2 X
                                                      T
                                                                                   2 X
                                                                                     T
                                      ≤ C2rev              (T − j)4 ∆t4 + C3rev            (T − j)6 ∆t6
                                                     j=0                             j=0

                                      = O(T 5 ∆t4 ).

A.3    A NALYSIS ON I MPLEMENTATIONS OF R EVERSAL L OSS

Our time-reversal loss implementation builts upon Lemma1 where the backward trajectory origi-
nates from the last state of the forward trajectory. One could also implement the reversal loss based
on Eqn 5 which is adopted in TRS-ODEN (Huh et al., 2020). We illustrated the comparison between
the two implementation in Figure 6.
Remark 3. Comparing TANGO against the implementation following Eqn.(5), when the recon-
struction loss deﬁned in Eqn.(7) and the time-reversal loss deﬁned in Eqn. (9) of both methods are
equal, the maximum error between the reversal and ground truth trajectory, i.e. M axErrorgt_rev =
maxj∈[T ] ky(j) − ŷ rev (T − j)k2 made by TANGO is smaller than that of following Eqn.(5).


                    Figure 6: Comparison between two reversal loss implementation

This remark suggests that our implementation of time-reversal symmetry is numerically better than
the implementation used in (Huh et al., 2020). We give an illustration of the remark below.
We expect an ideal model to align both the predicted forward and reverse trajectories with the ground
truth. As shown in Figure 6, we integrate one step from the initial state ŷ fwd (0) (which is the same
as y(0)) and reach the state ŷ fwd (1).
The ﬁrst reverse loss implementation (ours) follows lemma (1) as R ◦ Φt ◦ R ◦ Φt = id, which means
when we evolve forward and reach the state ŷ fwd (1) we reverse it into ŷ rev1 (−1) = R(ŷ fwd (1)) and
go back to reach ŷ rev1 (0), then reverse it to get R(ŷ rev1 (0)), which ideally should be the same as
ŷ fwd (0).
The second reverse loss implementation follows Eqn.(5) as R ◦ Φt = Φ−t ◦ R, which means we
ﬁrst reverse the initial state as ŷ rev2 (0) = R(y(0)), then evolve the reverse trajectory in the opposite
direction to reach ŷ rev2 (−1), and then perform a symmetric operation to reach ŷ rev2 (1), aligning it
with the forward trajectory.


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We assume the two reconstruction losses Lpred = kŷ fwd (1) − y(1)k22 := a are the same. For the
time-reversal losses, we also assume they have reached the same value b:
  Lreverse1 = kR(ŷ rev1 (0)) − ŷ fwd (0)k22 + kR(ŷ rev1 (−1)) − ŷ fwd (1)k22 = kR(ŷ rev1 (0)) − ŷ fwd (0)k22 := b,
  Lreverse2 = kŷ rev2 (0) − ŷ fwd (0)k22 + kŷ rev2 (1) − ŷ fwd (1)k22 = kŷ rev2 (1) − ŷ fwd (1)k22 := b,

As shown in Figure.6 where we illustrate the worst case scenario M axErrorgt_rev =
maxj∈[T ] ky(j)−ŷ rev (T −j)k2 of the two loss, we can see that in our implementation the worst error
is the maximum of two loss, while the TRS-ODEN’s implementation has the risk of accumulating
the error together, making the worst error being the sum of both:

  M axErrorgt_rev1 = max R(ŷ rev1 (0)) − y(0) 2 , R(ŷ rev1 (−1)) − y(1) 2 = max a, b ,

  M axErrorgt_rev2 = max ŷ rev2 (0) − y(0) 2 , ŷ rev2 (1) − y(1) 2

                      = max 0, R(ŷ rev1 (−1)) − y(1) 2
                           = ŷ rev2 (1) − ŷ fwd (1) 2 + ŷ fwd (1) − y(1) 2 = a + b,
So it is obvious that M axErrorgt_rev2 > M axErrorgt_rev1 , which means our model achieves a
smaller error of the maximum distance between the reversal and ground truth trajectory.

B     E XAMPLE OF VARYING DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
We illustrate the energy conservation and time reversal of the three n-body spring systems in Fig-
ure 1(a). We use the Hamiltonian formalism of systems under classical mechanics to describe their
dynamics and verify their energy conservation and time-reversibility characteristics.
The scalar function that describes a systems motion is called the Hamiltonian, H, and is typically
equal to the total energy of the system, that is, the potential energy plus the kinetic energy (North,
2021). It describes the phase space equations of motion by following two ﬁrst-order ODEs called
Hamilton’s equations:
                                dq    ∂H(q, p) dp           ∂H(q, p)
                                    =             ,    =−             ,                          (25)
                                dt        ∂p        dt          ∂q
where q ∈ Rn , p ∈ Rn , and H : R2n 7→ R are positions, momenta, and Hamiltonian of the system.
Under this formalism, energy conservative is deﬁned by dH/dt = 0, and the time-reversal symmetry
is deﬁned by H(q, p, t) = H(q, −p, −t) (Lamb & Roberts, 1998).

B.1    C ONSERVATIVE AND REVERSIBLE SYSTEMS .

A simple example is the isolated n-body spring system, which can be described by :
                                               dqi   pi
                                                   =
                                                dt   m
                                               dpi   X                                                               (26)
                                                   =    −k(qi − qj ),
                                                dt
                                                        j∈Ni

where q = (q1 , q2 , · · · , qN ) is a set of positions of each object , p = (p1 , p2 , · · · , pN ) is a set of
momenta of each object, mi is mass of each object, k is spring constant.
The Hamilton’s equations are:
                                      ∂H(q, p)   dqi    pi
                                               =      =
                                        ∂pi       dt     m
                                      ∂H(q, p)     dpi     X                                                         (27)
                                               =−       =    k(qi − qj ),
                                        ∂qi         dt
                                                                    j∈Ni

Hence, we can obtain the Hamiltonian through the integration of the above equation.
                                              X
                                              N
                                                pi 2           1X X 1
                                                                    N    N
                                                                                  2
                               H(q, p) =                   +           k(qi − qj ) ,                                 (28)
                                               i=1
                                                     2mi       2 i=1 2
                                                                        j∈Ni


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Verify the systems’ energy conservation
                             1 X pi 2     1 1X X 1                2
                                 N              N  N
                dH q, p)
                          = (           +              k(qi − qj ) = 0,                     (29)
                    dt       dt i=1 2mi   dt 2 i=1   2
                                                                j∈Ni
So it is conservative.
Verify the systems’ time-reversal symmetry We do the transformation R : (q, p, t) →7
(q, −p, −t).
                              XN
                                   pi 2    1X X 1
                                              N   N
                                                                   2
                   H(q, p) =             +              k(qi − qj ) ,
                              i=1
                                  2m   i   2 i=1 j∈Ni
                                                      2
                                                                                 (30)
                                X (−pi )
                                 N         2
                                                1X X 1
                                                   N   N
                                                                        2
                   H(q, −p) =                +               k(qi − qj ) ,
                                i=1
                                       2mi      2 i=1      2
                                                                j∈Ni
It is obvious H(q, p) = H(q, −p), so it is reversible

B.2   N ON - CONSERVATIVE AND REVERSIBLE SYSTEMS .

A simple example is a n-body spring system with periodical external force, which can be described
by:
                             dqi     pi
                                  =
                              dt     m
                             dpi     XN                                                      (31)
                                  =      −k(qi − qj ) − k1 cos ωt,
                              dt
                                            j∈Ni
The Hamilton’s equations are:
                      ∂H(q, p)   dqi    pi
                               =      =
                         ∂pi      dt     m
                      ∂H(q, p)     dpi     X                                                (32)
                               =−       =    k(qi − qj ) + k1 cos ωt,
                         ∂qi        dt
                                                         j∈Ni
Hence, we can obtain the Hamiltonian through the integration of the above equation:
                         XN
                             pi 2   1X X 1
                                        N  N
                                                             2
                                                                  XN
             H(q, p) =            +               k(qi − qj ) +       qi ∗ k1 cos ωt,       (33)
                         i=1
                             2mi    2 i=1       2                 i=1
                                                       j∈Ni
Verify the systems’ energy conservation
  dH q, p) 1 X pi 2             1 1X X 1               2  1 X
                    N                 N N                    N
              = (            +              k(qi − qj ) +      qi ∗ k1 cos ωt
       dt       dt     2mi
                      i=1
                                dt 2      2    i=1 j∈Ni
                                                          dt             i=1

                         1    X
                              N

               =0 +                 qi k1 cos ωt                                            (34)
                         dt   i=1
                   X
                   N

               =         −ωqi k1 sin ωt =6 0
                   i=1
So it is non-conservative.
Verify the systems’ time-reversal symmetry We do the transformation R : (q, p, t) →        7
(q, −p, −t).
                   XN
                        pi 2    1X X 1
                                   N   N
                                                        2
                                                            XN
         H(q, p) =           +               k(qi − qj ) +      qi ∗ k1 cos ωt,
                   i=1
                       2mi      2 i=1      2                i=1
                                      j∈Ni
                                                                                         (35)
                     XN
                         (−pi )2     1X X 1
                                        N   N
                                                             2
                                                                 XN
         H(q, −p) =               +               k(qi − qj ) +       qi ∗ k1 cos ω(−t),
                     i=1
                            2mi      2 i=1      2                i=1
                                                       j∈Ni
It is obvious H(q, p, t) = H(q, −p, t), so it is reversible


                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   N ON - CONSERVATIVE AND IRREVERSIBLE SYSTEMS .

A simple example is an n-body spring system with frictions proportional to its velocity,γ is the
coefﬁcient of friction, which can be described by:
                                          dqi   pi
                                              =
                                           dt   m                                               (36)
                                          dpi              pi
                                              = −k0 qi − γ
                                           dt              m
The Hamilton’s equations are:
                             ∂H(q, p)   dqi    pi
                                      =      =
                               ∂pi       dt     m
                             ∂H(q, p)     dpi     X                 pi                          (37)
                                      =−       =    k(qi − qj ) + γ
                               ∂qi         dt                       m
                                                      j∈Ni

Hence, we can obtain the Hamiltonian through the integration of the above equation:
                         X                                              Z
                                    1X X 1                        X
                          N             N  N                       N
                             pi 2                            2        γ t pi 2
             H(q, p) =            +               k(qi − qj ) +                 dt,             (38)
                         i=1
                             2mi    2 i=1       2                 i=1
                                                                      m 0 m
                                               j∈Ni

Verify the systems’ energy conservation
             dH q, p)
                dt
                X                                               Z
                    pi 2     1 1X X 1                2  1 X γ t pi 2
                 N                 N  N                     N
             1
            = (            +              k(qi − qj ) +              dt)
             dt i=1 2mi      dt 2 i=1   2               dt i=1 m 0 m
                                             j∈Ni

                        X
                        N       Z t   2
                                                                                                (39)
                 1          γ       pi
            =0 +                       dt)
                 dt     i=1
                            m     0 m

                X
                N
                  γ pi 2
            =                ) 6= 0
                i=1
                      m m
So it is non-conservative.
Verify the systems’ time-reversal symmetry We do the transformation R : (q, p, t) →     7
(q, −p, −t).
                  X                                              Z
                               1X X 1                      X
                   N              N   N                     N
                       pi 2                            2       γ t pi 2
        H(q, p) =           +               k(qi − qj ) +               dt,
                  i=1
                      2mi      2 i=1      2                i=1
                                                               m 0 m
                                     j∈Ni
                                                                    Z                 (40)
                    XN
                        (−pi )2     1X X 1
                                       N   N
                                                            2
                                                               XN
                                                                   γ (−t) pi 2
        H(q, −p) =               +               k(qi − qj ) +                 d(−t),
                    i=1
                           2mi      2 i=1      2               i=1
                                                                   m 0      m
                                               j∈Ni

It is obvious H(q, p, t) 6= H(q, −p, t), so it is irreversible

C     DATASET
In our experiments, all datasets are synthesized from ground-truth physical law via sumulation.
We generate four simulated datasets: three n-body spring systems under damping, periodic, or no
external force, and one chaotic tripe pendulum dataset with three sequentially connected stiff sticks
that form. We name the ﬁrst three as Sipmle Spring, Forced Spring, and Damped Spring respectively.
All n-body spring systems contain 5 interacting balls, with varying connectivities. Each Pendulum
system contains 3 connected stiff sticks.
For the n-body spring system, we randomly sample whether a pair of objects are connected, and
model their interaction via forces deﬁned by Hookes law. In the Damped spring, the objects have


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


an additional friction force that is opposite to their moving direction and whose magnitude is pro-
portional to their speed. In the Forced spring, all objects have the same external force that changes
direction periodically. We show in Figure 1(a), the energy variation in both of the Damped spring
and Forced spring is signiﬁcant.
For the chaotic triple Pendulum , the equations governing the motion are inherently nonlinear. Al-
though this system is deterministic, it is also highly sensitive to the initial condition and numerical
errors (Shinbrot et al., 1992; Awrejcewicz et al., 2008; Stachowiak & Okada, 2006). This prop-
erty is often referred to as the "butterﬂy effect", as depicted in Fig 7. Unlike for n-body spring
systems, where the forces and equations of motion can be easily articulated, for the Pendulum, the
explicit forces cannot be directly deﬁned, and the motion of objects can only be described through
Lagrangian formulations North (2021), making the modeling highly complex and raising challenges
for accurate learning.

                                              Original initial condition: 0      1    2
                         40                   w/ 1e-3 perturbation: 0            1    2
                                              w/ 1e-2 perturbation: 0            1    2


                         30



                         20
                 Joint


                         10



                          0



                         10

                              0   100   200           300            400       500   600   700
                                                                  Time steps


            Figure 7: Illustration to show the pendulum is highly-sensitive to initial states

We simulate the trajectories by using Euler’s method for n-body spring systems and using the 4th
order Runge-Kutta (RK4) method for the Pendulum. We integrate with a ﬁxed step size and sub-
sample every 100 steps. For training, we use a total of 6000 forward steps. To generate irregularly
sampled partial observations, we follow Huang et al. (2020) and sample the number of observations
n from a uniform distribution U(40, 52) and draw the n observations uniformly for each object.
For testing, we additionally sample 40 observations following the same procedure from PDE steps
[6000, 12000], besides generating observations from steps [1, 6000]. The above sampling proce-
dure is conducted independently for each object. We generate 20k training samples and 5k testing
samples for each dataset. The features (position/velocity) are normalized to the maximum absolute
value of 1 across training and testing datasets.
In the following subsections, we show the dynamical equations of each dataset in detail.

C.1     SPRING

C.1.1    S IMPLE SPRING
The dynamical equations of simple spring are as follows:
                                   dqi     pi
                                        =
                                    dt     m
                                   dpi     XN                                                             (41)
                                        =        −k(qi − qj )
                                    dt
                                                            j∈Ni

where where q = (q1 , q2 , · · · , qN ) is a set of positions of each object , p = (p1 , p2 , · · · , pN ) is a
set of momenta of each object. We set the mass of each object m = 1, the spring constantk = 0.1.


                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.2     DAMPED SPRING
The dynamical equations of damped spring are as follows:
                                     dqi   pi
                                         =
                                      dt   m
                                     dpi   X                   pi                                           (42)
                                         =    −k(qi − qj ) − γ
                                      dt                       m
                                              j∈Ni

where where q = (q1 , q2 , · · · , qN ) is a set of positions of each object, p = (p1 , p2 , · · · , pN ) is a
set of momenta of each object, We set the mass of each object m = 1, the spring constantk = 0.1,
the coefﬁcient of friction γ = 10.

C.1.3     F ORCED SPRING
The dynamical equations of forced spring system are as follows:
                                  dqi   pi
                                      =
                                   dt   m
                                  dpi   XN                                                                  (43)
                                      =    −k(qi − qj ) − k1 cos ωt,
                                   dt
                                           j∈Ni

where where q = (q1 , q2 , · · · , qN ) is a set of positions of each object , p = (p1 , p2 , · · · , pN ) is a
set of momenta of each object. We set the mass of each object m = 1 , the spring constantk = 0.1,
the external strength k1 = 10 and the frequency of variation ω = 1
We simulate the positions and momentums of three spring systems by using Euler methods as fol-
lows:
                                                       dqi
                                 qi (t + 1) = qi (t) +     ∆t
                                                        dt                                  (44)
                                                       dpi
                                 pi (t + 1) = pi (t) +     ∆t
                                                        dt
      dqi     dpi
where dt and dt were deﬁned as above for each datasets, and ∆t = 0.001 is the integration steps.

C.2     CHAOTIC PENDULUM

In this section, we demonstrate how to derive the dynamics equations for a chaotic triple pendulum
using the Lagrangian formalism.
The moment of inertia of each stick about the centroid is
                                                 1
                                           I=      ml2                                                      (45)
                                                12
The position of the center of gravity of each stick is as follows:
                    l                l
             x1 =     sin θ1 ,y1 = − cos θ1
                    2                2
                             1                           1
             x2 = l(sin θ1 + sin θ2 ), y2 = −l(cos θ1 + cos θ2 )                                            (46)
                             2                           2
                                     1                                   1
             x3 = l(sin θ1 + sin θ2 + sin θ3 ), y3 = −l(cos θ1 + cos θ2 + cos θ3 )
                                     2                                   2
The change in the center of gravity of each stick is:
         l                       l
  ẋ1 =    cos θ1 · θ˙1 , ẏ1 = sin θ1 · θ˙1
        2                        2
                          1                                     1
  ẋ2 = l(cos θ1 · θ˙1 + cos θ2 · θ˙2 ), ẏ2 = l(sin θ1 · θ˙1 + sin θ2 · θ˙2 )                               (47)
                          2                                     2
                                       1                                                     1
  ẋ3 = l(cos θ1 · θ˙1 + cos θ2 · θ˙2 + cos θ3 · θ˙3 ), ẏ3 = l(sin θ1 · θ˙1 + sin θ2 · θ˙2 + sin θ3 · θ˙3 )
                                       2                                                     2

                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Lagrangian L of this triple pendulum system is:
    L =T − V
       1                                                   1      2         2      2
      = m(x˙1 2 + x˙2 2 + x˙3 2 + y˙1 2 + y˙2 2 + y˙3 2 ) + I(θ˙1 + θ˙2 + θ˙3 ) − mg(y1 + y2 + y3 )
       2                                                   2                                                               (48)
       1
      = ml(9θ̇2 θ̇1 l cos(θ1 − θ2 ) + 3θ̇3 θ̇1 l cos (θ1 − θ3 ) + 3θ̇2 θ̇3 l cos (θ2 − θ3 ) + 7θ̇12 l + 4θ̇22 l + θ̇32 l
       6
       + 15g cos (θ1 ) + 9g cos (θ2 ) + 3g cos (θ3 ))
The Lagrangian equation is deﬁned as follows:
                                                     d ∂L ∂L
                                                             −    =0                                                       (49)
                                                     dt ∂ θ̇   ∂θ
and we also have:
                                                    ∂L      ∂T
                                                          =       =p
                                                     ∂ θ̇    ∂ θ̇                                                          (50)
                                                          d ∂L      ∂L
                                                    ṗ =          =
                                                          dt ∂ θ̇   ∂θ
where p is the Angular Momentum.
We can list the equations for each of the three sticks separately:
                                                      ∂L                ∂L
                                                 p1 =             p˙1 =
                                                      ∂ θ˙1             ∂θ1
                                                      ∂L                ∂L
                                                 p2 =             p˙2 =                                                    (51)
                                                      ∂ θ˙2             ∂θ2
                                                      ∂L                ∂L
                                                 p3 =             p˙3 =
                                                      ∂ θ˙3             ∂θ3
Finally, we have :


     θ˙1 = 6(9p1 cos(2(θ2 −θ3 ))+27p  2 cos(θ1 −θ2 )−9p2 cos(θ1 +θ2 −2θ3 )+21p3 cos(θ1 −θ3 )−27p3 cos(θ1 −2θ2 +θ3 )−23p1 )
                                    ml2 (81 cos(2(θ1 −θ2 ))−9 cos(2(θ1 −θ3 ))+45 cos(2(θ2 −θ3 ))−169)



     θ˙2 = 6(27p1 cos(θ1 −θ2 )−9pml1 cos(θ1 +θ2 −2θ3 )+9p2 cos(2(θ1 −θ3 ))−27p3 cos(2θ1 −θ2 −θ3 )+57p3 cos(θ2 −θ3 )−47p2 )


                                       2 (81 cos(2(θ −θ ))−9 cos(2(θ −θ ))+45 cos(2(θ −θ ))−169)

                                                        1  2            1    3              2   3
   ˙
 θ3 =
           6(21p1 cos(θ1 −θ3 )−27p1 cos(θ1 −2θ2 +θ3 )−27p2 cos(2θ1 −θ2 −θ3 )+57p2 cos(θ2 −θ3 )+81p3 cos(2(θ1 −θ2 ))−143p3 )
                                    ml  (81 cos(2(θ1 −θ2 ))−9 cos(2(θ1 −θ3 ))+45 cos(2(θ2 −θ3 ))−169)
                                       2

                     p ˙   = − 1
                                  ml    3 θ˙2 θ˙1 l sin (θ1 − θ2 ) + θ˙1 θ˙3 l sin (θ1 − θ3 ) + 5g sin (θ1 )


                         1      2



                    p˙   =  − 1
                                 ml    −3  θ ˙1 θ˙2 l sin (θ1 − θ2 ) + θ˙2 θ˙3 l sin (θ2 − θ3 ) + 3g sin (θ2 )


                       1       2

                        p˙1 = − 21 ml θ˙1 θ˙3 l sin (θ1 − θ3 ) + θ˙2 θ˙3 l sin (θ2 − θ3 ) − g sin (θ3 )
                                                                                                                 (52)
We simulate the angular of the three sticks by using the Runge-Kutta 4th Order Method as follows:
                              ∆θ 1 (t) = θ̇(t, θ(t)) · ∆t
                                                ∆t          ∆θ 1 (t)
                              ∆θ 2 (t) = θ̇(t +    , θ(t) +          ) · ∆t
                                                 2            2
                                                ∆t          ∆θ 2 (t)
                              ∆θ 3 (t) = θ̇(t +    , θ(t) +          ) · ∆t
                                                 2            2                                                            (53)
                              ∆θ 4 (t) = θ̇(t + ∆t, θ(t) + ∆θ 3 (t)) · ∆t
                                        1
                              ∆θ(t) = (∆θ 1 (t) + ∆θ 2 (t) + ∆θ 3 (t) + ∆θ 4 (t))
                                        6
                              θ(t + 1) = θ(t) + ∆θ(t)
where θ̇ was deﬁned as above , and ∆t = 0.0001 is the integration steps.

D      M ODEL D ETAILS
In the following we introduce in details how we implement our model and each baseline.


                                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.1     I NITIAL S TATE E NCODER

The initial state encoder computes the latent node initial states zi (t) for all agents simultaneously
considering their mutual interaction. Speciﬁcally, it ﬁrst fuses all observations into a temporal
graph and conducts dynamic node representation through a spatial-temporal GNN as in Huang et al.
(2020):
                                                                                                       
                                                                   X
                                       hl+1     l                              l
                                                                                    ′ )→j(t) × Wv ĥ
                                                                                                     l−1 
                                        j(t) = hj(t) + σ                       αi(t                  i(t′ )
                                                                i(t′ )∈Nj(t)
                                            T           1
                                                                                          ′          (54)
              l
             αi(t ′ )→j(t) = Wk ĥl−1
                                  i(t′ )        j(t) ·
                                          Wq hl−1      √ , ĥl−1  i(t′ ) = hi(t′ ) + TE(t − t)
                                                                             l−1
                                                         d

                                            ∆t                                        ∆t
                    TE(∆t)2i = sin                   , TE(∆t)2i+1 = cos                        ,
                                        100002i/d                                  100002i/d
where || denotes concatenation; σ(·) is a non-linear activation function; d is the dimension of node
embeddings. The node representation is computed as a weighted summation over its neighbors
plus residual connection where the attention score is a transformer-based Vaswani et al. (2017) dot-
product of node representations by the use of value, key, query projection matrices Wv , Wk , Wq .
Here hlj(t) is the representation of agent j at time t in the l-th layer. i(t′ ) is the general index for
neighbors connected by temporal edges (where t′ 6= t) and spatial edges (where t = t′ and i 6= j).
The temporal encoding Hu et al. (2020) is added to a neighborhood node representation in order
to distinguish its message delivered via spatial and temporal edges. Then, we stack L layers to get
the ﬁnal representation for each observation node: hti = hL   i(t) . Finally, we employ a self-attention
mechanism to generate the sequence representation ui for each agent as their latent initial states:
                                                                              !      !
                          1 X   T t t                              1 X t
                    ui =         σ ai ĥi ĥi , ai = tanh                  ĥ Wa ,                   (55)
                          K t                                     K t i
where ai is the average of observation representations with a nonlinear transformation Wa and
ĥti = hti + TE(t). K is the number of observations for each trajectory. Compared with recurrent
models such as RNN, LSTM Sepp & Jürgen (1997), it offers better parallelization for accelerating
training speed and in the meanwhile alleviates the vanishing/exploding gradient problem brought by
long sequences.
Given the latent initial states, the dynamics of the whole system are determined by the ODE function
g which we parametrize as a GNN as in Huang et al. (2020) to capture the continuous interaction
among agents. We then employ Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) as a decoder to predict the trajectories
ŷi (t) from the latent states zi (t).

      zi (t), zi (1), zi (2) · · · zi (T ) = ODEsolver(g, [z1 (0), z2 (0) · · · zN (0)], (t0 , t1 · · · tT ))
                                                                                                                (56)
                                    ŷi (t) = fdec (zi (t))

D.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

TANGO
Our implementation of TANGO follows GraphODE pipeline. We implement the initial state en-
coder using a 2-layer GNN with a hidden dimension of 64 across all datasets. We use ReLU for
nonlinear activation. For the sequence self-attention module, we set the output dimension to 128.
The encoder’s output dimension is set to 16, and we add 64 additional dimensions initialized with
all zeros to the latent states zi (t) to stabilize the training processes as in Huang et al. (2021). The
GNN ODE function is implemented with a single-layer GNN from Kipf et al. (2018) with hidden
dimension 128. To compute trajectories, we use the Runge-Kutta method from torchdiffeq python
package s(Chen et al., 2021) as the ODE solver and a one-layer MLP as the decoder.
We implement our model in pytorch. Encoder, generative model, and the decoder parameters are
jointly optimized with AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) using a learning rate of
0.0001 for spring datasets and 0.00001 for Pendulum. The batch size for all datasets is set to 512.


                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TANGOLrev =gt-rev and TANGOLrev =rev2 share the same architecture and hyparameters as TANGO,
with different implementations of the loss function. In TANGOLrev =gt-rev , instead of comparing
forward and reverse trajectories, we look at the L2 distance between the ground truth and reverse
trajectories when computing the reversal loss.
For TANGOLrev =rev2 , we implement the reversal loss following Huh et al. (2020) with one differ-
ence: we do not apply the reverse operation to the momentum portion of the initial state to the ODE
function. This is because the initial hidden state is an output of the encoder that mixes position and
momentum information. Note that we also remove the additional dimensions to the latent state that
TANGO has.
LatentODE
We implement the Latent ODE sequence to sequence model as speciﬁed in Rubanova et al. (2019).
We use a 4-layer ODE function in the recognition ODE, and a 2-layer ODE function in the generative
ODE. The recognition and generative ODEs use Euler and Dopri5 as solvers (Chen et al., 2021),
respectively. The number of units per layer is 1000 in the ODE functions and 50 in GRU update
networks. The dimension of the recognition model is set to 100. The model is trained with a learning
rate of 0.001 with an exponential decay rate of 0.999 across different experiments. Note that since
latentODE is a single-agent model, we compute the trajectory of each object independently when
applying it to multi-agent systems.
HODEN
To adapt HODEN, which requires full initial states of all objects, to systems with partial observa-
tions, we compute each objects initial state via linear spline interpolation if it is missing. Following
the setup in Huh et al. (2020), we have two 2-layer linear networks with Tanh activation in between
as ODE functions, in order to model both positions and momenta. Each network has a 1000-unit
layer followed by a single-unit layer. The model is trained with a learning rate of 0.00001 using a
cosine scheduler.
TRS-ODEN
Similar to HODEN, we compute each objects initial state via linear spline interpolation if it is
missing. As in Huh et al. (2020), we use a 2-layer linear network with Tanh activation in between
as the ODE functions, and the Leapfrog method for solving ODEs. The network has 1000 hidden
units and is trained with a learning rate of 0.00001 using a cosine scheduler.
TRS-ODENGNN
For TRSODENGNN , we substitute the ODE function in TRS-ODEN with a GraphODE network.
The GraphODE generative model is implemented with a single-layer GNN with hidden dimension
128. As in HODEN and TRS-ODEN, we compute each objects missing initial state via linear spline
interpolation and the Leapfrog method for solving ODE. For all datasets, we use 0.5 as the coefﬁcient
for the reversal loss in Huh et al. (2020), and 0.0002 as the learning rate under cosine scheduling.
LGODE
Our implementation follows Huang et al. (2020) except we remove the Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) from the initial state encoder. Instead of using the output from the encoder GNN as the
mean and std of the VAE, we directly use it as the latent initial state. That is, the initial states
are deterministic instead of being sampled from a distribution. We use the same architecture as in
TANGO and train the model using an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001 across all
datasets.


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

E.1   R ESULTS ON M U J O C O DATASET.

In addition to assessing our model’s performance on simulated datasets, we also conduct experi-
ments using a real-world motion capture datasetCMU (2003). In particular, we focus on the walking
sequences of subject 35. Each sample in this dataset is represented by 31 trajectories, each corre-
sponding to the movement of a single joint. For each joint, we ﬁrst randomly sample the number


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 3: Evaluation results on MSE ( 10−2 ) on MoJoCo Dataset
                          LatentODE HODEN TRS-ODENGNN LGODE TANGO
                    MSE 2.9061           1.9855      0.2609            0.7610   0.2192


                          Table 4: Evaluation results on MSE (10−2 ) over different solvers.
    Dataset                       Simple Spring                Forced Spring                Damped Spring                  Pendulum
    Solvers                      Euler     RK4                Euler     RK4                 Euler    RK4                Euler     RK4
    LGODE                       1.8443      1.7429           2.0462    1.8929             1.1686          0.9718        1.4634      1.4156
    TANGO                       1.4864      1.1178           1.6058    1.4525             0.8070          0.5944        1.3093      1.2527
    % Improvement               19.4057    35.8655          21.5228    23.2659            30.9430        38.8352       10.5303      11.5075


of observations from a uniform distribution U (30, 42) and then sample uniformly from the ﬁrst 50
frames for training and validation trajectories. For testing, we additionally sampled 40 observations
from frames [51, 99]. As shown in Table 3, TANGO consistently outperforms existing baselines.

E.2        C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SOLVERS

We next show our model’s sensitivity regarding solvers with different precisions. Speciﬁcally, we
compare against Euler and Runge-Kutta (RK4) where the latter is a higher-precision solver. We
show the comparison against LGODE and TANGO in Table 4.
We can ﬁrstly observe that TANGO consistently outperforms LGODE, which is our strongest base-
line across different solvers and datasets, indicating the effectiveness of the proposed time-reversal
symmetry loss. Secondly, we compute the improvement ratio as LGODE−T        LGODE
                                                                                  AN GO
                                                                                        . We can see
that the improvement ratios get larger when using RK4 over Euler. This can be understood as our
reversal loss is minimizing higher-order Tayler expansion terms (Theoreom 1) thus compensating
numerical errors brought by ODE solvers.

E.3        R EVERSAL L OSS V ISUALIZATIONS

To further illustrate the issue of energy explosion from LG-ODE that is purely data-driven, we
visualize the reversal loss over training epochs from LG-ODE6 and TANGO in Figure 8. As results
suggest, LG-ODE is having increased reversal loss over training epochs, meaning it is violating
the time-reversal symmetry sharply, as contrast to TANGO which has decreased reversal loss over
epochs.
 ×1𝑒 !"#                              ×1𝑒 !"#                              ×1𝑒 !"#                           ×1𝑒 !"$


            (a) Simple Spring                   (b) Damped Spring                    (c) Forced Spring                   (d) Pendulum


                       Figure 8: Time-Reversal symmetry loss visualization across datasets.


F       D ISCUSSION ABOUT R EVERSIBLE N EURAL N ETWORKS
In literature, there is another line of research about building reversible neural networks (NNs). For
example, Chang et al. (2018) formulates three architectures for reversible neural networks to address
the stability issue and achieve arbitrary deep lengths, motivated by dynamical system modeling. Liu
et al. (2019) employs normalizing ﬂow to create a generative model of graph structures. They all
propose novel architectures to construct reversible NN where intermediate states across layer depths
do not need to be stored, thus improving memory efﬁciency.
    6
        There is no reversal loss backpropagation in LG-ODE, we just compute its value along training.


                                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, we’d like to clarify that reversible NNs (RevNet) do not resolve the time-reversal sym-
metry problem that we’re studying. The core of RevNet is that input can be recovered from output
via a reversible operation (which is another operator), similar as any linear operator W (·) have a
reversed projector W −1 (·). In the contrary, what we want to study is that the same operator can
be used for both forward and backward prediction over time, and keep the trajectory the same. That
being said, to generate the forward and backward trajectories, we are using the same g(·), instead of
g(·), g −1 (·) respectively.
In summary, though both reversible NN and time-reversal symmetry share similar insights and in-
tuition, they’re talking about different things: reversible NNs make every operator g(·) having a
g −1 (·), while time-reversible assume the trajectory get from ẑ f wd = g(z) and ẑ bwd = −g(z) to be
closer. Making g to be reversible cannot make the system to be time-reversible.


                                                 26
