Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION FOR P REDICTING VARY-
ING E NVIRONMENT M APS FROM S INGLE I MAGES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We present a learning-based method for estimating view-dependent environmen-
         tal lighting from a single image. Our method learns to distill knowledge from a
         differentiable geometry and texture decomposition framework. The goal is to di-
         rectly predict the environment map from an input image using a neural network
         and thus bypass the need for solving iterative optimization. We propose a new
         physically-based strategy that decouples the illumination color and distribution of
         a local light probe given by a sampled pixel on the input image. The experiments
         show that our proposed method can train a neural network to efficiently derive
         the environment map of comparable or even higher quality from a single image in
         under a second, a significant improvement over the time-consuming optimization-
         based alternatives that require a few minutes to obtain the results.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The task of 3D reconstruction and reflection decomposition from multi-view images is twofold:
First, one needs to reconstruct the geometry of the target into common 3D-modeling formats such
as point clouds or meshes, and second, the material has to be decomposed into attributes like normal,
roughness, metallic, diffuse factor, and specular factor, which are essential for calculating the reflec-
tion on the target with the illumination. Typically, this task assumes a set of images captured from
different camera poses under fixed lighting conditions. The geometry, material, and illumination are
jointly obtained after the decomposition.
An extended task would be assuming a less-constrained and ill-posed setting, for example, decompo-
sition under varying illuminations, which entails that for images in the collection, both the viewing
directions and the illuminations are varying. When evaluating such a complex task of simultaneous
3D reconstruction and reflection decomposition from multi-view varying-illumination images, one
would need to synthesize novel views and render the target under new illumination conditions to
verify the reconstruction quality and decomposition accuracy.
Illumination estimation endeavors to extrapolate the comprehensive environmental lighting from
a segmented portion of a scene. An advanced exploration of this topic would be to integrate it
with inverse rendering techniques. Through inverse rendering, one can infer the environmental
illumination solely from a single-view image of the designated target. Subsequently, the derived
environment maps can be re-lit on different objects. The rendering results are compared with the
ones lit by ground-truth illuminations to verify the accuracy of estimation.
In this work, we consider solving the integration of the aforementioned tasks: given an image col-
lection of the target captured under varying illuminations and different viewing directions, we start
with the reconstruction and decomposition to obtain the geometry and material, and then we train a
neural network to learn the relation between the varying environmental illuminations and the light-
ing exhibited on the target based on the decomposed geometry and material. As a result, we obtain a
neural network that can efficiently predict the varying environmental illumination directly from any
given image of the target.
To achieve reconstruction and decomposition, we adopt a state-of-the-art optimization-based de-
composition tool, nvdiffrec (Munkberg et al., 2022), originally designed for scenarios with fixed
illumination. We apply it to our varying illumination settings to derive the geometry and material
of the target from multi-view varying illumination images and then relax nvdiffrec to produce an


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


individual environment map for each image instead of a fixed environment map for all images. Re-
garding the estimation of lighting, we propose a new strategy for predicting the environment map
by decoupling the illumination color and distribution of local light probes from sampled pixels. The
light probes’ decoupled illumination color and distribution can then be re-combined to generate the
complete environment map. We train a neural network to learn the illumination color using a tailored
loss to ensure improved performance and design the distribution following physically-based render-
ing to generate realistic results. Given a new input image of the target captured under an unknown
illumination, our method can bypass the need for solving iterative optimization by nvdiffrec, and,
instead, directly predicts the environment map using the neural network trained with the distilled
knowledge from nvdiffrec. Our proposed method can derive the environment map within a second
without solving optimization.

2   R ELATED W ORK
3D Reconstruction. Recent advancements in view synthesis and 3D reconstruction have been im-
pressive and exciting, particularly with the introduction of the neural radiance field concept by NeRF
(Mildenhall et al., 2020). This innovative approach leverages a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to de-
code the 3D radiance space from multi-view 2D images via incorporating positional encoding to
capture intricate high-frequency details. Successive methods have refined both the quality of recon-
struction and the efficiency in training and inference through diverse representations. For instance,
Mip-NeRF 360 (Barron et al., 2022) enhances the encoding technique to deal with the issue of alias-
ing and hence can produce finer details for view synthesis. Plenoxel (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022) and
DVGO (Sun et al., 2022) introduce faster convergence mechanisms for deriving the radiance field
by directly optimizing on a voxel grid with trilinear interpolation and thus significantly reducing
computation time. Contemporary research has been broadening the scope by exploring extensions
in characterizing not just the color and density but also the geometry, material, and illumination.

Decomposition Under Fixed Illumination. An inherent limitation of the radiance field is its in-
ability to accommodate variations in lighting conditions robustly, which causes challenges in sce-
narios that require relighting under different illumination. The neural radiance field predominantly
captures the color radiance within a given space yet neglects the mutual influences between inci-
dent radiance and the target surface’s reflection. NeRV (Srinivasan et al., 2021) thus introduces a
neural reflectance field to distinguish between diffuse and specular reflections. Building upon the
foundational idea of the reflectance field, NeRFactor (Zhang et al., 2021b) implements a decompo-
sition approach that learns to estimate the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF)
reflection using multiple MLPs. Note that most neural field-based methods focus on refining view
synthesis quality but often neglect the actual illumination. PhySG (Zhang et al., 2021a) applies the
notion of 3D reconstruction via neural fields to inverse rendering and seeks to generate the environ-
ment map concurrently during the 3D reconstruction process. While many have employed neural
rendering within neural field representation to compute the rendered radiance, PhySG introduces an
SG rendering method that approximates the varied incident light by the combination of spherical
Gaussians around the environment map. While the representation of lighting in PhySG is flexible
enough to calculate the reflection on different textures of the target, the produced environment map
is often blurred and is of low resolution due to the limitation of Gaussians. Following the physically-
based rendering, a more advanced process of decomposition and inverse rendering called nvdiffrec is
proposed by (Munkberg et al., 2022). The geometry and material of the target are decomposed into
triangular mesh and 2D texture, which are popular formats in most rendering engines. To produce
illumination in high resolution, Munkberg et al. (2022) propose a differentiable split-sum approx-
imation of environment maps with an optimization-based representation. Their follow-up method
nvdiffrec-mc (Hasselgren et al., 2022) replaces the split-sum approximation with an important light-
ing sampling for Monte Carlo rendering and denoising. The Monte Carlo rendering improves the
decomposition quality and handles the material issue compared with the previous version nvdiffrec.

Decomposition Under Varying Illuminations. While most methods pursue more precise decom-
position under fixed illumination, NeRD (Boss et al., 2021a) brings out a more ill-posed but realistic
assumption. The images in their collection are captured under varying illuminations, which means
for each image, not only does its viewing direction differ, but also the image is captured under vary-
ing and unknown illumination. Following the general architecture of NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020)


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with the decomposition network for basic view-dependent color and BRDF reflection, the learned
latent space encodes different lighting for varying illuminations. Neural-PIL (Boss et al., 2021b)
proposes a pre-integral lighting network to match the illumination latent code and further enhance
the efficiency and accuracy of rendering. The application of their methods includes i) relighting the
target with different illuminations by editing the latent code or ii) lighting estimation from a single
image captured under unknown illumination by optimizing a latent code.

Lighting Estimation. A more challenging extended task to the topic of decomposition would be
estimating the lighting from a single image. The task usually requires the ability to estimate the
complete environment map from partial information about the illumination. ALP (Yu et al., 2023)
attempts to assume a more difficult but useful condition to acquire the high-resolution environment
map in the wild. They consider a scenario that the target is some highly-reflective common object
like a metal can, with the reconstruction from the laboratory for more precise geometry mesh and
the optimization-based method adopted from nvdiffrec-mc (Hasselgren et al., 2022) for material
and illumination. They obtain environment maps that are accurate enough to generate relighting
effects on other objects with different textures. Similar tasks around the lighting estimation topic
include StyleLight (Wang et al., 2022) and Deep Parametric (Gardner et al., 2019). Another variant
on this topic is spatially varying lighting estimation. Rather than estimating the illumination from
an object, the targets are usually the entire scene. Without the common assumption of location-
agnostic deep lighting environment maps, illuminations are estimated depending on the locations
around the scene. Some spatially-varying lighting estimation methods includes (Garon et al., 2019),
(Choi et al., 2023), (Li et al., 2020), and (Srinivasan et al., 2020).

3     M ETHOD
To decompose a scene based on lighting reflection, our method leverages a physically-based render-
ing approach that follows the Bidirectional Scattering Distribution Function (BSDF) reflection. To
predict the unknown illumination from the reflection on the target, we adopt the split sum approx-
imation of specular reflection for simulating the illumination colors and distributions of local light
probes across various directions.
Due to the highly ill-posed settings for simultaneously i) decomposing the scene into geometry and
material and ii) learning the illuminations from the target, we divide our method into two phases
of learning. In the first phase, we focus on decomposing the scene to obtain the triangular mesh of
geometry, the 2D texture of material, and the environment maps for the illuminations. In the second
phase, we train an illumination MLP to predict the color of light probes directly from the target and
produce the complete environment map.

3.1     P HASE I: D ECOMPOSITION UNDER VARYING I LLUMINATIONS

In the first phase, we decompose the scene into geometry, material, and illuminations. The input
data in our assumption are multi-view images captured under varying unknown illuminations. After
the decomposition, we obtain the triangular mesh and 2D texture. Also, for each view of the input
image, we optimize a corresponding environment map at the same time to learn the geometry and
material. The process of the first phase is summarized in Figure 1.

3.1.1    R ENDERING E QUATIONS
The decomposition is achieved by nvdiffrec (Munkberg et al., 2022), which is a powerful tool built
on a differentiable physically-based renderer. The rendering equations follow BSDF reflection:
                                      Z
                             L(ωo ) =    Li (ωi ) f (ωi , ωo ) (ωi · n) dωi ,                  (1)
                                        Ω
where L(ωo ) is the reflected light, Li (ωi ) is the incident light, f (ωi , ωo ) is BSDF, n denotes the
normal vector, ωi denotes the incident direction of light, ωo denotes the reflected direction of light,
and Ω is the hemi-sphere centered at n. Note that the specular reflection in nvdiffrec is represented
by split sum approximation:
                         Z                            Z
               L(ωo ) ≈     f (ωi , ωo ) (ωi · n) dωi    Li (ωi ) D(ωi , ωo ) (ωi · n) dωi ,         (2)
                          Ω                            Ω


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Neural                                                                 Gradient
                             SDF
        Tet-grid                              Triangle mesh                                        Tensor flow



                            Neural
                                                                  Rendering
                            texure                                                             -
                                                2D Texture
                                                                                      Prediction       GT


                                                                                                   FC layer
        Env Map


                       Figure 1: An overview of the first phase in our pipeline.


where D is a function representing the GGX normal distribution (NDF) as mentioned in nvdiffrec.
In the second phase, we also follow it to simulate the distribution of the light probe that we aim to
predict.

3.1.2     A PPLYING NVDIFFREC
Starting with an initial tetra-grid, nvdiffrec learns the signed distance function (SDF) and the normal
vector of each vertex using an MLP. It then adjusts the positions of vertices during training. Another
MLP learns the texture, including the diffuse factor, specular factor, and roughness, which are used
in calculating the BSDF reflection. At the end, the geometry is converted into the triangular mesh
by Marching Tetrahedra, and the material is represented as 2D texture maps by XAtlas. For illumi-
nation, a cube map of the tensor is optimized during training. Since each input image is captured
under varying illuminations in our assumption, we modify the pipeline to optimize the individual
environment map for each different view.
After the decomposition, we obtain the triangular mesh, 2D texture, and environment map corre-
sponding to each view. We further use this information to train an illumination MLP for predicting
light probes in the second phase.

3.2     P HASE II: L EARNING I LLUMINATION MLP

In order to predict the illumination directly from the lighting of the scene, we train an illumination
MLP to predict the color of a local light probe. Given the information about the target’s geometry and
material obtained in the first phase, we simulate the split sum approximation of specular reflection
for the color and distribution of a light probe. For each sampled pixel from the input image, we
multiply the color with the distribution to produce a light probe. Then, we stack these light probes
to obtain the complete environment map, similar to the idea of multiplying the Gaussian spheres
to approximate the integral of ‘incident light’ in most related work on BSDF reflection. To make
the light probes close to physically-based rendering, we follow a split sum approximation used in
nvdiffrec, simulating the light-probe representation as
                          Psample = c(c, kd , ks , n, r, ωo ) · D(n, r, ωo , ωi ) ,                           (3)
where Psample is an incident light probe produced from a sampled pixel and represented as a 3D ten-
sor with the size of (H, W, 3), while c is the predicted color of the light probe from the illumination
MLP given the MLP’s input as the sampled pixel’s color c, diffusion factor kd , specular factor ks ,
normal vector n, roughness r and viewing direction ωo matched to the 3D geometry and texture.
The viewing direction ωo and incident light direction ωi can be derived from the camera pose [R|t],
the location of the reflected point on the surface of the target, and the location of incident light on the
environment map. The tensor D is derived from the function D(ωi , ωo ) (ωi · n) in Equation 2 and
represented as a 2D tensor with the size of (H, W ). The process of the second phase is summarized
in Figure 2.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         illumination
                                                             MLP
            2D Texture      Image                                                        Env Map



                                                                                            Multiply


                                                                                           FC layer
           Triangle mesh                                  Distribution


            Reflectance Direction


          Figure 2: An overview of the second phase of our new physically-based approach.


3.2.1    I LLUMINATION MLP
We train an illumination MLP to predict the colors of incident light probes directly from the observed
lighting of the scene. First, we sample pixels from the input image. By matching these pixels to
the geometry and material learned from the first phase, we obtain the corresponding pixel’s normal
n, diffusion kd , specular ks , and roughness r. With the aforementioned information and the pixel
color as the input, the illumination MLP is trained to predict the color of incident light probe as the
output.

3.2.2    D ISTRIBUTION OF L IGHT P ROBE
We simulate the distribution of an incident light probe following the split sum approximation. The
normal and roughness needed for the function D are also obtained by matching the pixels to the ge-
ometry and material estimated by nvdiffrec. While most recent methods related to the decomposition
of reflection utilize Gaussian spheres to approximate the integral of the incident light, we represent
the distribution of the light probe explicitly on the tensor equal to the size of the environment map
                                                        r2
                   D(n, r, ωo , ωi ) =                                      (ωo · n) .                 (4)
                                         π (((ωo + ωi )/2)2 (r 2 − 1) + 1)2
With this new approach, we can stack all the light probes in an instance and achieve better results.

3.2.3    S TACKING L IGHT P ROBES FROM S AMPLED D IRECTIONS
We use a weighted average to stack all the light probes produced by the sampled pixels. The weight
we use while stacking the light probes is based on the light-probe distribution mentioned in the
previous section:
                            N
                            X   cn (c, kd , ks , n, r, ωo ) · Dn (n, r, ωo , ωi )
                      P=                                                          ,            (5)
                           n=1
                                              Dn (n, r, ωo , ωi )
where N is the number of stacked light probes corresponding to N sampled pixel. We set N = 1024
while training the illumination MLP in the second phase and set N to 1/4 the number of pixels on the
test image inside the target mask during evaluation with the sample probability P (r) = |r − 1| − 1.
We encourage sampling the light probes produced by pixels that have lower roughness since they
offer more reliable information about the environment light in the corresponding directions.

3.3     L OSS F UNCTIONS

In the first phase, we adopt the same loss terms as in nvdiffrec, which includes mainly the L2 loss
between the rendered image and the ground truth and other regularizers mentioned by (Munkberg
et al., 2022).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the second phase, the main loss is the image reconstruction loss between the stacked environment
map and the optimized environment map obtained in the first phase. For better learning of the
stacked environment map produced by sampled pixels, we propose a weighted L2 loss defined by
                                         W,H     (u,v)
                                         X      Dsample
                   Weighted L2 Loss =            (u,v)
                                                          Y (cu,v ) ∥cu,v − ĉu,v ∥2 ,            (6)
                                          u,v   Dtotal

where Dsample is the summation of the sampled light probes’ distributions as in Equation 5, which
implies the importance of the area being sampled. The summation of the total light probes’ distri-
butions Dtotal is calculated as a weighted average by the number of light probes from each direc-
tion, which indicates the importance averaged from each direction of the light probe while stacking
all of them produced by the pixels in the entire image. The main idea is to encourage the illu-
mination MLP to learn high-contrast light colors like black and white with an intensity weight
Y (c) = |0.299r + 0.587g + 0.114b − 0.5| + 0.5.

4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   DATASETS

We evaluate our proposed method on the NeRD (Boss et al., 2021a) datasets. We use the state-of-
the-art method, Neural-PIL (Boss et al., 2021b), as the main baseline for comparison. The datasets
we choose contain seven scenes categorized as follows: i) three synthetic scenes (Chair, Car, Globe)
with each view relighted under varying illumination and camera pose, ii) two real-world scenes
(Gnome, MotherChild) captured under varying illumination, and iii) two real-world scenes, one
with fixed unknown illumination (Cape) and the other with relatively varying illumination (Head).
Neural-PIL also tests their method on the NeRF dataset (Mildenhall et al., 2020), which is synthe-
sized with fixed illumination. We do not test our method on the NeRF synthetic data because it only
has fixed illumination, while our method aims to address a more challenging scenario of varying
illuminations in multi-view images. As our method is based on nvdiffrec for the first phase, our
results on the NeRF dataset would be identical to those shown in the nvdiffrec paper (Munkberg
et al., 2022). We also compare our method with the other two neural rendering methods, NeRF and
NeRD, as done by Neural-PIL. The qualitative results and the evaluation scores of NeRF and NeRD
are taken from Neural-PIL’s paper.

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In the first phase, we follow most of the configurations in nvdiffrec. In order to obtain the fine-
optimized environment map against each view, we set the batch size to one and training iterations
to 40k rather than eight and 5k. Also, we adjust the learning rate of geometry to 0.015, and material
and light to 0.005. All learning rates are descending exponentially from 1.0 to 0.1 of their values
during the training. We set the resolution of the environment map to (6, 128, 128, 3), which matches
the resolution of our baseline. In the second phase, we train our illumination MLP with iterations
depending on the size of the scenes. For NeRD synthetic scenes that contain 200 views, we set the
iterations to 30k. For real-world scenes that contain around 100 views, we set the iterations to 30k.
The learning rate of the illumination MLP is fixed at 0.0005 during the training.
Both phases of training take within 3 hours on a single GTX 1080 Ti GPU, which is shorter than
our baseline, Neural-PIL, that requires 22 hours on four RTX 2080 Ti GPUs, even with some pre-
trained priors. Note that Neural-PIL’s paper only presents the average scores and does not have
the performance on individual scenes. Therefore, in experiments shown below, we also reproduce
Neural-PIL, on 4 V100 GPUs with their released code and evaluate the individual result of each
scene. Our code for the experiments will be released after the review process.

4.3   M AIN R ESULTS

Comparison with the State of the Art. We show the experimental results of our method com-
pared with the state-of-the-art baseline method and the other two prior methods. For the synthetic
scenes under varying illuminations (Car, Chair, Globe), the results are shown in Table 1. We can


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


see that our method achieves competitive results on the Car and Chair scenes but fails on the recon-
struction of the Globe scene because of the strong self-reflection that ends up being falsely copied
into the material and thus causes the geometry defection. Table 2 shows the results of the scenes
captured under varying illuminations in the real world (Gnome, MotherChild). Further, Table 3
presents the results of the scenes captured under relatively varying illuminations (Head) and fixed
illumination (Cape) in the real world. For these real-world scenes, our method achieves a better
score on PSNR but a slightly worse score on SSIM. Compared with the baseline method, which
requires pre-trained with strong illumination before trying to match the most possible illumination,
our method directly predicts the illumination from the lighting on the target and does not rely on any
prior. Such an advantage allows our method to perform better on real-world conditions for higher
PSNR. Our method reconstructs the target to the format of triangular mesh and 2D texture, which
conforms to the most common rendering engine and hence is more efficient for training; however,
the geometry reconstruction is also restricted to the complexity of triangular mesh and thus results
in lower SSIM.
We also compare the inference time for lighting estimation from a single image in Table 4. Our
method only requires a single-step inference that takes less than 1 second for a new view under
unknown illumination, which is much faster than our baseline, requiring several minutes to optimize
the illumination latent for 100 steps.

Visualization. We visualize some of our results in comparison with the baseline methods. The im-
ages of other methods, including Neraul-PIL, are taken from the original paper (Boss et al., 2021b).
Figure 3 illustrates the decomposition of diffuse, specular, roughness, normal, illumination, and ren-
dered images following the representations in their paper on the NeRD Car synthetic scene. Our
method has some color baked into the environment map but is competitive with other methods
overall. We also show the reconstruction of some novel-view synthesis images on the NeRD Cape
real-world scene in Figure 4; our method exhibits better quality in visualization in contrast to the
baseline method and others.

Table 1: Results on the NeRD synthetic varying-illumination scenes. The comparisons are evaluated
using the average scores of NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020), NeRD (Boss et al., 2021a), and the main
baseline method Neural-PIL (Boss et al., 2021b). The average results reported in the original paper
of Neural-PIL are referred to as Neural-PIL (Ori.). We also reproduce the results using their released
code, referred to as Neural-PIL (Rep.), for evaluating the scores of each individual scene.

                        Average scores             Car                  Chair               Globe
     Method            PSNR↑ SSIM↑          PSNR↑ SSIM↑           PSNR↑ SSIM↑          PSNR↑ SSIM↑
      NeRF              21.05     0.89         -         -           -          -         -         -
      NeRD              27.96     0.95         -         -           -          -         -         -
 Neural-PIL (Ori.)      29.24     0.96         -         -           -          -         -         -
 Neural-PIL (Rep.)      26.33     0.88       27.74     0.92        29.51      0.92      21.95     0.81
       Ours             27.51     0.94       29.09     0.96        29.61      0.95      23.83     0.90

              Table 2: Results on the NeRD real-world varying-illuminations scenes.

                                Average scores             Gnome            MotherChild
             Method            PSNR↑ SSIM↑            PSNR↑ SSIM↑         PSNR↑ SSIM↑
               NeR              20.11     0.87           -       -           -       -
              NeRD              25.81     0.95           -       -           -       -
         Neural-PIL (Ori.)      26.23     0.95           -       -           -       -
         Neural-PIL (Rep.)      22.92     0.87         23.73   0.81        22.11   0.92
               Ours             27.48     0.94         25.25   0.90        29.67   0.97


Ablation Study. We conduct an ablation study on the NeRD Chiar scene to verify our proposed
loss in Section 3.3. The weighted loss is designed to emphasize the importance of the sampled area
and the intensity on the environment map; we compare the result produced by i) pure L2 loss, ii)
L2 loss with intensity weight, iii) L2 loss with sample weight, and iv) L2 loss with sample weight
and intensity weight in Table 5. L2 loss with sample weight gives better results than pure L2 loss


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


since it focuses on the area sampled among the environment map. L2 loss with intensity weight has
little effect compared with pure L2 loss because the intensity weight through the entire environment
map may not be related enough to the sampled area. However, combined with the sample weight,
the intensity weight can accordingly encourage learning against extreme lighting. Therefore, this
ablation study shows that our proposed L2 loss with sample and intensity weight is beneficial to
achieve the best result.
                Table 3: Results on the NeRD real-world fixed illumination scenes.

                                Average scores             Head                Cape
             Method            PSNR↑ SSIM↑           PSNR↑ SSIM↑         PSNR↑ SSIM↑
              NeRF              23.34     0.85          -         -         -         -
              NeRD              23.86     0.88          -         -         -         -
         Neural-PIL (Ori.)      23.95     0.90          -         -         -         -
         Neural-PIL (Rep.)      22.18     0.78        23.14     0.85      21.21     0.71
               Ours             24.00     0.87        24.01     0.89      23.98     0.85

        Table 4: Comparison of inference time for lighting estimation from a single image.

                        Method        Inference time (sec)   Inference steps
                         NeRD              ≈ an hour              1000
                       Neural-PIL            ≈ 300                 100
                          ours                <1                    1

        Table 5: Ablation results of different illumination losses on the NeRD Chair scene.

                                                                Evaluation scores
                                    Method                      PSNR↑ SSIM↑

                                   L2 loss                       28.68         0.95
                          L2 loss + Intensity weight             28.71         0.95
                          L2 loss + Sample weight                29.24         0.95
                 L2 loss + Sample weight + Intensity weight      29.61         0.95



5   C ONCLUSION
We have proposed a method for learning varying environment maps from multi-view images of the
target captured under different illuminations. We first apply the fixed-illumination decomposition
method, nvdiffrec, to our varying-illumination scenario for the geometry and material of the target.
Then, we train an illumination MLP to predict the color of the light probes sampled from the target.
With the distribution that follows physically-based rendering for each light probe, we produce a
complete environment from the target image depending on its illumination. Unlike the existing
methods that rely on strong illumination prior, our method learns the relation between the lighting
on the target and the environment map. Furthermore, our method is more efficient for both training
and inference on learning to predict varying environment maps from single images.

Limitations. The accuracy of the decomposed material is always an issue for reflection decom-
position under both fixed and varying illuminations. A common issue would be the lighting baked
into the material or the material baked into illumination. Our method applies nvdiffrec to solve the
decomposition under fixed illumination for the geometry and material of the target, which could be
improved on the accuracy of estimating the material. Without assuming strong illumination prior or
using iterative optimization to estimate the environment map, our method predicts the illumination
from lighting on the target with a representation simulating physically-based rendering. While the
physically-based simulation characterizes a more realistic relation between lighting on the target
and the illumination, it might also miss details in producing the complete environment map from
sampled light probes, which is worth further exploration.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   GT
   RSSVR
   Neural-PIL NeRD
   Ours


                     Diffuse   Specular    Roughness         Normal      Illumination      Render

Figure 3: Visualization of decomposition. The qualitative comparisons of Neural-PIL, RSSVR Li
et al. (2018), NeRF and NeRD.


                     (a) GT     (b) NeRF          (c) NeRD        (d) Neural-PIL        (e) Ours

                                    Figure 4: Visualization of Gold Cape.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-
  nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, 2022.
Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T. Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik P.A. Lensch.
 Nerd: Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In IEEE International Confer-
 ence on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Raphael Braun, Ce Liu, Jonathan T. Barron, and Hendrik P.A. Lensch.
 Neural-pil: Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.
Junyong Choi, SeokYeong Lee, Haesol Park, Seung-Won Jung, Ig-Jae Kim, and Junghyun Cho.
  MAIR: multi-view attention inverse rendering with 3d spatially-varying lighting estimation. In
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2023, Vancouver,
  BC, Canada, June 17-24, 2023, 2023.
Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24,
  2022, pp. 5491–5500. IEEE, 2022.
Marc-André Gardner, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Christian Gagné, and Jean-
 François Lalonde. Deep parametric indoor lighting estimation. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South), October 27 - November 2,
 2019, 2019.
Mathieu Garon, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Sunil Hadap, Nathan Carr, and Jean-François Lalonde. Fast
 spatially-varying indoor lighting estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, 2019.
Jon Hasselgren, Nikolai Hofmann, and Jacob Munkberg. Shape, light, and material decomposition
  from images using monte carlo rendering and denoising. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Zhengqin Li, Zexiang Xu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker.
  Learning to reconstruct shape and spatially-varying reflectance from a single image. ACM Trans.
  Graph., 37(6):269, 2018.
Zhengqin Li, Mohammad Shafiei, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chan-
  draker. Inverse rendering for complex indoor scenes: Shape, spatially-varying lighting and
  SVBRDF from a single image. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
  tern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020, 2020.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Computer Vi-
  sion - ECCV 2020 - 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23-28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part I, 2020.
Jacob Munkberg, Wenzheng Chen, Jon Hasselgren, Alex Evans, Tianchang Shen, Thomas Müller,
  Jun Gao, and Sanja Fidler. Extracting triangular 3d models, materials, and lighting from im-
  ages. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New
  Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, 2022.
Pratul P. Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Richard Tucker, and
  Noah Snavely. Lighthouse: Predicting lighting volumes for spatially-coherent illumination. In
  2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle,
  WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020, 2020.
Pratul P. Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Xiuming Zhang, Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall, and
  Jonathan T. Barron. Nerv: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for relighting and view syn-
  thesis. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2021, virtual,
  June 19-25, 2021, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast con-
  vergence for radiance fields reconstruction. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, 2022.
Guangcong Wang, Yinuo Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Stylelight: HDR panorama
  generation for lighting estimation and editing. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2022 - 17th European
  Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23-27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV, 2022.
Hong-Xing Yu, Samir Agarwala, Charles Herrmann, Richard Szeliski, Noah Snavely, Jiajun Wu,
  and Deqing Sun. Accidental light probes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2023, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 17-24, 2023, 2023.
Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Qianqian Wang, Kavita Bala, and Noah Snavely. Physg: Inverse rendering
  with spherical gaussians for physics-based material editing and relighting. In IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2021, virtual, June 19-25, 2021, 2021a.
Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul E. Debevec, William T. Freeman, and
  Jonathan T. Barron. Nerfactor: Neural factorization of shape and reflectance under an unknown
  illumination. CoRR, abs/2106.01970, 2021b.


                                              11
