Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“W HAT DATA B ENEFITS M Y C LASSIFIER ?”
E NHANCING M ODEL P ERFORMANCE AND
I NTERPRETABILITY THROUGH I NFLUENCE -BASED
DATA S ELECTION
    Anshuman Chhabra† , Peizhao Li§‡ , Prasant Mohapatra† , and Hongfu Liu§
 †                                           §                       ‡
     University of California, Davis           Brandeis University     GE HealthCare
 {chhabra,pmohapatra}@ucdavis.edu                          {peizhaoli,hongfuliu}@brandeis.edu



                                                     A BSTRACT

              Classification models are ubiquitously deployed in society and necessitate high
              utility, fairness, and robustness performance. Current research efforts mainly focus
              on improving model architectures and learning algorithms on fixed datasets to
              achieve this goal. In contrast, in this paper, we address an orthogonal yet crucial
              problem: given a fixed convex learning model (or a convex surrogate for a non-
              convex model) and a function of interest, we assess what data benefits the model by
              interpreting the feature space, and then aim to improve performance as measured
              by this function. To this end, we propose the use of influence estimation models
              for interpreting the classifier’s performance from the perspective of the data feature
              space. Additionally, we propose data selection approaches based on influence that
              enhance model utility, fairness, and robustness. Through extensive experiments on
              synthetic and real-world datasets, we validate and demonstrate the effectiveness of
              our approaches not only for conventional classification scenarios, but also under
              more challenging scenarios such as distribution shifts, fairness poisoning attacks,
              utility evasion attacks, online learning, and active learning.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning models have become essential tools in various societal applications for automating
processes and generating insights (Pouyanfar et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2017). Along with the choice
of model type/architecture, data is a critical component of the learning process, and the quality and
quantity of training data have significant impacts on the model performance (Blum & Langley, 1997).
Despite this, current research mainly focuses on proposing high-performing model architectures
or learning approaches while keeping the training data fixed. However, it is evident that not every
sample in the training set augments model performance. Furthermore, the same data sample could be
beneficial or detrimental to performance depending on the type of model being used (Blum & Langley,
1997). Therefore, in this paper, we aim to answer the research question “what data benefits the
learning model in a certain aspect?” and select suitable training data to improve model performance.1
Our work relates to but contrasts with research on data valuation. Data valuation aims to assign a
monetary value or worth to a particular set or collection of data, whereas our goal in this work is to
analyze what type of data can be utilized to enhance a model. Data valuation can be performed in
a variety of ways, such as using cooperative game theory (Shapley-value or Banzhaf index) (Ghor-
bani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019; Kwon & Zou, 2022; Ghorbani et al., 2020; Wang & Jia, 2023)
and reinforcement learning (Yoon et al., 2020). It is also important to note that as alternative to
influence functions, Shapley-value based data valuation approaches (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia
et al., 2019) can also be used in our algorithms. However, Shapley-value based approaches such as
TMC-Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) require the model to be retrained and evaluated multiple times,
where even√the most efficient known non-distributional model-specific algorithms (Jia et al., 2019)
require O( n log(n)2 ) model retraining steps, and n is the number of training samples. Other ap-
     1
         With respect to utility/accuracy, fairness, and adversarial robustness.


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


proaches such as KNN-Shapley (Jia et al., 2018) that are computationally efficient are model-agnostic
and designed to work with utility. Hence, KNN-Shapley is neither tailored to the specific model being
used nor a function of interest other than utility (such as fairness and robustness), and cannot guar-
antee performance on the downstream classifier (Blum & Langley, 1997). Moreover, current work on
Shapley-value based frameworks generally estimate the data value in utility, with either very few or no
work studying fairness (Arnaiz-Rodriguez et al., 2023) and robustness. Reinforcement learning-based
data valuation (Yoon et al., 2020) faces similar issues due to its complex design and poor convergence.
Our work is also closely related to other work on data influence, such as the seminal paper on influ-
ence functions by Koh and Liang (Koh & Liang, 2017), follow-up work such as TracIn (Pruthi et al.,
2020), representer point (Yeh et al., 2018), and Hydra (Chen et al., 2021). However, these methods
are fundamentally influence estimation approaches, and do not directly answer our research question,
which is to identify and interpret the feature space for improving the model’s performance. Other
miscellaneous approaches, such as Datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022) only work with one specific target
sample at a time, posing a limitation. Unlike all these methods, our data selection approaches can also
uniquely handle scenarios where data is unlabeled such as in active learning applications. Moreover,
our work considers utility, fairness, and robustness under diverse application scenarios. Note that
our data selection strategy can even boost the performance of methods such as the influence-based
data reweighing approach of (Li & Liu, 2022) for improving fairness (Section 5.1) and outperform
existing influence-based approaches for active learning (Liu et al., 2021) (Section 5.5). Thus, we
utilize influence functions as a tool (allowing for any influence approach to be used interchangeably)
and extend its applicability to diverse domains and scenarios not considered previously.
Finally, our work also conceptually relates to several other data-related areas. Data efficiency ap-
proaches (Paul et al., 2021; Coleman et al., 2020; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Shen & Sanghavi, 2019;
Killamsetty et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2022) aim to accelerate deep model training by pruning or select-
ing a subset of data, which is beyond the scope of our work. Feature selection approaches (Cai et al.,
2018; Hall, 1999) aim to select important features for training, but are limited in scope as they only
work for utility. Active learning (Cohn et al., 1996; Wei et al., 2015) partially aligns with our research
question, as it involves selecting unlabeled data points to be annotated and added to the training set
for improving model performance. However, its applicability is limited to this specific scenario, while
our work considers a broader range of applications, including this one. Antidote data methods (Raste-
garpanah et al., 2019; Chhabra et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2023) aim to add generated data to the training
set for mitigating unfairness but cannot be used to interpret the usefulness of existing samples.
Contributions. We summarize our major contributions as follows:
  • We utilize influence functions to assess what data improves a given convex classifier (or a
    surrogate for a non-convex model) with respect to utility, fairness, and robustness by interpreting
    the feature space. Our key idea is to use tree-based influence estimation models to understand and
    interpret which sample features contribute positively or negatively to the model’s performance
    with respect to desired evaluation functions on a validation set. Additionally, we design a data
    selection strategy to achieve performance improvements.
  • We verify the correctness of our proposed approaches to improve the classification model’s utility,
    fairness, and robustness on synthetic data and demonstrate the usefulness of our approaches on
    real-world diverse datasets with regard to efficacy, simplicity, and interpretability.
  • We move beyond the above classical classification setting and apply our approaches to diverse
    and practical application scenarios, including correcting for fairness distribution shift, combating
    fairness poisoning attacks, defending against adaptive evasion attacks, online learning with
    streaming batch data, and analyzing unlabeled sample effectiveness in active learning.

2    P RELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND
We first introduce influence functions on convex models (logistic regression) and how to measure sam-
ple influence on utility, fairness, and robustness. We then discuss extensions to non-convex models.
Influence Functions. Given a training set Z = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 and a classifier trained using
empirical risk minimization by a loss function ℓ, we have the optimal parameters of the clas-
                          Pn
sifier θ̂ = arg minθ∈Θ n1 i=1 ℓ(xi , yi ; θ). Influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017) mea-
sure the effect of changing an infinitesimal weight of samples on a validation set, based on
an impact function f evaluating the quantity of interest, such as utility, fairness, and robust-


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ness. Downweighting a training sample xj by a very small fraction ϵ leads the model param-
                                      Pn
eter to θ̂(xj ; −ϵ) = arg minθ∈Θ n1 i=1 ℓ(xi , yi ; θ) − ϵℓ(xj , yj ; θ). The actual impact of such
a change can be written as I ∗ (xj ; −ϵ) = f (θ̂(xj ; −ϵ)) − f (θ̂), where f (θ̂(xj ; −ϵ)) can be ob-
tained by retraining the model without xj . Assuming l is strictly convex and twice differen-
tiable, and f is also differentiable, the actual impact can be estimated without expensive model
retraining by I(xj ; −ϵ) = limϵ→1 f (θ̂(xj ; −ϵ)) − f (θ̂) = ∇θ̂ f (θ̂)⊤ H−1θ̂
                                                                               ∇θ̂ ℓ(xj , yj ; θ̂), where
        Pn       2
Hθ̂ = i=1 ∇θ̂ ℓ(xj , yj ; θ̂) is the Hessian matrix of ℓ and is invertible since ℓ is assumed to be
convex. Thus, we can measure the influence of removing sample xj from the training set as I(−xj ).
Measuring Influence on Utility. If we instantiate the impact function f to calculate the loss value
on a validation set V , we can measure the training sample influence on utility as follows:
                                                X
                            I util (−xi ) =             ∇θ̂ ℓ(x, y; θ̂)⊤ H−1
                                                                          θ̂
                                                                             ∇θ̂ ℓ(xi , yi ; θ̂).         (1)
                                              (x,y)∈V

Measuring Influence on Fairness. Similarly, we can instantiate the impact function f by group
fairness (Dwork et al., 2012), such as demographic parity (DP) or equal opportunity (EOP) to measure
influence on fairness. Consider a binary sensitive attribute defined as g ∈ {0, 1} and let ŷ denote the
predicted class probabilities. The fairness metric DP is defined as: f DP-fair (θ̂, V ) = EV [ŷ|g = 1] −
EV [ŷ|g = 0] . Based on that, we can calculate the training sample influence on fairness as follows:2
                             I DP-fair (−xi ) = ∇θ̂ f DP-fair (θ̂, V )⊤ H−1
                                                                         θ̂
                                                                            ∇θ̂ ℓ(xi , yi ; θ̂).          (2)

Measuring Influence on Adversarial Robustness. We can also measure which points contribute
to adversarial robustness (or vulnerability) using influence functions. To do so, we first define an
adversary– any attack approaches to craft adversarial samples that can be used including black-box,
white-box, among others. We consider a white-box adversary (Megyeri et al., 2019) specific to linear
models, which can be easily extended to other models and settings, such as FGSM (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), PGD (Madry et al., 2017), etc. To craft an adversarial sample, we take each sample
                                                          ⊤
x of the validation set V and perturb it as x′ = x − γ θ̂ θ̂⊤x+b
                                                              θ̂
                                                                 θ̂, where θ̂ ∈ Rd are the linear model
coefficients, b ∈ R is the intercept, and γ > 1 controls the amount of perturbation added. Since the
decision boundary is a hyperplane, we simply move each sample orthogonal to it by adding minimal
perturbation. In this manner, we can obtain an adversarial validation set V ′ which consists of x′
for each sample x of V . The class labels y remain unchanged. Now, we can compute adversarial
robustness influence for each training sample as follows:
                                                 X
                          I robust (−xi ) =                 ∇θ̂ ℓ(x′ , y; θ̂)⊤ H−1
                                                                                θ̂
                                                                                   ∇θ̂ ℓ(xi , yi ; θ̂).   (3)
                                              (x′ ,y)∈V ′

Extension to Non-Convex Models. A current limitation of influence functions is that they require
the model to satisfy strict convexity conditions, implying its Hessian is positive definite and invertible,
and that it is trained to convergence (Koh & Liang, 2017). To extend influence functions to non-
convex models, several possible solutions exist: (1) a linear model can be used as a surrogate on the
embeddings obtained via the non-convex model (Li & Liu, 2022); (2) a damping term can be added to
the non-convex model such that its Hessian becomes positive definite and invertible (Han et al., 2020);
and (3) for certain tasks specific or second-order influence functions can be derived (Basu et al., 2020b;
Alaa & Van Der Schaar, 2020). In this paper, we adopt the above first strategy for non-convex models.
Note that there is work that shows that influence functions for deep learning models are fragile (Basu
et al., 2020a). However, follow-up work (Bae et al., 2022; Epifano et al., 2023) has contrasted
with some of these findings, resulting in the applicability of influence functions in deep learning
being a contentious research topic. Despite this, multiple work has demonstrated their benefits in
deep networks, such as on BERT (Han et al., 2020), ResNets (Liu et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022),
CNNs (Koh & Liang, 2017; Schioppa et al., 2022). We also provide preliminary results using our data
selection approach on BERT to show this (Appendix H). However, our paper is primarily focused on
convex models and resolving the undecided research question of deep learning influence fragility
is not our goal. Thus, we resort to using a surrogate convex model on the embedding space of the
non-convex model. This strategy subsequently obtains positive experimental performance as well.
   2
       We provide the sample influence definitions for EOP in Appendix A.


                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     P ROPOSED A PPROACHES

We now present Algorithm 1 for influence estimation via trees to interpret how data samples and
feature ranges impact model performance with respect to utility, fairness, and robustness. Additionally,
we propose Algorithm 2 for trimming training samples to improve model performance given a budget.
3.1    E STIMATING THE I NFLUENCE OF S AMPLES

Influence functions can efficiently estimate the data impact in various aspects. To further provide
their interpretations, we employ decision trees to uncover which sample features contribute positively
or negatively to the model’s performance with respect to desired evaluation functions. To address
the issue of the tree depth on interpretability, we utilize hierarchical shrinkage (Agarwal et al., 2022)
to regularize the tree. We present our approach for influence estimation in Algorithm 1, which takes
as input a regularization parameter λ, training set Z, validation set V , and an influence function
definition I F for samples in Z on V . Specifically, we iterate over each training set tuple (xi , yi ) ∈ Z
and create a new regression dataset M where the regressor is [xi , yi ] (block matrix notation implies
appending yi to the end of xi ) and the response variable is computed via I M (−xi ). Note that we
append the label to our dataset since influence estimation is dependent on class labels.
Then, we train a regression tree h using CART Algorithm 1 : Influence Estimation Via Trees
(Breiman et al., 2017). To ensure that the tree
is interpretable while preserving performance,           Input: Training set Z , Validation set V , Influence func-
                                                         tion I F , Hyperparameter λ
we utilize hierarchical shrinkage post-training.
                                                         Output: Influence Estimator Tree ĥ
For our tree h and for a given sample qi in 1: initialize M ← ∅.
the dataset M , let its leaf-to-root node path 2: for (xi , yi ) ∈ Z do
in the tree denote as tw ⊂ tw−1 ⊂ ... ⊂ t0 . 3:              qi ← [xi , yi ] //appending label to xi
Here tw represents the leaf node and t0 is            4:     M    ← M ∪ {(qi , I F (−xi ))}
                                                      5: end for
the root node. Then we define two mapping 6: train h using CART (Breiman et al., 2017) on M .
functions for ease of readability: ϕ and ξ. 7: return ĥ by using hierarchical shrinkage (Agarwal
The function ϕ takes as input a tree node and            et al., 2022) on h with λ.
returns the number of samples it contains.
The function ξ takes as input the query sample q and the tree node t and outputs the average
predictive response for q at node P  t. The overall regression tree prediction model for qi can then
                                        w
be written as: h(qi ) = ξ(qi , t0 ) + j=1 ξ(qi , tj ) − ξ(qi , tj−1 ). Hierarchical shrinkage regularizes
the tree h by shrinking the prediction over each tree node by the sample means of its parent nodes,
                       Pw ξ(q ,tj )−ξ(qi ,tj−1 )
ĥ(qi ) = ξ(qi , t0 ) + j=1 i1+λ/ϕ(t    j−1 )
                                                 .
3.2    DATA T RIMMING FOR S UPERVISED M ODELS

We present Algorithm 2 for trimming training
datasets which takes input as before Z, V , I F Algorithm 2 : Data Trimming
for samples in Z on V , and a budget b for the          Input: Training set Z , Validation set V , Influence func-
number of samples to remove and outputs the             tion I F , Budget b
trimmed dataset Z . The goal is to remove sam- 1: Output:
                    ′                                              Trimmed Dataset Z ′
                                                        initialize J ← ∅, K ← ∅, Z ′ ← ∅.
ples from the dataset that have negative influ- 2: for (xi , yi ) ∈ Z do
ence. First, we initialize the sets J, K, and Z ′ . 3:      J ← J ∪ {I F (−xi )} //on set V
Then we populate J with the influence values of      4:     K ← K ∪ {i}
samples in J, and K with the indices of these 5:        end for
                                                     6: sort J in ascending order.
samples (lines 2-3). We then sort J in order of 7: sort KPusing J .
increasing positive influence, and K according 8: b′ ← 1j<0,j∈J .
to the sorted order obtained via J. In K we only 9: Z ′ ← Z ′ ∪ {xi }, ∀i ∈/ K:min{b,b′ } , xi ∈ Z .
                                                                   ′
care about the first min{b, b′ } indices (line 9) 10: return Z .
         ′
where b is the total number of negative influence samples (line 8). Finally, we select only those
samples to be part of Z ′ that do not have indices in this subset of K and return Z ′ .

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present results for our algorithms presented in the previous section. We first verify
the correctness of our algorithms on synthetically generated toy data. We analyze how our influence


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Correctness verification on toy data for utility (accuracy), fairness, and robustness functions.
(+) class samples are denoted in blue, (-) class samples are denoted in orange, majority group samples
are denoted by ◦ and minority group samples are denoted by ×. A, D, and G show the training
set with the original logistic regression decision boundary, and we visualize the influence regions
generated by our tree model from Algorithm 1 as positive (light green) or negative (light red) for each
function: utility/fairness/robustness. B, E, and H denote the points to be trimmed as identified by
Algorithm 2 for each function type. C and F denote the validation set and how we obtain improved
accuracy and fairness performance on it after trimming. I denotes the adversarial validation set and
how post trimming we can improve performance on adversarial data.

estimation algorithm can be used to visualize and interpret regions of positive or negative influence,
and trim the training set to improve accuracy, fairness, and robustness on the validation set. We then
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms on test sets of four real-world datasets and greatly
improve their performance, especially for fairness and robustness.
Correctness Verification on Toy Data. We generate 150 train and 100 validation samples using
two isotropic 2D-Gaussian distributions and use logistic regression for binary classification. We then
analyze the training sample’s positive/negative impact on model’s accuracy, fairness and robustness in
Figure 1 A, D, and G, respectively. The green regions denote the positive influences, while the pink re-
gions denote the negative influences. These regions show the feature values derived from training sam-
ples that affect the linear model either positively or negatively for the function of interest. In Figure 1
A, most samples contribute positively for utility, and hence lead to positive influence regions. Simi-
larly, in Figure 1 D, most of the samples are harmful for fairness as the (+) class has a large number of
majority group samples and the (-) class has a large number of minority samples. Thus, most of the re-
gions identified are of negative influence on fairness. Subsequently, we use Algorithm 2 with a budget
b = 10 to obtain the points to be trimmed, shown in Figure 1 B, E, and H. We then remove these points
from training set, resulting in significant performance improvement on the validation set for each func-
tion of interest, as shown in Figure 1 C, F, and I. Notably, the robustness is significantly improved from


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Double y-plot of our trimming method on the test sets of Adult, Bank, CelebA, and Jigsaw
Toxicity. The left y-axes present algorithmic accuracy, fairness, and robustness, while the right y-axes
present the influence value of the trimmed samples. Higher values indicate better accuracy and
robustness, while lower values indicate better fairness. The blue lines represent the performance of
our trimming method, while the red lines represent the performance with random trimming.

0.01 to 0.42 by simply removing the identified points. Additionally, Figure 1 I shows an adversarial
set with samples perturbed in Section 2, where adversarial points crowd around the original decision
boundary and are difficult to classify accurately. Note that while validation of influence computations
has been well-demonstrated in previous studies (Koh & Liang, 2017; Li & Liu, 2022), we provide
comparisons for actual sample influence via model retraining and estimated influence in Appendix B.
Algorithmic Performance on Real-World Datasets. We
demonstrate the performance of our proposed methods on
four real-world datasets, consisting of two tabular datasets
Adult (Kohavi et al., 1996) and Bank (Moro et al., 2014),                         ≤

one visual dataset CelebA (Liu et al., 2018), and one
textual dataset Jigsaw Toxicity (Noever, 2018). Details on            ≤                    >
datasets and training are present in Appendix C. Influence
is measured on the validation set and logistic regression
is the base model used. We present results on test sets
of these datasets in Figure 2, along with influence value
magnitudes corresponding to trimmed samples for each                  ≤ >                 ≤ >

function type. Results with using MLP as the base model
are shown in Appendix D.1 and exhibit similar trends. While         (#samples=3940) (#samples=9025)   (#samples=5) (#samples=116)

full visualizations of the tree estimators (Algorithm 1) for Figure 3: Example influence subtree.
all four datasets are presented in Appendix F, as a descriptive
example we provide the left subtree for fairness influence on Jigsaw Toxicity in Figure 3.
In Figure 2, we demonstrate the effect of increasing the budget b of our trimming approach (up to 5%
of training data) and compare it to a random baseline that removes b training samples.3 The results
show that our methods are able to improve fairness (DP)4 and robustness significantly, while the
random baseline fails to do so. This is particularly evident for datasets where large fairness disparities
exist. Additionally, we are able to achieve significant improvements in accuracy on the adversarial
test set for all datasets, indicating that our trimming can improve the model’s robustness by effectively
selecting training samples. However, we observe that trimming does not lead to much improvement
in accuracy for most datasets, except for Bank, where we obtain a 10% increase. We conjecture that
   3
     We fail to wholly compare with model-specific Shapley-value data valuation methods such as TMC-Shapley
(Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) in utility due to their prohibitively long execution time on our datasets. However, we
provide some preliminary results on subsampled data and execution time comparisons in Appendix E.
   4
     Additional experiments using EOP as the fairness metric are presented in Appendix D.2.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Performance of fairness and utility of several fairness algorithms under distribution shift. A
greener background denotes a better solution in terms of both accuracy and fairness.


the current logistic regression models may already achieve optimal performance on these datasets, as
seen by the quick decrease in utility influence value, which suggests little room for improvement.
This also implies that we may not require as much training data to achieve similar utility results.

5     A PPLICATION S CENARIOS B EYOND C ONVENTIONAL C LASSIFICATION
We extend the conventional classification setting of the previous section by conducting extensive
experiments for various practical deployment and maintenance scenarios, such as correcting distribu-
tion shift unfairness, combating (fairness) poisoning and (utility) evasion attacks, online learning with
streaming batch data, and analyzing unlabeled sample effectiveness for active learning. We thus show
the effectiveness of our proposed methods in improving model performance across diverse application
scenarios either by trimming the training set, or by identifying new beneficial samples to add to it.
5.1   M ITIGATING U NFAIRNESS U NDER D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

We demonstrate how our proposed method can serve as an effective fairness intervention and enhance
the current methods under distribution shift. Fairness-specific distribution shifts (Roh et al., 2023)
occur when the distribution of sensitive attributes (and class labels) between the training and test
sets have drifted apart, resulting in severe issues of unfairness on the test set. Although it is a
newly emerging direction, some pioneering attempts (Roh et al., 2023; Maity et al., 2021; Giguere
et al., 2022) have been taken to address the change in bias between the original and test distribution.
Typically, these methods have access to some samples from the test set to study the change in bias.
In our experiments, these samples can constitute the validation set V given that the validation and
test set are correlated with each other. Here we employ multiple fair intervention approaches as
baselines– such as Correlation Shift (Roh et al., 2023), FairBatch (Roh et al., 2021), Robust Fair
Logloss Classifier (RLL) (Rezaei et al., 2020), Influence-based Reweighing (Li & Liu, 2022), and
vanilla logistic regression. We use the ACS Income (Ding et al., 2021) dataset and construct three
different distribution shift scenarios– time-based, location-based, time&location-based. In all three
scenarios, we use the same training data constituting California (2014) data with 18000 samples,
while the test sets consist of 6000 different samples: for time-based shift, this comprises California
(2018) data, for location-based shift, it is Michigan (2014) data, and for the time&location-based shift,
we use Michigan (2018) data. We set budget b = 600 which constitutes only 3.33% of the training set.
We present results as fairness-accuracy plots in Figure 4. We show that our trimming based approach
can greatly improve fairness under distribution shift even when utilized with the vanilla model,
making it competitive with the fairness intervention baselines. Moreover, except for the vanilla
model (Figure 4 A&C), our trimming approach with the fairness intervention methods improves their
accuracy significantly as well. This demonstrates the generalizability of our approach, as it can be
used as a pre-processing step to boost the performance of other mitigation strategies.
5.2   C OMBATING P OISONING ATTACKS AGAINST FAIRNESS

We use our trimming approach as an effective defense for mitigating poisoning attacks against fairness.
Recently, several attacks (Solans et al., 2021; Mehrabi et al., 2021; Chhabra et al., 2023a) have been
proposed to reduce fairness of learning models. Random Anchoring Attack (RAA) and Non-random
Anchoring Attack (NRAA)(Mehrabi et al., 2021) are two representative ones. These first select a
set of target points to attack, and then poison a small subset of the training data by placing additional


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


anchoring points near the targets with the opposite class label. The target samples are uniformly ran-
domly chosen in RAA, while NRAA selects “popular” target samples that result in the maximization
of bias for all samples in the test set post the attack. Here we follow the original implementations
of RAA and NRAA and use their same datasets including German (Hsieh, 2005), Compas (Brennan
et al., 2009), and Drug (Fehrman et al., 2017). Since all these are different sizes we set the trimming
budget b ≤ 10% of training samples and the attacker’s poisoning budget is 10% of training samples.
Table 1 shows the results obtained. Our trim-
ming approach is useful for combating fairness- Table 1: Performance of fairness poisoning attacks
reducing poisoning attacks, as it improves
                                                                       German       Compas       Drug
fairness (and utility for Compas) performance          Method
                                                                     DP    ACC    DP    ACC   DP    ACC
compared to the metric values obtained before
                                                       Before       0.117 0.670 -0.281 0.652 0.371 0.668
and after the attacks. It is also significant to
                                                       RAA         -0.029 0.655 -0.060 0.630 0.225 0.657
note that there are currently no well-performing       RAA + Ours   0.000 0.650 -0.082 0.643 0.090 0.616
defenses proposed for the aforementioned attack        NRAA         0.268 0.665 0.168 0.652 0.501 0.665
in the supervised setting (Chhabra et al., 2023a). NRAA + Ours 0.005 0.650 0.048 0.654 0.142 0.657
Our trimming approach thus shows promise as
potentially the first defense against such attacks as it improves fairness significantly without sacrific-
ing utility. Also note that since the defender does not know how many points the attacker poisons, the
goal here is not to discover poisoned samples, but maximizing performance on the test set compared
to both pre-attack and post-attack performance by trimming a small number of training samples.
5.3   D EFENDING AGAINST A DAPTIVE E VASION A DVERSARIES

In addition to fairness shifts and poisoning defense, we show how the influence-based trimming
approach can help defend against an adaptive adversary (Tramer et al., 2020; Biggio et al., 2013)
that conducts evasion attacks on the given learning model. Here, adaptive refers to the adversary
being able to target the given defense. In our case, the attacker can randomly select test samples
to conduct the attack. Notably, this is significantly different from our robustness analysis in Section 4,
where we create an adversarial set using all test samples and then trim samples to optimize robustness
accuracy. Here we defend by choosing to trim the training set by a fixed amount, but we have no
knowledge of what samples are adversarial during inference.
We use the attack described in Section 2 to attack logistic regression. The attacker is adaptive to
randomly choose between 5-25% of the test set samples to perturb. Correspondingly, we let the
defender trim only 2.5% of the training set using Algorithm 2. We repeat these experiments between
the attacker and defender over 10 runs for the datasets used in Section 4. In Figure 5, we plot
the pre-attack accuracy, the post-attack accuracy distribution, as well as the post-attack accuracy
distribution after trimming the training set and retraining the model, on the test set. These results
indicate that trimming the training set after the attack can be a viable defense. With just 2.5% of the
training data trimmed, we find that we can increase performance well beyond pre-attack values.
5.4   O NLINE L EARNING WITH S TREAMING DATA AND N OISY L ABELS

So far, we considered classification problems with a fixed training set. In this part, we consider the
online classification setting with streaming batch data. Online learning is a popular choice when
learning models need to be implemented on memory constrained systems, or to combat distribution
shift (Hoi et al., 2021; Montiel et al., 2021). Online learning assumes that the training data arrives in
sequential batches and the learning model trains/updates on each batch sequentially. Here we reuse


 Figure 5: Defending with our trimming method against adaptive evasion attacks on four datasets.

                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: A - D: Online learning with noisy labels using logistic regression and linear Support Vector
Machines with and without our influence-based trimming strategy on four datasets; E: Comparison
of different active learning strategies on the Diabetic Retinopathy dataset.

the datasets in Section 4 and trim samples in each batched stream of data using Algorithm 2. Note
that we estimate influence over each batch independently. To make the setting more practical, we
consider that the data stream might consist of noisy class labels– where one-third of samples that
arrive in a batch have noisy labels flipped from the original ground truth labels. We set the trimming
budget b to be 10% of the batch size, and train on 10 sequential batches of data. We then measure test
set accuracy with and without trimming each batch for both the online models. Figure 6 A-D show
the performance of logistic regression and linear Support Vector Machines (SVMs) (Joachims, 2006)
trained in an online manner with Stochastic Gradient Descent (Ketkar, 2017) with and without our
trimming processing. It can be seen that trimming combined with our influence estimation model can
lead to much better performance for all the given datasets (except Bank) and learning models.

5.5   ACTIVE L EARNING

Finally, we employ our approaches for active learning by choosing beneficial samples for annotation.
Active learning (Cohn et al., 1996) constitutes a small labeled training set, and a large pool of
unlabeled samples, where the goal is to pick samples from the unlabeled set for annotation and then
retrain the model on the combined data for boosting performance. It is generally employed in fields
where annotation is very expensive to undertake, such as in medicine and health.
Here, we use a linear SVM as our learning model since a number of active learning strategies
work optimally for SVM models (Kremer et al., 2014). We simulate an active learning use-case,
following prior work (Zhang & An, 2016; Ahsan et al., 2022), by using the Diabetic Retinopathy
(Decencière et al., 2014) dataset. The dataset consists of 1151 retina images of patients and can be
used for predicting whether they suffer from diabetic retinopathy or not. We use the image features
as extracted in (Antal & Hajdu, 2014). In this setting, there are 10 rounds of querying for annotations,
where each round allows for 10 samples to be annotated. As a result, by the end of the final round
we will have an additional 100 labeled samples available. We consider the following baselines for
active learning– random sampling, entropy sampling (Holub et al., 2008), margin sampling (Balcan
et al., 2007), uncertainty sampling (Nguyen et al., 2022), and ISAL (Liu et al., 2021) which is an
influence-based strategy that uses base model predictions as pseudo-labels to compute influence.
For our influence-based sampling, since we do not have access to labels in the unlabeled set, we train
our tree estimation model (Algorithm 1) without labels. Then we use the estimator to predict the
influence of the unlabeled samples. Out of these we select the 10 highest influence samples available
in each round for labeling. Note that our influence-based sampling is deterministic over multiple runs
since our tree estimator is deterministic when provided the same input. We present results for this
experiment in Figure 6 E over 5 runs. It can be seen that our influence sampling outperforms other
baselines in most rounds, and ends up with the best performance after the final round, demonstrating
its effectiveness. We obtain similar results on our four real-world datasets in Appendix G.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we extended influence functions to assess what data improves a given convex classifier
(or a surrogate for a non-convex model) with respect to utility, fairness, and robustness by interpreting
the feature space. We used tree-based influence estimation models to interpret which sample features
contribute positively or negatively to the model’s performance. We also designed a data selection
strategy to achieve performance improvements. Through extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets, and diverse application settings such as poisoning/evasion attacks, distribution
shift, online and active learning, we showed how our simple and general approaches for data selection
can significantly boost performance and provide valuable insights for practitioners.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work touches upon an important problem of selecting data for a fixed model to improve its
performance in terms of utility, fairness, and robustness. For applications requiring fairness and
equity (Chhabra et al., 2021; 2023b; Zafar et al., 2017; Sapiezynski et al., 2019), our approach can
constitute an important preprocessing step that helps reduce bias and discrimination in systems. Our
approach can also help ensure systems are robust (Xu & Mannor, 2012; Feurer et al., 2015) and
high-performing under diverse problem settings, allowing these models to better serve their use-cases.
It is also important to note that our work consists only of positive contributions (such as regarding
interpretability, improving fairness, defending against attacks, etc.), and the approaches cannot be
used in a problematic way by a malicious adversary.
Throughout the paper, we show that by employing our influence-based estimation models and simple
influence-based data trimming, we can augment performance in multiple diverse problem scenarios.
However, our approaches have limitations that we believe can be investigated in future work. First,
better interpretability mechanisms can be designed using influence that outdo the benefits of using
rule sets derived from decision trees. Second, our current data trimming approach is very simple–
it is heuristic. While simplicity was the current goal of our work in this paper, better approaches
for data trimming or selection can be developed. Third, our approach can be utilized on deep learning
models (such as transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)) and studied in more diverse non-convex deep
learning tasks and use-cases. For instance, it is important to study robustness of large language
models (Chhabra et al., 2024) and deep unsupervised models (Chhabra et al., 2022a), among others
not covered in this work. Future work can delve into influence selection approaches for such models.

R EFERENCES
Abhineet Agarwal, Yan Shuo Tan, Omer Ronen, Chandan Singh, and Bin Yu. Hierarchical shrinkage:
  Improving the accuracy and interpretability of tree-based models. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2022.
Muhammad Ahtazaz Ahsan, Adnan Qayyum, Adeel Razi, and Junaid Qadir. An active learning
 method for diabetic retinopathy classification with uncertainty quantification. Medical & Biological
 Engineering & Computing, 2022.
Ahmed Alaa and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Discriminative Jackknife: Quantifying uncertainty in deep
  learning via higher-order influence functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2020.
Bálint Antal and András Hajdu. An ensemble-based system for automatic screening of diabetic
  retinopathy. Knowledge-based Systems, 2014.
Adrian Arnaiz-Rodriguez, Francisco Escolano, and Nuria Oliver. FairShap: A Data Re-weighting
 Approach for Algorithmic Fairness based on Shapley Values. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01928,
  2023.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Andrei Broder, and Tong Zhang. Margin based active learning. In Annual
 Conference on Learning Theory, COLT. Springer, 2007.
Samyadeep Basu, Philip Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14651, 2020a.
Samyadeep Basu, Xuchen You, and Soheil Feizi. On second-order group influence functions for
  black-box predictions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020b.

Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Šrndić, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio
  Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time. In ECML PKDD,
  2013.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Avrim L Blum and Pat Langley. Selection of relevant features and examples in machine learning.
  Artificial Intelligence, 1997.
Leo Breiman, Jerome H Friedman, Richard A Olshen, and Charles J Stone. Classification and
  regression trees. Routledge, 2017.
Tim Brennan, William Dieterich, and Beate Ehret. Evaluating the predictive validity of the compas
  risk and needs assessment system. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 2009.
Jie Cai, Jiawei Luo, Shulin Wang, and Sheng Yang. Feature selection in machine learning: A new
   perspective. Neurocomputing, 2018.
Yuanyuan Chen, Boyang Li, Han Yu, Pengcheng Wu, and Chunyan Miao. Hydra: Hypergradient
  data relevance analysis for interpreting deep neural networks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.
Anshuman Chhabra, Karina Masalkovaitė, and Prasant Mohapatra. An overview of fairness in
  clustering. IEEE Access, 2021.
Anshuman Chhabra, Ashwin Sekhari, and Prasant Mohapatra. On the Robustness of Deep Clustering
  Models: Adversarial Attacks and Defenses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022a.
Anshuman Chhabra, Adish Singla, and Prasant Mohapatra. Fair clustering using antidote data. In
 Algorithmic Fairness through the Lens of Causality and Robustness workshop, 2022b.
Anshuman Chhabra, Peizhao Li, Prasant Mohapatra, and Hongfu Liu. Robust Fair Clustering:
 A Novel Fairness Attack and Defense Framework. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023a.
Anshuman Chhabra, Kartik Patwari, Chandana Kuntala, Deepak Kumar Sharma, Prasant Mohapatra,
  et al. Towards Fair Video Summarization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023b.
Anshuman Chhabra, Hadi Askari, and Prasant Mohapatra. Revisiting Zero-Shot Abstractive Summa-
  rization in the Era of Large Language Models from the Perspective of Position Bias. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.01989, 2024.
David A Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I Jordan. Active learning with statistical models.
  Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 1996.
C Coleman, C Yeh, S Mussmann, B Mirzasoleiman, P Bailis, P Liang, J Leskovec, and M Zaharia.
  Selection via proxy: Efficient data selection for deep learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Etienne Decencière, Xiwei Zhang, Guy Cazuguel, Bruno Lay, Béatrice Cochener, Caroline Trone,
  Philippe Gain, Richard Ordonez, Pascale Massin, Ali Erginay, et al. Feedback on a publicly
  distributed image database: the Messidor database. Image Analysis & Stereology, 2014.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring Adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, 2012.
Jacob R Epifano, Ravi P Ramachandran, Aaron J Masino, and Ghulam Rasool. Revisiting the fragility
  of influence functions. Neural Networks, 162:581–588, 2023.
Elaine Fehrman, Awaz K Muhammad, Evgeny M Mirkes, Vincent Egan, and Alexander N Gorban.
  The five factor model of personality and evaluation of drug consumption risk. In Data Science:
  Innovative Developments in Data Analysis and Clustering. Springer, 2017.
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and
 Frank Hutter. Efficient and robust automated machine learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Amirata Ghorbani, Michael Kim, and James Zou. A distributional framework for data valuation. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Stephen Giguere, Blossom Metevier, Bruno Castro da Silva, Yuriy Brun, Philip Thomas, and Scott
  Niekum. Fairness guarantees under demographic shift. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Mark A Hall. Correlation-based feature selection for machine learning. PhD thesis, The University
 of Waikato, 1999.
Xiaochuang Han, Byron C Wallace, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Explaining black box predictions and
  unveiling data artifacts through influence functions. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Steven CH Hoi, Doyen Sahoo, Jing Lu, and Peilin Zhao. Online learning: A comprehensive survey.
  Neurocomputing, 2021.
Alex Holub, Pietro Perona, and Michael C Burl. Entropy-based active learning for object recognition.
  In IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops.
  IEEE, 2008.
Nan-Chen Hsieh. Hybrid mining approach in the design of credit scoring models. Expert Systems
  with Applications, 2005.
Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00622, 2022.
Eeshaan Jain, Tushar Nandy, Gaurav Aggarwal, Ashish V Tendulkar, Rishabh K Iyer, and Abir De.
  Efficient data subset selection to generalize training across models: Transductive and inductive
  networks. 2022.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nezihe Merve Gurel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang,
  Costas Spanos, and Dawn Song. Efficient task specific data valuation for nearest neighbor
  algorithms. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2018.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bo Li,
  Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the Shapley
  value. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
Thorsten Joachims. Training linear svms in linear time. In ACM SIGKDD International Conference
  on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2006.
Nikhil Ketkar. Stochastic gradient descent. Deep learning with Python: A hands-on introduction,
  2017.
Krishnateja Killamsetty, Xujiang Zhao, Feng Chen, and Rishabh Iyer. Retrieve: Coreset selection for
  efficient and robust semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:14488–14501, 2021.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Ron Kohavi et al. Scaling up the accuracy of naive-bayes classifiers: A decision-tree hybrid. In KDD,
  1996.
Jan Kremer, Kim Steenstrup Pedersen, and Christian Igel. Active learning with support vector
  machines. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Beta Shapley: a Unified and Noise-reduced Data Valuation
  Framework for Machine Learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, 2022.
Peizhao Li and Hongfu Liu. Achieving fairness at no utility cost via data reweighing with influence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Peizhao Li, Ethan Xia, and Hongfu Liu. Learning antidote data to individual unfairness. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Weibo Liu, Zidong Wang, Xiaohui Liu, Nianyin Zeng, Yurong Liu, and Fuad E Alsaadi. A survey of
 deep neural network architectures and their applications. Neurocomputing, 2017.
Zhuoming Liu, Hao Ding, Huaping Zhong, Weijia Li, Jifeng Dai, and Conghui He. Influence selection
  for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Large-scale Celebfaces attributes (CelebA)
  dataset. Retrieved August, 2018.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Subha Maity, Debarghya Mukherjee, Mikhail Yurochkin, and Yuekai Sun. Does enforcing fairness
  mitigate biases caused by subpopulation shift? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
István Megyeri, István Hegedűs, and Márk Jelasity. Adversarial robustness of linear models: regular-
   ization and dimensionality. i6doc. com, 2019.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Muhammad Naveed, Fred Morstatter, and Aram Galstyan. Exacerbating algorith-
  mic bias through fairness attacks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Jacob Montiel, Max Halford, Saulo Martiello Mastelini, Geoffrey Bolmier, Raphael Sourty, Robin
  Vaysse, Adil Zouitine, Heitor Murilo Gomes, Jesse Read, Talel Abdessalem, et al. River: machine
  learning for streaming data in python. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
Sérgio Moro, Paulo Cortez, and Paulo Rita. A data-driven approach to predict the success of bank
   telemarketing. Decision Support Systems, 2014.
Vu-Linh Nguyen, Mohammad Hossein Shaker, and Eyke Hüllermeier. How to measure uncertainty
  in uncertainty sampling for active learning. Machine Learning, 2022.
David Noever. Machine learning suites for online toxicity detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01869,
  2018.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2021.
Samira Pouyanfar, Saad Sadiq, Yilin Yan, Haiman Tian, Yudong Tao, Maria Presa Reyes, Mei-
  Ling Shyu, Shu-Ching Chen, and Sundaraja S Iyengar. A survey on deep learning: Algorithms,
  techniques, and applications. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 2018.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Bashir Rastegarpanah, Krishna P Gummadi, and Mark Crovella. Fighting fire with fire: Using
  antidote data to improve polarization and fairness of recommender systems. In ACM International
  Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2019.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashkan Rezaei, Rizal Fathony, Omid Memarrast, and Brian Ziebart. Fairness for robust log loss
  classification. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.

Yuji Roh, Kangwook Lee, Steven Euijong Whang, and Changho Suh. Fairbatch: Batch selection for
  model fairness. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Yuji Roh, Kangwook Lee, Steven Euijong Whang, and Changho Suh. Improving fair training under
  correlation shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Piotr Sapiezynski, Wesley Zeng, Ronald E Robertson, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. Quantifying
  the impact of user attentionon fair group representation in ranked lists. In The World Wide Web
  Conference, 2019.

Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence functions.
  In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.

Yanyao Shen and Sujay Sanghavi. Learning with bad training data via iterative trimmed loss
  minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

David Solans, Battista Biggio, and Carlos Castillo. Poisoning attacks on algorithmic fairness. In
  ECML PKDD. Springer, 2021.

Florian Tramer, Nicholas Carlini, Wieland Brendel, and Aleksander Madry. On adaptive attacks to
  adversarial example defenses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.

Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. Data Banzhaf: A Robust Data Valuation Framework for Machine
   Learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023.

Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. Minilm: Deep self-
 attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Kai Wei, Rishabh Iyer, and Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity in data subset selection and active learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

Huan Xu and Shie Mannor. Robustness and Generalization. Machine Learning, 86:391–423, 2012.

Shuo Yang, Zeke Xie, Hanyu Peng, Min Xu, Mingming Sun, and Ping Li. Dataset pruning: Reducing
  training data by examining generalization influence. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Chih-Kuan Yeh, Joon Kim, Ian En-Hsu Yen, and Pradeep K Ravikumar. Representer point selection
  for explaining deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, and Tomas Pfister. Data valuation using reinforcement learning. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rogriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fairness
 constraints: Mechanisms for fair classification. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2017.

Yinan Zhang and Mingqiang An. An active learning classifier for further reducing diabetic retinopathy
  screening system cost. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2016.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     I NFLUENCE F UNCTION D EFINITION FOR EOP
Let there be a binary sensitive attribute defined as g ∈ {0, 1}. The equal opportunity (EOP) fairness
metric can then be defined as:

           f EOP-fair (θ, V ) = EV [l(x, y; θ)|y = 1, g = 1] − EV [l(x, y; θ)|y = 1, g = 0] .

Now the influence function definition is:

                           I EOP-fair (−xi ) = ∇θ̂ f EOP-fair (θ̂, V )⊤ H−1
                                                                         θ̂
                                                                            ∇θ̂ l(xi , yi ; θ̂).              (4)

B     I NFLUENCE F UNCTION VS ACTUAL E FFECT VIA L EAVE -O NE -O UT
      R ETRAINING ON T OY DATA


             (a) Utility                              (b) Fairness                           (c) Robustness

Figure 7: Predicted vs actual influence analysis with leave-one-out training over 125 samples (out of
150 total training samples). Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ) between the predicted and
actual influence values is also shown.


In Figure 7 we present results comparing sample influence of points measured using influence
functions to their actual influence obtained via leave-one-out retraining on the toy dataset. In the
latter case we essentially measure the change in the function of interest (utility/fairness etc.) on the
entire dataset versus when the point being considered is removed and the model retrained on the
remaining samples. We remove a total of 125 points out of 150 samples in the training set as part of
this experiment.
Figure 7a shows these results for utility, Figure 7b for fairness, and Figure 7c for robustness. It can
be seen that the approximated and actual influences are very close together and we further quantify
this by computing the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ρ. As the value obtained in each case
is 0.99, this indicates high similarity in predicted and actual influence.

C     D ETAILS R EGARDING M ODEL T RAINING , DATASET S PLITS , AND
      M ISCELLANEOUS I NFORMATION
C.1   DATASET I NFORMATION AND S PLITS

For CelebA we utilize extracted features provided by the dataset authors, and for Jigsaw Toxicity
we extract text embeddings via the MiniLM transformer model (Wang et al., 2020). We set sex
(male/female) as the sensitive attribute for Adult, Bank, CelebA, and ethnicity (black/other) for Jigsaw
Toxicity. Further details are provided below.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bank. For this dataset, we have a total of 30,488 samples, with 18,292 training samples, 6,098
validation set samples, and 6098 test set samples. The number of features are 51. We use sex
(male/female) as the sensitive attribute for fairness. The target to predict is whether or not (yes/no) a
client will subscribe to a term deposit.
Adult. For this dataset, we have a total of 45,222 samples, with 30,162 training samples, 7,530
validation set samples, and 7,530 test set samples. The number of features are 102. We use sex
(male/female) as the sensitive attribute for fairness. The target to predict is whether income is > $50k
(yes) or ≤ $50k (no).
CelebA. For this dataset, we have a total of 104,163 samples, with 62,497 training samples, 20,833
validation set samples, and 20,833 test set samples. The number of features are 39. We use sex
(male/female) as the sensitive attribute for fairness. The target to predict is whether a given person is
smiling (yes) or not (no).
Jigsaw Toxicity. For this dataset, we have a total of 30,000 samples, with 18,000 training samples,
6,000 validation set samples, and 6,000 test set samples. The number of features are 385. We use
ethnicity (black/other) as the sensitive attribute for fairness. The target to predict is whether a given
tweet is toxic (yes) or not (no).

C.2   M ITIGATING D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

In these experiments for the main paper, we basically use logistic regression as the base learning
model and utilize our trimming algorithm. This constitutes the results on the vanilla model shown
in the figures for each distribution shift. Now, we utilize the same points identified for deletion
using our approach and measure performance before and after trimming these for all other fairness
intervention baselines. Note that we use Logistic Regression as a surrogate in this case which allows
us to effectively compute sample influence and improve the fairness performance of these approaches.
Note that since we are using logistic regression, there is very little variance observed in the results.
All the other baselines are used as provided by the authors.

C.3   O NLINE L EARNING WITH N OISY L ABELS E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Here for both models we compute influence using the logistic regression model as the surrogate. For
each batch of streaming data we train a new logistic regression model from scratch and compute
sample influences. Based on these values we conduct data batch stream-level trimming.

C.4   ACTIVE L EARNING E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Here, the dataset splits for the labeled sample set, and the large unlabeled pool sample set (as well as
validation/test set) are obtained by randomly partitioning the data. We then measure the results on the
fixed test set and compute the influence on the fixed validation set over all rounds. For influence-based
sampling, we use logistic regression as the surrogate for influence computation.

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS FOR A LGORITHMIC P ERFORMANCE ON
      R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS
In this section, we provide additional experiments that extend the results on showcasing algorithmic
performance of our proposed approaches on four real-world datasets. In particular, we first provide
results in a similar fashion to the main paper when the base learning model is an MLP Neural Network
as opposed to a logistic regression Model. Next, we provide results for utilizing EOP instead of DP
for fairness trimming experiments, for both the MLP and logistic regression models. We find that in
both cases the trends demonstrate that trimming is highly beneficial and improves model performance
significantly.

D.1    R ESULTS FOR MLP N EURAL N ETWORK

We present results for MLP (2 hidden layers with ReLU activations in between layers) as the learning
model in Figure 8. It can be seen that even though the MLP model is non-linear, our approach is


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


able to improve utility, fairness (DP), and robustness performance, for each of the four datasets.
Furthermore, the random baseline is unable to do so, and actually leads to worsened performance in
some cases.


Figure 8: Double y-plot of our trimming method on the test sets of Adult, Bank, CelebA, and Jigsaw
Toxicity for the MLP Neural Network as the base learning model. The left y-axes present algorithmic
accuracy, fairness (DP), and robustness, while the right y-axes present the influence value of the
trimmed samples. Higher values indicate better accuracy and robustness, while lower values indicate
better fairness. The blue lines represent the performance of our trimming method, while the red lines
represent the performance with random trimming.


D.2   R ESULTS FOR EOP (L OGISTIC R EGRESSION AND MLP)

Now we present results for using EOP (instead of DP) as the fairness function for both MLP and
logistic regression as the learning models as Figure 9. It can be seen that our results hold for EOP as
well, and can significantly improve fairness for both models on all four datasets and for both logistic
regression and the MLP network.


Figure 9: Additional fairness experiment on our trimming method and random trimming shown as a
double y-plot on the test sets of Adult, Bank, CelebA, and Jigsaw Toxicity for Logistic Regression and
MLP as the base learning model but with the EOP metric instead of DP. The blue lines represent the
performance of our trimming method, while the red lines represent the performance with random
trimming.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS WITH S HAPLEY- VALUE BASED DATA
      VALUATION
E.1    E XECUTION - TIME C OMPARISONS WITH I NFLUENCE E STIMATION

We now present results to demonstrate that compared to data valuation approaches such as TMC-
Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019), influence is much faster, and hence, a better choice for data
valuation and data selection tasks. For system details and the runtime environment, please refer to
Appendix I. We utilize the implementation of DataShapley (Truncated Monte Carlo), i.e. TMC-
Shapley as provided by the authors and run it with the default parameters on our four real-world
datasets. We find that while influence computations are in the order of seconds (< 3) for all datasets
except Jigsaw Toxicity, for which the computation takes ∼ 1.5 minutes. This is understandable
as Jigsaw Toxicity has the largest number of dimensions compared to the other datasets with 384
embedding features.
However, in comparison to DataShapley (TMC) these computations are many order of magnitudes
faster, as that takes over 11.2 hours to compute for Bank, our smallest dataset. For all other datasets,
we either ran into memory overflow errors after 96 hours, or the computation was not making
reasonable progress (such as for Jigsaw Toxicity). It is clearly evident that DataShapley (TMC) is not
viable for use on large-scale datasets.

Table 2: Execution times on all datasets for computation for both our influence-based approach and
TMC-Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019). Influence computation is order of magnitudes faster.
                    Dataset       Influence (Ours)   DataShapley (TMC) (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019)
                     Bank          1.659 Seconds                    11.2 Hours
                     Adult         4.061 Seconds                    > 96 Hours
                    CelebA         2.301 Seconds                    > 96 Hours
                Jigsaw Toxicity    85.42 Seconds                    > 96 Hours


E.2   P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF I NFLUENCE -BASED T RIMMING (O URS ) VS
      TMC-S HAPLEY BASED T RIMMING ON S UBSAMPLED Bank


Figure 10: Comparing TMC-Shapley and Influence Estimation on a subsampled version of the Bank
dataset, which only contains 100 samples.

Despite the running-time issues of TMC-Shapley, we conduct an additional experiment to compare per-
formance with TMC-Shapley on a subsampled version of the Bank dataset consisting of 100 samples.
We then iteratively trim the training set (up to 12.5%) using Algorithm 2 for both influence and Shapley
values on logistic regression. These results are provided as Figure 10. It can be seen that influence-
based trimming outperforms TMC-Shapley. While not an exhaustive comparison, we believe our
approach shows promise as a data selection strategy with respect to scalability and performance.
F     V ISUALIZING I NFLUENCE T REES FOR R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS
We now showcase the visualizations of trees obtained using our first algorithm for influence estimation.
For Adult, we provide the utility estimation tree as Figure 11, fairness estimation tree as Figure 12,


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and robustness estimation tree as Figure 13. For Bank, we provide the utility estimation tree as Figure
14, fairness estimation tree as Figure 15, and robustness estimation tree as Figure 16. For CelebA, we
provide the utility estimation tree as Figure 17, fairness estimation tree as Figure 18, and robustness
estimation tree as Figure 19. For Jigsaw Toxicity, we provide the utility estimation tree as Figure 20,
fairness estimation tree as Figure 21, and robustness estimation tree as Figure 22.


                      Figure 11: Adult dataset utility influence estimation tree.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 12: Adult dataset fairness influence estimation tree.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 13: Adult dataset robustness influence estimation tree.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Figure 14: Bank dataset utility influence estimation tree.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 15: Bank dataset fairness influence estimation tree.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 16: Bank dataset robustness influence estimation tree.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 17: CelebA dataset utility influence estimation tree.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 18: CelebA dataset fairness influence estimation tree.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Figure 19: CelebA dataset robustness influence estimation tree.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Figure 20: Jigsaw Toxicity dataset utility influence estimation tree.


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 21: Jigsaw Toxicity dataset fairness influence estimation tree.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Figure 22: Jigsaw Toxicity dataset robustness influence estimation tree.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    A DDITIONAL ACTIVE L EARNING E XPERIMENTS


                      (a) Adult                                          (b) Bank


                     (c) CelebA                                     (d) Jigsaw Toxicity

Figure 23: Additional comparisons on real-world datasets for active learning baselines with influence-
based sampling.



We now provide additional results for the active learning experiments from the main paper. Here, we
conduct the same experiments on our four real-world datasets. Labeled and unlabeled sample sets
are partitioned randomly, as are the validation and test sets. The results are shown in Figure 23. It
can be seen that influence-based sampling is superlative to the other active baselines for all datasets
except Adult. For Adult, influence-based sampling still outperforms uncertainty sampling and random
sampling, but is slightly less performant than entropy and margin sampling.



H    P RELIMINARY R ESULTS ON DATA T RIMMING (A LGORITHM 2) FOR
     I MPROVING U TILITY P ERFORMANCE OF BERT

We conduct very preliminary experiments to show that influence functions and influence-based
trimming can be applicable for deep learning; this can also guide future work in this area. We use
the setting of (Han et al., 2020) where BERT is fine-tuned on 10k samples for binary sentiment
classification on the SST-2 dataset (Socher et al, 2013) and influences are computed for individual test
samples. Then we compute training set influence for 50 test samples, take the union of all training
samples that were given a negative influence, and use these to trim the training set up to 12%. We fine-
tune BERT for each of these trimmed sets, and measure performance. These experiments are repeated
three times and results are provided in Figure 24. It can be seen that test set accuracy improves upon
trimming, which shows the effectiveness of our work in an initial preliminary experiment setting.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 24: Comparing Influence-Based Trimming on BERT (Vaswani et al., 2017) using the experi-
mental set-up of (Han et al., 2020) for Binary Sentiment Classification on the SST-2 Dataset (Socher
et al, 2013).


I   C ODE AND R EPRODUCIBILITY
• We open-source our code and experiment implementations in the following repository: https:
//github.com/anshuman23/InfDataSel.
• All experiments were conducted on a Linux server running Ubuntu 18.04.6 LTS. The CPU used
was an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4114 CPU @ 2.20GHz. Any experiments using the GPU (such as for
MLP, etc.) were conducted using a Tesla V100 with 32GB VRAM and CUDA version 11.4.
• All code is written in Python, and utilizes basic libraries such as as NumPy, scikit-learn, PyTorch,
Pandas, etc. Detailed package information is provided in the code repository itself.


                                                 32
