Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E FFICIENT PARAMETER T UNING OF L ARGE P ROTEIN
L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR De Novo P ROTEIN D ESIGN
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

        Protein language models (ProtLMs) have achieved unprecedented breakthroughs
        in protein design. However, optimizing ProtLMs effectively with limited data has
        been challenging due to their large number of parameters. In this study, we in-
        troduce prefix tuning to efficiently prompt the pre-trained ProtLMs for de novo
        protein design with desired structures and functions. During the training process,
        only the prefix virtual token is trainable, while the pre-trained ProtLM is frozen.
        We trained two prefix virtual tokens on antimicrobial peptide (AMP) dataset and
        alpha-helix strucutre dataset, respectively. Our results demonstrate that prefix tun-
        ing is efficient to prompt the pre-trained ProtLM by optimizing fewer trainable
        parameters to achieve superior results compared with fine tuning, even under low-
        data settings. Furthermore, these two prefix virtual tokens can be combined to
        precisely control protein generation with both desired properties, which is not pos-
        sessed by other tuning methods. We anticipate that prefix tuning will contribute to
        the protein discovery and biomedical advancement.



1   INTRODUCTION

Designing proteins with tailored functions and structures is a primary goal of protein engineering
research. In the past decade years, protein engineering has achieved huge advancements through
directed evolution (Romero & Arnold, 2009). Nonetheless, this technology heavily depends on
random mutations and heuristic search methods, which can only delve into a minute fraction of
the vast protein sequence space. Deep learning-based de novo protein design methods, such as
deep generative models, typically generate proteins by sampling from the latent space of protein
representations, which can explore the whole protein space for designing novel proteins.
Recently, language models, such as BERT(Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT(Brown et al., 2020) de-
rived from natural language processing (NLP), have been introduced into the field of protein re-
search. Several protein language models (ProtLMs), such as ESM-1b(Rives et al., 2021) and Prot-
GPT2(Ferruz et al., 2022), have been developed and applied in substantial downstream tasks, such as
protein function prediction and protein design. By leveraging the vast amount of available protein-
related data, ProtLMs can predict the potential functions and interactions of proteins more accu-
ratelyWang et al. (2023). This is particularly valuable in drug discovery, where understanding
protein functions can aid in target identification and drug design. ProtLMs can also assist in de-
signing novel proteins with specific structures or functions. By generating protein sequences that
meet desired criteria, these models contribute to the development of new enzymes, therapeutics, and
biomaterials. However, due to the huge number of parameters of ProtLMs, adapting ProtLMs to
a specific domain or a particular task, especially under data-limited scenarios, can encounter some
challenges, including overfitting and catastrophic forgetting.
Prompt learning (Gao et al., 2020) has been proven highly successful in numerous small data sce-
narios in NLP. For instance, large-scale language models like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) can get
remarkable few-shot results through natural language prompts, without tuning the models’ parame-
ters. Regrettably, the vocabulary of ProtLMs is confined to amino acids, preventing them from fully
leveraging natural language prompts (Brown et al., 2020) (Figure 1A). Nevertheless, prefix tuning
(Li & Liang, 2021) can train virtual tokens to prompt language models in downstream tasks, offering
promising possibilities for advancements in protein design.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A                           Prompt generation                     B                                      Prefix tuning                     C      Transformer with Prefix

                  Vocabulary
          1. is   2. apple      3. data
          4. a    5. poem       ...                                       Prefix virtual token
                                                                                                                                                               Prefix
                                                                                                     Prefix Encoder <\S>     M     V     ...           ...   embedding
    Input                                  Natural        Output
       Prompt: Generate a                 language     Nothing gold                                                                                Feed Forward       Concat
       poem.                                model      can stay...
                                           (GPT3)                                                                                                                 Masked Multi
                                                                                                                                                                  Self Attention
                   Vocabulary
           1. A   2. F   3. S     4. W
                                                                                                                                                                         +
           5. C   6. L   7. V     ...


                                                                                                      ...

                                                                                                             ...

                                                                                                                    ...

                                                                                                                             ...

                                                                                                                                   ...

                                                                                                                                         ...
                                                                                                                                                                    LayerNorm
                                                                                 Trainable
     Input      ×                           Protein                               Frozen                                                                           Feed Forward
                                           language                                                                 ProtGPT                                              +
       Prompt: Generate
       AMP sequence     ×                    model
                                          (ProtGPT2)                                                                M        V     L     ...                        LayerNorm


Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed method. (A) Prompt generation. The amino acid vocabulary
can’t be used to construct valid prompts of ProtLM. (B) Prefix-tuning architecture, where the pre-
trained protein language model’s parameters are frozen and only the prefix-tuning parameters are
trainable. (C) Concatenation with prefix embedding.


In this study, we introduce prefix tuning to efficiently prompt the pre-trained ProtLM for protein de-
sign with desired structures and functions. Prefix tuning trains a virtual token to direct the pre-trained
ProtLM in generating protein sequences. During the training process, only the prefix virtual token
is trainable, while the pre-trained ProtLM is frozen. We assess the effectiveness of prefix tuning
to direct ProtGPT2 in generating proteins with alpha-helix structure and antimicrobial function. In
summary, our contributions include: (1) introducing prefix tuning to prompt the pre-trained ProtLM
for protein design; (2) demonstrating the effectiveness of prefix tuning by optimizing fewer trainable
parameters to achieve superior results compared with fine tuning, even under low-data settings; (3)
combining two prefix virtual tokens to precisely control protein generation with both desired prop-
erties. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that leverages prefix tuning
to prompt ProtLMs for protein sequence generation. We aspire for this method to gain widespread
adoption and contribute to the advancement of drug design and protein discovery.


2        RELATED WORK

Rosetta-based protein design. The majority of traditional protein design methods are based on
Rosetta tool (Leaver-Fay et al., 2011; Leman et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2011), which has been effec-
tively employed to address various protein design challenges, such as enzyme design (Richter et al.,
2011), vaccine design (Correia et al., 2014), and protein drug design (Cao et al., 2022). The Rosetta
software suite is a comprehensive tool for macro-molecular modeling, encompassing biomolecular
structure prediction and design, enabling researchers to measure and manipulate protein conforma-
tions, calculate energies, model variable regions of proteins, dock proteins or small molecules, and
design protein sequences through the Rosetta suit.
Structure-based protein generation model. A structure-based generation model is trained using
structural information, such as atomic coordinates, contact maps, and inter-residue angles, to directly
generate protein structures. For instance, IG-VAE (Eguchi et al., 2020) employed a variational auto-
encoder (VAE) to directly generate the 3D coordinates of immunoglobulins. Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) were also applied to generate protein structures encoded by pairwise distances
between α-carbons on the protein backbone (Anand et al., 2019). Recently, diffusion models have
made significant strides in various generative tasks (Saharia et al., 2022). Diffusion models train
neural networks starting from noise and generate samples through iterative denoising processes.
They are also applied in protein structure generation (Luo et al., 2022; Watson et al., 2023).
Sequence-based protein generation model. Sequence-based generation methods can directly pro-
duce protein sequences with a desired function. (Hawkins-Hooker et al., 2021) introduced MSA
VAE and AR-VAE models, utilizing aligned sequence input and raw sequence input respectively, for
the generation of functional protein variants. ProteinGAN (Repecka et al., 2021) leverages GANs
to learn natural protein sequence distribution. Recently, language models have shown powerful ca-
pabilities in NLP, including modeling large-scale data, exceptional transfer learning (Peng et al.,
2019), and robust representation (Devlin et al., 2018). These attributes enable their extension to the


                                                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


analysis of biological sequences (Elnaggar et al., 2021; Rives et al., 2021). Simultaneously, lan-
guage models also demonstrate their prowess in protein generation. ProtGPT (Ferruz et al., 2022),
a ProtLM with a transformer decoder architecture trained on the UniRef50 dataset, is capable of
generating protein sequences that are comparable to natural proteins. ProGen (Madani et al., 2020)
can generate artificial lysozymes that exhibit catalytic efficiencies similar to those of natural ones
through the use of a conditional language model.

3     METHODOLOGIES

3.1   AUTOREGRESSIVE LANGUAGE MODEL

The autoregressive language model produces the next token based on its previous context in the
sequence. Let a = (a1 , ..., aL ) be a protein sequence with L amino acids. The chain rule of proba-
                                     QL
bility can be formulated as p(x) = i=1 p(ai |a<i ) (Bengio et al., 2000). An autoregressive ProtLM
is to learn the distribution of amino acids in proteins, called linkage disequilibrium or evolutionary
patterns in Proteomics. In practically, a ProtLM with parameters θ can be trained by minimizing
the negative log-likelihood loss value across a given protein dataset D = {a1 , ..., a|D| }. The loss
                                      P|D|
function can be formulated as L = k=1 logpθ (aki |ak<i ).
Here, we employed a pre-trained language model ProtGPT2 (Ferruz et al., 2022) as the base
model for protein generation. ProtGPT2 is a transformer decoder-only language model trained on
UniRef50. Its architecture is similar to the previously released GPT2-large Transformer (Radford
et al., 2019), which is constructed with a 36-layer transformer decoder and 12 attention heads in
each layer with a model dimensionality of 1280.

3.2   P REFIX TUNING

Prefix tuning trains a virtual token as a prompt to guide ProtLM in generating proteins with desired
functions and structures. The prefix token is a virtual token because it does not represent specific
amino acids but is learned through training on a specialized dataset. The prefix token p is concate-
nated on the left of the protein sequence as the first context, thereby influencing the generation of
amino acids on its right. Let a′ = [p; a] denote the concatenated input, pi and |p| be the i-th vir-
tual prefix token and length of prefix respectively. The prefix embedding is generated by the prefix
encoder Pβ ∈ R|p|×d . The output hi of the ProtLM with a prefix can be formulated as follows:
                                                       Pβ (i), if i < |P |

                                hi =                ′                                             (1)
                                        P rotLMσ (ai , h<i ), otherwise
where σ, β are parameters of the ProtLM and prefix encoder. The objective function of prefix tuning
is the same as autoregressive language model. Furthermore, to deal with the unstable optimization
of parameters β, Pβ [i, :] is reparameterized by a matrix (Pβ′ ) into M LPβ (Pβ′ [i, :]) by using feed-
forward neural network. During training, the parameters σ in the ProtLM are frozen, while only
the parameters β in the prefix encoder are trainable. Thus, after training only the prefix encoder Pβ
needs to be stored.

3.3   P ROTEIN SEQUENCE GENERATION

During the generation process, prefix tokens associated with desired structures and functions are
first fed into prefix-tuned ProtLM. Then in every generation step, a subsequent amino acid is pro-
duced according to its previous tokens. To increase the generative diversity and reduce the repeated
amino acids, top-k sampling (Radford et al., 2019) with a repetition penalty (Keskar et al., 2019)
is employed, which is a sampling strategy that selects the subsequent tokens from the top k most
probable tokens featured within the distribution generated by the ProtLM. Typically, the top k tokens
are sampled by using the softmax function with a sampling temperature. The probability of the i-th
token being sampled from the top k tokens is computed by Eq. (2).
                                              exp(zi /T)
                                        pi = P                                                     (2)
                                               j exp(zj /T)


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where zi is the prediction for token i, T is the temperature, and pi is the sampling probability of token
i. The next token is then chosen by sampling through a multinomial distribution with probabilities
pi clipped at the top-k tokens. To prevent repetition, a repetition penalty is used in top-k sampling
to reduce the probabilities of tokens that have been presented within priors. The probability of the
i-th token is defined as Eq.(3)
                       exp(zi /T · I(i ∈ g))
                 pi = P                        , I(i ∈ g) = θ if i ∈ g is True else 1                (3)
                        j exp(zj /T · I(j ∈ g)

where g represents a list of generated tokens.

4     EXPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS

We constructed two protein datasets, alpha-helix structure dataset and antimicrobial function dataset,
to assess the effectiveness of prefix tuning in directing ProtGPT2 from structure and function aspects.
The alpha-helix structure dataset was collected from the Alpha class of Structural Classification of
Proteins (SCOP) database (Andreeva et al., 2014). After eliminating duplication, non-protein se-
quences, and sequences with non-standard amino acids, the final dataset contains 9,168 proteins.
The antimicrobial function dataset was collected from the Database of Antimicrobial Activity and
Structure of Peptides (DBAASP) (Pirtskhalava et al., 2021; Capecchi et al., 2021). Antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) were classified as active if their IC50 against P. aeruginosa, A. baumanii, or S.
aureus are at least one below 10 µM, 10,000 nM, or 32 µgmL−1 . We got a total of 4,505 ac-
tive peptides. In both experiments, 80% of the data is randomly sampled as training data, and the
remaining 20% is the testing data.

4.2   M ETRICS

We measured the quality of generated protein sequences from structure and function aspects by uti-
lizing several metrics, including perplexity, percentage of alpha-helix, Rosetta energy score, proba-
bility of antimicrobial function, as well as the identity and diversity.
Perplexity is a general metric in sequence generation tasks, which is the exponential value of the
cross-entropy loss computed for each token within a given dataset. A lower perplexity correlates
with a higher quality model. The percentage of alpha-helix was calculated by employing the DSSP
tool to count the amino acids with alpha-helix structure in the protein structure predicted by ESM-
Fold (Lin et al., 2023). We got Rosetta energy scores by running Rosetta Relax with the default
Rosetta full-atom energy terms and weights in the Pyrosetta (Chaudhury et al., 2010). Lower Rosetta
energy conformers correlate with more relaxed structures (Sauer et al., 2020). To minimize the time
needed for relax, we set the maximum number of iterations to 20. A general guideline is that the
total score (Rosetta Energy Units, REU) should typically fall within the range of -1 to -3 per residue
(Wedemeyer et al., 2019). We calculated the physicochemical properties of generated AMPs, in-
cluding length, charge, charge density, hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment, and isoelectric point
by using modlAMP(Müller et al., 2017). The antimicrobial function of generated AMPs were pre-
dicted by leveraging the CAMP server (Waghu et al., 2014). Sequences with a length greater than
100 amino acids were removed before prediction. The sequence identity was performed by BLAST.

4.3   S ETUP

We employed the pre-trained ProtGPT2 as the base model, and optimized it with prefix tuning
and fine tuning methods on alpha-helix structure dataset and antimicrobial function dataset. To
estimate the effectiveness of prefix tuning, we compared the proteins generated by prefix-tuned
ProtGPT2 with the proteins generated by pre-trained ProtGPT2 and fine-tuned ProtGPT2, as well as
two baselines: the natural proteins in testing data and the randomly generated proteins.
All compared methods were trained in 100 epochs with the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017). We set a learning rate of 5e-6 and 5e-3 for fine-tuning and prefix tuning with batch size 8 on
the alpha-helix structure dataset, and a learning rate of 1e-6 and 1e-3 for fine-tuning and prefix tuning
with batch size 32 on antimicrobial function dataset, respectively. We implemented a polynomial


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   A                                                                            C



                                                                                      pLDDT: 86.126
                                                                                    Energy Score: -2.63


  B
                                                                                      pLDDT: 91.489
                                                                                    Energy Score: -2.54


                                                                                      pLDDT: 89.801
                                                                                    Energy Score: -2.41
  D
                    Test           Random           Pretrain         Finetune                Prefix


   E
Identities (%)


                                              Alignment Length



Figure 2: Comparison in generating proteins with alpha-helix structure. (A) Percentage of amino
acids within alpha-helix structure in the compared datasets. (B) Average Rosetta energy units per
residue in the compared datasets. (C) Three proteins with ‘all alpha-helix’ generated by prefix-
tuned ProtGPT2. (D) Ramachandran plots comparing the (ϕ, ψ) dihedral angles for the testing set
and generated proteins by different methods. (E) Pairwise sequence identity comparison of testing
dataset, proteins generated by fine-tuned and prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 against training dataset.


decay schedule with a final learning rate of 1e-7 and a polynomial exponent of 3. The length of
prefix virtual tokens is 100 and 20 for the alpha-helix structure dataset and antimicrobial function
dataset, respectively. During generation, the subsequent amino acids were sampled from the top 500
with repetition penalty of 1.2. The random dataset was created by randomly combining 20 amino
acids according to their background distribution in the training dataset. We generated 2,000 proteins
with alpha-helix structure and 1000 proteins with antimicrobial function by each compared method.


5                RESULT

5.1              G ENERATING PROTEINS WITH ALPHA - HELIX STRUCTURE

In this section, we evaluated the effectiveness of prefix tuning to prompt ProtGPT2 from the alpha-
helix structure aspect. We compared the prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 with the pre-trained ProtGPT2, fine-
tuned ProtGPT2, as well as random generation according to amino acid background distribution.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We first compared the percentage of amino acids with alpha-helical structure and the Rosetta en-
ergy score (Rosetta Energy Units, REU) on the generated proteins by all compared methods against
the testing dataset. Prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 outperforms other methods in terms of both metrics.
For the alpha-helix structures comparison (Figure 2A), although both prefix-tuning and fine-tuning
methods significantly improve the percentage of alpha-helix structure in generated proteins com-
paring to pre-trained ProtGPT2, the prefix tuning achieves closer distribution to natural proteins in
the testing dataset, having a higher proportion of amino acids with alpha-helix structures. To fur-
ther estimate the model’s capability to efficiently generate stable proteins, we calculated the Rosetta
energy of generated proteins (Figure 2B). The energy scores of majority proteins are between -1
and -3 REU/residue, except proteins in the random generation dataset. The mean energy scores for
testing, prefix-tuned, fine-tuned datasets are -1.59, -0.92, and -0.8 REU/residue, respectively. The
proteins generated by prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 have lower Rosetta energy scores than the proteins
generated by the other methods, but are still slightly higher than the natural proteins in the testing
dataset. The three ’all alpha’ protein examples (Figure 2C) generated by prefix tuning also show
the stability with low energy scores.
To further analyze the conformation and dihedral angular distribution of proteins, we conducted Ra-
machandran plots (Ramachandran & Sasisekharan, 1968) to illustrate the co-occurrence frequency
of dihedrals (ϕ, ψ). The result (Figure 2D) indicates that all methods are able to generate all three
major secondary structure elements in protein backbones. However, the proteins generated by prefix
tuning exhibit greater similarity to the natural sequence conformation, while other methods pro-
duce dihedral angles that are more dispersed and less reasonable, scattered across the periphery.
We also conducted a comparison of sequence identity for generated proteins against the training
dataset (Figure2E). The proteins produced through prefix tuning exhibit a higher sequence iden-
tity, whereas the proteins generated by fine-tuning predominantly display identities falling within
the range of 20% to 50%. Note that the proteins generated by pre-trained ProtGPT2 and random
generation have few sequences matched with training data. Thus their results are not presented.
Overall, prefix tuning with a limited number of trainable parameters surpasses fine tuning with
fully trainable parameters in generating proteins with stable energy and reasonable conformation,
demonstrating the capability of prefix tuning to prompt large ProtLM with desired structures.


A


B                                 C                                  D


E                                 F                                  G


Figure 3: Physicochemical property comparison in generating proteins with antimicrobial function.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   G ENERATING PROTEINS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL FUNCTIONS

In this section, we evaluated the capability of prefix tuning from the antimicrobial function as-
pect. We first compared the generated proteins in terms of 7 physicochemical properties, including
amino acid distribution, length, charge, charge density, hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment, and
isoelectric point (Figure 3). Since the ProtGPT2 was pre-trained on a large-scale protein dataset,
which includes peptides with short amino acid sequences and large proteins with long amino acid
sequences, we limited the maximum length to 20 amino acids in the generation process to focus on
peptide generation. Except for AMPs generated by pre-trained ProtGPT2, all other methods are able
to produce AMPs with amino acid distribution close to natural AMPs in the testing dataset (Figure
3A). Note that the random generation is based on the background distribution of amino acids in the
testing dataset. Thus it has the same distribution with test data. The other results of 6 physicochem-
ical properties distribution show that the AMPs generated by prefix tuning and fine tuning are both
notable resemblance in physicochemical properties of natural AMPs in the testing dataset, demon-
strating that both of them possess the potential to direct ProtGPT2 toward the generation of protein
sequences with target physicochemical properties (Fjell et al., 2012).
We then compared antimicrobial activity of generated AMPs between prefix tuning and several state-
of-the-art AMP generation methods, including PepLSTM (Muller et al., 2018), PepCVAE (Das et al.,
2018), and Hydramp (Szymczak et al., 2023). PepLSTM designs AMPs by leveraging Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) to recognize the grammar of amphipathicity in peptides. PepCVAE designs
novel AMPs based on a semi-supervised variational autoencoder model. HydrAMP employed a
conditional variational autoencoder to project amino acid sequences into reduced-dimensional, con-
tinuous representations. The activity of all generated AMPs was predicted by CAMP (Waghu et al.,
2014), an open-access AMP prediction web-server (Figure 4A). Note that although CAMP has a
state-of-the-art performance in AMP identification, it still faces the generalization problem. Thus,
the proteins in testing dataset are not predicted as all AMPs.
It is obvious that the prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 produces AMPs with higher probability of being active
than the fine-tuned ProtGPT2. And the activity distributions of AMPs generated by prefix-tuned
ProtGPT2 and fine-tuned ProtGPT2 are significantly higher than other methods. Similarly, we
also conducted a comparison of sequence identity for generated AMPs against the training dataset
(Figure 4B). AMPs produced by prefix tuning exhibit similar distribution to natural AMPs, demon-
strating they have higher sequence identity. In contrast, only one sequence generated by fine-tuning
can be matched to the training set. Furthermore, the amphipathicity has been demonstrated to be
a significant property influencing the antimicrobial activity of antimicrobial peptides (Fjell et al.,
2012). We generated helical wheel plots of 5 top-ranking AMPs with P(AMP)=1 generated by the
prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 (Figure 4C). The plots show that the generated AMPs have the formation
of amphipathic helical structures. The results suggest that prefix tuning can prompt ProtGPT2 to
generate proteins with desired functions.

5.3   C OMBING PREFIX TOKENS FOR FINE - GRAINED CONTROL IN PROTEIN GENERATION

A large language model can be prompted by a complicated instruction that contains multiple tokens
for fine-grained control, such as using multiple tokens to specify different aspects or conditions
within the instruction. To further investigate the potential of prefix tuning in protein generation,
we combined alpha-helix prefix token and AMP prefix token to prompt the ProtGPT2 to generate
proteins with both alpha-helix structure and AMP function.
We implemented two manners for combining the alpha-helix prefix token and AMP prefix token:
concatenating or averaging their prefix embeddings (Figure 5). Regarding the limitation of input
length and robustness of token combination, we retrained the alpha-helix prefix embedding with
length of 20. To illustrate the impact of the AMP prefix token, we integrated the AMP prefix token
into the alpha-helix prefix token, and conducted an ablation experiment by replacing the AMP prefix
token with randomly initial prefix tokens. Since the AMPs are a class of small proteins with short
amino acid sequences, we filtered out the generated sequences with length exceeding 100 amino
acids. After filtering, the peptides prompted by only alpha-helix prefix token are left with 254 se-
quences, with most of them having length around 80 amino acids and the average activity probability
of 0.425. When combining the AMP prefix token into the alpha-helix prefix token, especially using
the averaging manner, the probability distribution of being AMP is notably improved and the length

                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             A


                                                                                 B


B
    Identities (%)


                                                  Alignment Length
C


                      0.609                           0.452
                                                                                         0.577
                                     0.633                               0.536


Figure 4: Antimicrobial activity comparison in generating proteins with antimicrobial functions. (A)
The probability distribution comparison of being the active AMPs. (B) Pairwise sequence identity
comparison of testing dataset, generated by fine-tuned and prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 against training
dataset. (C) The helical wheel plots of 5 top-ranking AMps with P(AMP)=1 generated by the prefix-
tuned ProtGPT2. The amino acids labeled with “N” and “C” subscript represent the N-terminus and
C-terminus of the peptide sequences, respectively. The black circles represent hydrophobic residues,
while the blue circles represent polar residues. The spatial segregation between hydrophobic and
polar amino acids can be precisely assessed using the hydrophobic moment (HM) and the associated
HM vector points toward the hydrophobic face of the helix.

A                                                                    B


Figure 5: Comparison of probability of antimicrobial activity (A) and sequence length (B) in
generating proteins with antimicrobial functions by using prefix token combinations.


of generated peptides becomes shorter. However, the randomly initial prefix token has no discernible
impact on the peptide generation. These results demonstrate that combining multiple prefix tokens
can effectively fine-grain the protein generation by specifying different properties or conditions.
Taking this strength, we can construct more prefix tokens to guide the ProtLM’s behavior in a more
precise manner, leading to more accurate and desired outputs.

5.4                  I MPACT OF LOW TRAINING DATA AND LENGTH OF PREFIX EMBEDDING

Prefix tuning has shown significant capability in the low-data setting in the field of NLP. To evaluate
the effectiveness of prefix tuning in protein generation tasks in low-data scenarios, we randomly


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A Fine tuning


                    (Pretrained)



B   Prefix tuning


                    (Pretrained)



C


Figure 6: Comparison of antimicrobial activity in low-data settings and various prefix length set-
tings. The probability distribution for AMPs generated by the fine-tuned ProtGPT2 (A) and the
prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 (B) in a low-data setting. (C) The probability distribution for AMPs gener-
ated by the prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 with various prefix length settings.


subsampled the full antimicrobial function dataset to obtain 6 small datasets with 50, 100, 200, 500,
1000, 2000 AMPs. We compare fine-tuned ProtGPT2 and prefix-tuned ProtGPT2 in a low-data
setting (Figure 6A, B). Although both of them exhibit an improvement trend in terms of activity
probability of generated AMPs as the size of the training data increases, the prefix tuning consis-
tently outperforms the fine-tuning in all instances of low-data settings, especially on the 4 lower-data
settings with 50, 100, 200, 500 AMPs. But the gap narrows as the dataset size increases. These re-
sults highlight the effectiveness of prefix tuning when dealing with small datasets.
A longer prefix embedding results in more trainable parameters, leading to increased expressive
power in the prompt generation, but more parameters also need larger data to training. We evaluated
the prefix tuning with different prefix embedding length settings (Figure 6C). The performance
reaches the peak at a threshold of 20 in the AMP design task and then slightly drops as the length
increases. The prefix length is indeed a crucial hyperparameter in prefix tuning.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this study, we leveraged the prefix tuning to efficiently prompt large protein language models
for generating proteins with desired properties. We evaluated the effectiveness of prefix tuning on
generating proteins with alpha-helix structure and with antimicrobial function. The results indicate
prefix tuning is efficient than fine tuning in terms of higher performance and fewer trainable pa-
rameters. Moreover, multiple prefix tokens can be combined to guide the protein language model’s
behavior in a more precise manner, leading to more accurate and desired outputs.
In future study, we plan to integrate multiple modal information including structure-related repre-
sentation and function-related features for protein generation. These methods can be effectively
extended to various applications in the field of antibody and drug peptide discovery, thereby facili-
tating advancements in drug discovery research.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Namrata Anand, Raphael Eguchi, and Po-Ssu Huang. Fully differentiable full-atom protein back-
  bone generation. 2019.

Antonina Andreeva, Dave Howorth, Cyrus Chothia, Eugene Kulesha, and Alexey G Murzin. Scop2
  prototype: a new approach to protein structure mining. Nucleic acids research, 42(D1):D310–
  D314, 2014.

Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Longxing Cao, Brian Coventry, Inna Goreshnik, Buwei Huang, William Sheffler, Joon Sung Park,
  Kevin M Jude, Iva Marković, Rameshwar U Kadam, Koen HG Verschueren, et al. Design of
  protein-binding proteins from the target structure alone. Nature, 605(7910):551–560, 2022.

Alice Capecchi, Xingguang Cai, Hippolyte Personne, Thilo Köhler, Christian van Delden, and Jean-
  Louis Reymond. Machine learning designs non-hemolytic antimicrobial peptides. Chemical
  science, 12(26):9221–9232, 2021.

Sidhartha Chaudhury, Sergey Lyskov, and Jeffrey J Gray. Pyrosetta: a script-based interface for im-
  plementing molecular modeling algorithms using rosetta. Bioinformatics, 26(5):689–691, 2010.

Bruno E Correia, John T Bates, Rebecca J Loomis, Gretchen Baneyx, Chris Carrico, Joseph G
  Jardine, Peter Rupert, Colin Correnti, Oleksandr Kalyuzhniy, Vinayak Vittal, et al. Proof of
  principle for epitope-focused vaccine design. Nature, 507(7491):201–206, 2014.

Payel Das, Kahini Wadhawan, Oscar Chang, Tom Sercu, Cicero Dos Santos, Matthew Riemer, Vijil
  Chenthamarakshan, Inkit Padhi, and Aleksandra Mojsilovic. Pepcvae: Semi-supervised targeted
  design of antimicrobial peptide sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07743, 2018.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Raphael R Eguchi, Namrata Anand, Christian A Choe, and Po-Ssu Huang. Ig-vae: generative
  modeling of immunoglobulin proteins by direct 3d coordinate generation. Biorxiv, 2020:8, 2020.

Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi, Yu Wang, Llion Jones,
  Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger, et al. Prottrans: Toward un-
  derstanding the language of life through self-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 44(10):7112–7127, 2021.

Noelia Ferruz, Steffen Schmidt, and Birte Höcker. Protgpt2 is a deep unsupervised language model
  for protein design. Nature communications, 13(1):4348, 2022.

Christopher D Fjell, Jan A Hiss, Robert EW Hancock, and Gisbert Schneider. Designing antimicro-
  bial peptides: form follows function. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 11(1):37–51, 2012.

Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15723, 2020.

Alex Hawkins-Hooker, Florence Depardieu, Sebastien Baur, Guillaume Couairon, Arthur Chen,
  and David Bikard. Generating functional protein variants with variational autoencoders. PLoS
  computational biology, 17(2):e1008736, 2021.

Po-Ssu Huang, Yih-En Andrew Ban, Florian Richter, Ingemar Andre, Robert Vernon, William R
  Schief, and David Baker. Rosettaremodel: a generalized framework for flexible backbone protein
  design. PloS one, 6(8):e24109, 2011.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
  Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.05858, 2019.

Andrew Leaver-Fay, Michael Tyka, Steven M Lewis, Oliver F Lange, James Thompson, Ron Jacak,
  Kristian W Kaufman, P Douglas Renfrew, Colin A Smith, Will Sheffler, et al. Rosetta3: an
  object-oriented software suite for the simulation and design of macromolecules. In Methods in
  enzymology, volume 487, pp. 545–574. Elsevier, 2011.

Julia Koehler Leman, Brian D Weitzner, Steven M Lewis, Jared Adolf-Bryfogle, Nawsad Alam, Re-
  becca F Alford, Melanie Aprahamian, David Baker, Kyle A Barlow, Patrick Barth, et al. Macro-
  molecular modeling and design in rosetta: recent methods and frameworks. Nature methods, 17
  (7):665–680, 2020.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.

Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Shitong Luo, Yufeng Su, Xingang Peng, Sheng Wang, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Antigen-specific
  antibody design and optimization with diffusion-based generative models for protein structures.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9754–9767, 2022.

Ali Madani, Bryan McCann, Nikhil Naik, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Namrata Anand, Raphael R Eguchi,
  Po-Ssu Huang, and Richard Socher. Progen: Language modeling for protein generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.03497, 2020.

Alex T Müller, Gisela Gabernet, Jan A Hiss, and Gisbert Schneider. modlamp: Python for antimi-
  crobial peptides. Bioinformatics, 33(17):2753–2755, 2017.

Alex T Muller, Jan A Hiss, and Gisbert Schneider. Recurrent neural network model for constructive
  peptide design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 58(2):472–479, 2018.

Yifan Peng, Shankai Yan, and Zhiyong Lu. Transfer learning in biomedical natural language
  processing: an evaluation of bert and elmo on ten benchmarking datasets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.05474, 2019.

Malak Pirtskhalava, Anthony A Amstrong, Maia Grigolava, Mindia Chubinidze, Evgenia Alim-
 barashvili, Boris Vishnepolsky, Andrei Gabrielian, Alex Rosenthal, Darrell E Hurt, and Michael
 Tartakovsky. Dbaasp v3: database of antimicrobial/cytotoxic activity and structure of peptides
 as a resource for development of new therapeutics. Nucleic acids research, 49(D1):D288–D297,
 2021.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

GN t Ramachandran and V Sasisekharan. Conformation of polypeptides and proteins. Advances in
 protein chemistry, 23:283–437, 1968.

Donatas Repecka, Vykintas Jauniskis, Laurynas Karpus, Elzbieta Rembeza, Irmantas Rokaitis, Jan
  Zrimec, Simona Poviloniene, Audrius Laurynenas, Sandra Viknander, Wissam Abuajwa, et al.
  Expanding functional protein sequence spaces using generative adversarial networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 3(4):324–333, 2021.

Florian Richter, Andrew Leaver-Fay, Sagar D Khare, Sinisa Bjelic, and David Baker. De novo
  enzyme design using rosetta3. PloS one, 6(5):e19230, 2011.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, et al. Biological structure and function emerge from
  scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 118(15):e2016239118, 2021.
Philip A Romero and Frances H Arnold. Exploring protein fitness landscapes by directed evolution.
  Nature reviews Molecular cell biology, 10(12):866–876, 2009.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Marion F Sauer, Alexander M Sevy, James E Crowe Jr, and Jens Meiler. Multi-state design of
 flexible proteins predicts sequences optimal for conformational change. PLOS Computational
 Biology, 16(2):e1007339, 2020.
Paulina Szymczak, Marcin Możejko, Tomasz Grzegorzek, Radosław Jurczak, Marta Bauer, Damian
  Neubauer, Karol Sikora, Michał Michalski, Jacek Sroka, Piotr Setny, et al. Discovering highly
  potent antimicrobial peptides with deep generative model hydramp. Nature Communications, 14
  (1):1453, 2023.
Faiza Hanif Waghu, Lijin Gopi, Ram Shankar Barai, Pranay Ramteke, Bilal Nizami, and Susan
  Idicula-Thomas. Camp: Collection of sequences and structures of antimicrobial peptides. Nucleic
  acids research, 42(D1):D1154–D1158, 2014.
Shaojun Wang, Ronghui You, Yunjia Liu, Yi Xiong, and Shanfeng Zhu. Netgo 3.0: Protein language
  model improves large-scale functional annotations. Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics,
  2023.
Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eise-
  nach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. De novo design of
  protein structure and function with rfdiffusion. Nature, pp. 1–3, 2023.
Michael J Wedemeyer, Benjamin K Mueller, Brian J Bender, Jens Meiler, and Brian F Volkman.
 Modeling the complete chemokine–receptor interaction. In Methods in cell biology, volume 149,
 pp. 289–314. Elsevier, 2019.


                                               12
