Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FedJETs: Efficient Just-In-Time Personaliza-
tion with Federated Mixture of Experts
  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



                                            Abstract
         One of the goals in Federated Learning (FL) is to create personalized
         models that can adapt to the context of each participating client, while
         utilizing knowledge from a shared global model. Yet, often, personalization
         requires a fine-tuning step using clients’ labeled data in order to achieve
         good performance. This may not be feasible in scenarios where incoming
         clients are fresh and/or have privacy concerns. It, then, remains open how
         one can achieve just-in-time personalization in these scenarios. We propose
         FedJETs, a novel solution by using a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) framework
         within a FL setup. Our method leverages the diversity of the clients to train
         specialized experts on different subsets of classes, and a gating function
         to route the input to the most relevant expert(s). Our gating function
         harnesses the knowledge of a pretrained model (common expert) to enhance
         its routing decisions on-the-fly. As a highlight, our approach can improve
         accuracy up to 18% in state of the art FL settings, while maintaining
         competitive zero-shot performance. In practice, our method can handle
         non-homogeneous data distributions, scale more efficiently, and improve the
         state-of-the-art performance on common FL benchmarks.

1    Introduction
Due to the success of large-scale deep learning (27; 3; 4; 14; 5; 17), it is now widely accepted
as a design philosophy that “the larger (model/dataset), the better ". Yet, the increase of
computational and memory costs that come from training such large models raises a key
question: “Are we spending the available budget wisely when we focus on training a single,
monolithic model?” Research stemming from the so called “grandmother cell hypothesis” in
neuroscience (2) suggests that, ideally, a model’s parameters should be specialized on different
data (e.g., different features/classes/domains), such that we fully utilize the capacity of all
parameters. This would potentially enable us to activate only part of the model on different
data, resulting in sparse model activations and lower computation/memory/communication
costs during training and testing (29; 5; 17; 26; 24; 31).
Mixture of experts (or MoEs)1 (10; 11) is a famous sparse expert model variant that is
motivated by the above premises. MoEs often utilize a gating function to activate parts of
the global model, based on the current input data. Successful instances of MoEs include the
works of (29; 5; 17; 26; 24; 31), where “experts” are defined as integral subparts of a neural
network architecture (e.g., through a vertical decomposition of the fully-connected layers).
Yet, such a use of experts is not clearly motivated by data distribution learning, but rather
as a means to scale up models (29; 5; 17; 26; 24; 31). This perspective is strengthened by
recent advances on MoE research (34) that show, over a single domain dataset, a random
gating function –which essentially removes any specialization of the experts– lead to trained
models that perform favorably compared to more sophisticated gating functions. Works that
aim to learn different data distributions through MoEs mostly focus on multi-domain tasks
(18; 6), which require that i) we clearly distinguish between different data domains; and ii)
each domain is an independent dataset for a separate expert.
    1
      We distinguish MoEs from ensemble models (7): for the latter, “experts” are independently
trained end-to-end, before models make decisions in an aggregated manner. In contrast, MoEs
–either as submodels or as collections of disjoint models– are updated jointly before the testing phase.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, it is still an open question on how to put flesh on the promise of specialized experts for
strictly better performance over a single domain dataset.
Here, we study a new perspective to this quarrel, using Federated Learning (FL) as our
workhorse. FL (22; 20; 12) is a distributed protocol that aims to achieve simultaneously three
goals: i) to train a good global model that can generalize well across clients; ii) to enhance
the global model’s performance via good personalized models that can adapt to clients, where
iii) these models should also work well on new incoming clients, ideally, without requiring
additional data from them. Achieving these goals is not trivial, especially when the data
distribution across clients is non-i.i.d. E.g., goal iii) could be achieved via fine-tuning, but
this step requires access to labeled data, which may not be available, due to concerns on
sensitive data. Alternatively, one could just use the global model as a just-in-time/zero-shot
model for each testing client, which may not capture key aspects of incoming client’s data.
Main hypothesis and our contributions. Applying MoEs in a single domain is meaningful
–beyond scalability– if each expert can learn different aspects within the dataset. Our
observation is that the non-i.i.d. data on each client can be viewed as having different data
characteristics, on which different experts specialize. But, how can we encourage the experts
to discover such a specialization in a non-adhoc way?
We propose FedJETs, a distributed system that connects and extends MoEs in a FL setting
(See Figure 1). Our system is comprised of multiple independent models that each operate
as experts, and uses a pretrained common expert model as feature extractor, that influences
which experts are chosen for each client on the fly. These “ingredients” are combined with
a novel gating functionality that guides the training: based on the common global model
and current experts’ specialization, the gating function orchestrates the dispatch of specific
experts to be trained per active client, based on the local data. We argue that this approach
can turn the bane of non-i.i.d. data into a blessing for expert specialization, as the experts
can learn from diverse and complementary data sources and adapt to different client needs.
Some of our findings include:
• FedJETs can exploit the characteristics of each client’s local dataset and adaptively select
  a subset of experts that match those characteristics during training.
• FedJETs are able to dynamically select experts on-the-fly and achieve just-in-time person-
  alization on unseen clients during testing. FedJETs accurately classify unseen data, not
  included in training, with small adaptations.
• We achieve these without violating data privacy, and by reducing the overall communication
  cost by not sending the whole MoE module to all clients, compared to state of the art
  methods (28).
• Some highlights of FedJETs in practice: FedJETs achieve ∼ 95% accuracy on FL CIFAR10
  and ∼ 78% accuracy on FL CIFAR100 as a just-in-time personalization method on unseen
  clients, where the second best SOTA method achieves ∼ 71% and ∼ 74%, respectively.

2   Background
Notation. Vectors and matrices are represented with bold font (e.g., x), while scalars are
represented by plain font (e.g., x). We use capital letters to distinguish matrices from vectors
(e.g., W vs w). We use calligraphic uppercase letters to denote sets (e.g., D); the cardinality
of a set D is denoted as |D|. Given two sets S1 and S2 that contain data, S1 ̸=d S2 indicates
that the data in S1 does not follow the same distribution as that of S2 , and vice versa. [N ]
is [N ] = {1 . . . N }.
FL formulation. Let S be the total number of training clients. Each client s has its own local
                                                                                           |D |
data, denoted as Ds , such that Ds ̸=d Ds′ , ∀s ̸= s′ . We will assume that Ds = {xi , yi }i=1s ,
where xi is the i-th input sample and yi its corresponding label in a supervised setting. Let
W denote abstractly the collection of trainable model parameters. The goal in FL is to find
values for W that achieve good accuracy on all data D = ∪s Ds , by minimizing the following
optimization objective:
                                      (                 S
                                                                    )
                                                        X
                           ⋆                        1
                        W ∈ arg min L(W) := S             ℓ (W, Ds ) ,
                                  W                    s=1



                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ℓ (W, Ds ) = |D1s | {xi ,yi }∈Ds ℓ (W, {xi , yi }). Here, with a slight abuse of notation,
                          P

ℓ (W, Ds ) denotes the local loss function for user s, associated with a local model Ws (not
indicated above), that gets aggregated with the models of other users. The local model Ws
denotes a temporary image of the global model that gets updated locally at each client site,
before sent to the server for aggregation. E.g., Ws could be a full copy of the global model
at the current training round, or a selected submodel out of the global one, randomly chosen
or based on client’s characteristics.
It is desired that the trained global model W c ≈ W⋆ is applied to unseen test clients, that
come with different non-i.i.d local data. Let Ds′ denote the local data of a new client;
then, Ds′ ̸=d Ds for all clients s during training. Previous approaches handling a similar
scenario (32; 30) assume we have access to part of the new client’s labeled local data and
fine-tune W.
           c We consider this as a limitation, since new users are likely unwilling/not able
to provide accurate labeled data, and/or might not have sufficient resources to contribute to
a fine-tuning phase of the whole model.
The learning scenario we consider. To be compatible with existing FL settings, we
focus on image classification supervised learning tasks, as the most prevalent in literature.
As a benchmark dataset, we use the CIFAR data suite (15; 8); following existing works,
we partition the data samples by classes to turn full datasets into non-i.i.d. subsets. We
assume the FL server-client protocol, where clients participate in training using local data;
we assume there are 100 clients while we can only activate 10% clients per round. Our
system deviates from traditional FL implementations (22; 20; 12); in those, one assumes a
sole global model that is being shared with active clients, and updates to this model are
being aggregated by the server per synchronization round. E.g., a large, ResNet-type of a
network –like ResNet34, ResNet101 or ResNet200– could be used (9) in those scenarios. For
our system, the “global” model is comprised by different independent ResNet34 models (9)
that operate as experts, as well as a common pretrained ResNet34 model, that influences
expert choice on the fly, and a novel gating function that guides both training and testing.
In our scenarios, we assume a range of experts between 5 to 10. More details about our
system in the section that follows.

3   Overview of FedJETs
Overview. Our system is depicted in Figure 1. On the server side (using purple boxes), we
have access to a collection of experts (MoE module); see part (a) in Figure 1. These experts
are selected to be of the same architecture (here, ResNet34, motivated by FL classification
tasks) and their parameters are denoted as Wi , i ∈ [M ]. Further, these experts could be
randomly initialized or could be a priori trained.
Beyond the MoE module, the server is responsible for a gating function; see part (b) in
Figure 1. As we explain below in more detail, the gating function is a simple MLP defined
by a set of parameters, denoted as Wr .
On the client side (using cyan boxes), we assume that each client has access to the same
pretrained expert; see part (c) in Figure 1. This common expert is used to embed local
data to be further fed into the server’s gating function; see part (d) in Figure 1. Note that
the common expert is never retrained during our procedure, but only used as an embedding
mechanism.
The result of the gating function is a sparse selection of experts; see part (e) in Figure 1.
The selected experts, say experts i and j, are communicated to the client (see part (f ) in
Figure 1), to be locally trained on the client side, where the selected experts’ parameters
–denoted as Wi∈es , with a slight abuse of notation– and the gating function’s parameters,
Wr , are jointly trained; see part (g) in Figure 1. Finally, the updated parameters Wi∈es
and Wr are sent to the server to be aggregated with similar updates coming from other
clients contributing in the same training round; see (h) in Figure 1.
At the core of our system lies the gating function that meets the following requirements:

• Aim #1: it should somehow “analyze” the data characteristics of local datasets;


                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Server


   Ensemble
     MoE                                                                           ...
                                        Expert 1                     Expert 2                                        Expert M
                                                                                                                                (a)

                                     Gating Function         Select appropiate experts based on                    Aggregate               from active clients
   Embeddings


                                                                                                Aggregate                                from active clients
                           Softmax
     Input


                                                                                         Aggregate                 from active clients
                                                                        Expert i              Expert j
                                                     (b)
                                                       (b)                                               (f)                        (h)

                                                             Client
                                                                                                           Train
                                                                                                              Train
                                                                                                            Train
                                                                                                            Train
                                                                                                            Send   updates
                                                                                                              Sendupdates
                                                                                                           Send     updatesof
                                                                                                                           ofofof
                                                                                                            Send    updates
                Common Expert                                                                               totoserver
                                                                                                           to    server
                                                                                                                server
                                                                                                               to server
                  (c)                              (d)                          (e)                                     (g)

Figure 1: For each client: i) The server uses the gating function to select a subset of experts
based on the local data distribution (parts (a), (b), (d), (e)); ii) The client updates expert
and gating function’s weights (part (g)) and sends these back to the server. iii) the server
aggregates and update the new weights (part (h)). The above are repeated for all FL rounds.

• Aim #2: it should guide the specialization of each expert;
• Aim #3: it should learn to fulfill the above, without sending all experts to clients during
  training.

Aim #1: A new gating function. Our gating function involves two parts: i) the pretrained
common model that serves as a feature extractor from each client data samples. The
embeddings are fed into the expert-ranking network. By design, our gating function should
be model agnostic with respect to the pretrained common expert; such expert is considered
a “black-box” 2 , which does not need to be fully trained. ii) An expert-ranking network that
predicts the specialization score of all experts for each data sample in local datasets. Such
network is updated by each client, based on local data and a chosen subset of experts; the
choice of experts is made before the local training starts. This function operates as a routing
module that aggregates the score vectors from all the data samples in local datasets; per
round, the routing module is designed to only select the most relevant experts to be sent to
each active client per round.
Aim #2: Guiding the specialization of experts. We utilize a collection of experts that
get updated locally by active clients. The selection of experts is made locally per client,
based on the local data distribution, a common –across clients– expert and the current
status of a global gating function. To achieve this second goal, we introduce a novel client
activation strategy, called anchor clients, that i) encourages experts to have a meaningful
initial specialization; and ii) enables the gating function to have a better understanding
of each expert’s specialization. To be more concrete, assume there are M experts in our
system; we also pre-select M of clients (out of N ≪ M ) as anchor clients. Anchor clients
are destined to be activated more often than normal clients, in order to form a specialized,
one-to-one assignment relationship with experts, by using an independent loss. As we see in
Section 5 this strategy stabilizes our system’s performance.
Aim #3: Efficient model training. The idea of MoEs in FL is not new (28). Recent research
(34) has demonstrated that directly using MoE methods (with or without top K expert
selection) yields similar performance to using a random gating function, which essentially
eliminates any specialization of the experts. However, by leveraging the non-iid data in each
client along with anchor clients to guide the training of the gating function and experts, we
   2
       We never update the common expert, as it may be too large to distribute per round.


                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are able to overcome such random gating behavior and achieve true expert specialization.
To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first works to do so.

4       System details
We dive into the details of our method in the following subsections.
Pretraining. Each client utilizes a pretrained com-                        Frozen / Fixed
mon expert with parameters Wc ; see Figure 2. The
common expert should have –to some extent– knowl-
edge over the global data distribution D = ∪s Ds .
                                                           Input
E.g., such an expert could be a pretrained model on      examples
                                                                                                    Embeddings
CIFAR/ImageNet for image classification purposes.                                   Common Expert

We restrict our methodology such that: i) we ensure       Pretrained on public dataset (CIFAR, ImageNet, etc)

our algorithm is agnostic to both the common ex- Figure 2: Common expert module.
pert’s architecture and performance; ii) we assume
only access to the common expert’s embedding capabilities; and, iii) we do not modify/re-
train the common expert. The common expert is sent to all clients only once, before training.
For client s, we perform one-time inference on all local data using the common expert and
store the corresponding output features for each data sample; noted as x̂si for each xi ∈ Ds .
The set of expert models. Our methodology involves M experts, each being an indepen-
dent model of the same architecture.3 For the i-th expert, i ∈ [M ], we denote its parameters
as Wi and the corresponding model function as f (·, Wi )). See also Figure 1(a). The M
experts are randomly initialized in our experiments to provide full plasticity during training.4
Each round, different subsets of experts are selected to be communicated to and updated by
active clients, based on their local data (see Figure 1(f )). Per round, the updated experts
are sent back to the server to be aggregated, before the next round starts; see Figure 1(h).
The gating function. We randomly initialize an expert-ranking network with parameters
Wr . This is a small-scale, two-layer MLP network that, per active client, takes the embeddings
from the common expert based on local data, and predicts the specialization score of all
experts. In particular, for client s and given M experts, we denote the score as g(x̂si , Wr ) ∈
RM , for the i-th data sample, based on:
                             g(x̂si , Wr ) = Softmax(MLP(x̂si , Wr )) ∈ RM .

The final decision on the top-k experts is made via the rule:
                 X
                     g(x̂si , Wr ) , over all embedded local data samples, x̂si , i ∈ [|Ds |],

   es = TopK
                     i

where the TopK(·) function selects the dominating experts, based on the current state of
Wr and the local data embeddings {x̂si }ni=1 .
The “anchor clients” mechanism. Given M experts, we pre-select M special clients,
with roughly distinct local data distributions, as anchor clients; we call all other clients
as normal clients. For each anchor client5 , we initially pre-assign a one-to-one relationship
to an expert; we denote the index of expert assigned to the q-th anchor client as Iq as an
indicator function. At the beginning of each round, we follow the FL process, where only a
small subset of clients, say N , is active; i.e., N ≪ S, where S is the total number of clients.
Based on the discussion above, the active clients N are split into Na anchor and Nc normal
clients, such that N = Na + Nc . Na clients are activated from the pile of M anchor clients,
and Nc clients from (S − M ) normal clients.6 The idea is that, since M ≪ (S − M ), we
more frequently sample the anchor clients, which –combined with special expert assignment–
shall encourage expert specialization. I.e., we encourage experts to be trained over the same
data distributions of anchor clients to help specialization.
    3
      This choice is made for simplicity. We consider diverse architectures per expert as future work.
    4
      Discussion about different initialization for experts is provided in Section 5.
    5
      Selection process for anchor clients is detailed on Appendix A
    6
      Discussion about the ratio Na : Nc is provided in the experimental section.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The training process. To both normal and anchor clients, the server sends the current
copy of parameters of the gating function, Wr . The gating function then selects experts;
the output es abstractly contains the set of chosen experts Wi for expert s, where i ∈ es .
The server receives es and sends the parameters Wi , for i ∈ es , to the corresponding client
s; this routine reduces the communication cost –as compared to existing methods (28)– and
encourages expert specialization.
Per training round, each normal client, using the standard cross entropy loss, will locally
update both Wr and Wi ’s; the same procedure is followed for all active clients, each
containing a different set of chosen experts. Formally, this amounts to (see also Figure 1,
part (g)):
                                                                                    !
                                         X     X
                                    1                  s
           L (Wr , Wi∈es , Ds ) := |Ds |    ℓ     [g(x̂j , Wr )]i · f (xj , Wi ), yj .
                                           {xj ,yj }∈Ds       i∈es

For an anchor client q, we only send the Iq expert to encourage expert specialization. Such
an expert is trained regularly on the anchor’s local distribution. Accordingly, we encourage
the expert ranker network to recognize such rough specialization of the selected expert by
using a simple independent loss. The two loss functions for anchor clients are as below:
                                                                                             ℓ g(x̂i , Wr ), 1Iq ,
                         X                                                             X
     L WIq , Dq = |D1q |                                       L (Wr , Dq ) = |D1q |

                           ℓ f (xi , WIq ), yi ,
                        {xi ,yi }∈Dq                                               {xi ,yi }∈Dq


where 1Iq is the one-hot encoding indicating Iq .

Algorithm 1 FedJETs
     Parameters: T rounds, S training clients,                   for s = 1, . . . , Nc do
     U testing clients, M experts, ℓ1 local it-                    Select a subset of experts es for client s;
                                                                   es = TopK( |D
                                                                                    P s|       s
     erations, experts’ function and parameters                                        i=1 g(x̂i , Wr ));
     f (·, Wi ), gating function’s function and param-             Send experts Wi , i ∈ es to client s;
     eters g(·, Wr ), common expert’s parameters                   for l = 1, . . . , ℓ1 do
     Wc .                                                                                ∂L(Wr ,Wi∈es ,Ds )
                                                                      Wrs = Wrs − η               Wrs       ;
                            ♠ Pretraining ♠                                                     ∂L(Wr ,Wi∈es ,Ds )
                                                                      Wi∈es = Wi∈es − η               Wi∈es
                                                                                                                   ;
     Send Wc to all clients;
     // Data embedding                                             end for
     for s = 1, . . . , S do                                     end for
       x̂si = f (xsi , Wc )
     end for                                                    // Send to server for aggregation
                                                                Wr = Aggregate(Wrq , Wrs ), ∀q, s;
                              ♠ Training ♠                      Wi = Aggregate(Wi∈Eq , Wi∈es ), ∀q, s;
     for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do                              end for
       Activate Na anchor and Nc normal clients;
       Send g(·, Wr ) to all activated clients;                                       ♠ Testing ♠
       for q = 1, . . . , Na do                               for u = 1, . . . , U do
          Send expert WIq to client q;                          Send g(·, Wr ) and common expert, Wc ;
                                                                eu = TopK( |D
                                                                                 P u|        u
          for l = 1, . . . , ℓ1 do                                                 i=1 g(f (xi , Wc ), Wr ));
                                ∂L(Wr ,Dq )                     Send experts Wj , j ∈ eu to client u;
            Wrq = Wrq − η          Wr
                                     q      ;                   // Perform inference
            WIq = WIq − η
                                 ∂L(WIq ,Dq )
                                              ;                 j ′ = maxj∈eu [g(f (xui , Wc ), Wr )]j ;
                                    WI q                        ŷiu = f (xui , Wj ′ )
         end for                                              end for
 -     end for

After all clients finish the local training round, the server applies a simple aggregation step
to average the updated copies of Wr and Wi ’s. The above is not trivial adaptation of
MoE loss to FL settings. After the selection of experts locally, the gating function can only
“see” K ≪ M experts, facing a significant challenge: If it chooses all incorrect experts, this
will lead to a decrease in performance and de-specialization of the selected experts. Our
system though shows that, even with these restrictions, the gating function can overcome
this difficulty and achieve near-perfect expert selection based on local data characteristics.
Testing procedure. During testing, we assume that we are given unseen new users with
unseen local data distributions. We only send K experts to each test client and we cannot


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


get access to local test data labels to perform fine-tuning. We first send Wr to the test
client and select the top-K experts, according to aggregated expert ranking score. Then, for
each test sample, instead of using the weighted average of the output of all selected experts,
we use the output of the expert with the highest expert ranking score to fully utilize the
specialization of the expert. I.e., both experts might be utilized for different data samples,
instead of averaging their performance on each testing sample.
The above are summarized in pseudocode in Algorithm 1.

5      Experiments
Task and model description. For the experts’ architecture, we use ResNet34 (9). For
the gating function, we use a two-layer MLP followed by a SoftMax layer at the output to
weight each expert. For the clients, we use the SGDM optimizer, with learning rate 0.01 and
momentum 0.9; we set the batch size to 256 and the number of local epochs to 1. For the
gating function update, we use the SGD optimizer with learning rate 0.001. The aggregation
of the model weights on the server side is performed with FedAvg (23).
Dataset. We conduct experiments on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (15). Initially, the training
dataset is randomly partitioned across 100 clients. We followed the same procedure for
the anchor clients but we avoided replacement, aiming to preserve the label diversity in
each subset. We establish a one-to-one mapping between these clients and the experts,
corresponding to each group of labels. This path leads to: i) we have one expert available
for each group; and ii) we retain flexibility to activate the anchor clients during the training
rounds. The complete client distribution for both datasets is detailed in the Appendix A.
Zero-Shot Personalization. Let us first describe the baselines to compare against:
• FedMix (28) trains an ensemble of specialized models that are adapted to sub-regions of
  the data space. By definition, FedMix sends all the experts to each client in order to
  specialize them, heavily increasing communication costs. For this implementation, we
  initialized the common expert from the initial pretrained model checkpoint and we use it
  to embed local data in the gate function and help the routing.
• FedAvg(23) is the de facto approach for FL and allows to have a fair comparison in terms
  of fixed communication cost. Here, we initialize the global model with the initial common
  expert checkpoint, and aggregate the updates from all sampled clients per iteration.
• FedProx (21) tackles heterogeneity by introducing a regularization term that limits the
  distance between local/global model, at the cost of additional computation overhead per
  round. For initialization, we follow the same strategy with FedAvg.
• Scaffold (13) handles non-iidness by applying control variates for the server and clients
  at the expense of doubling communication cost per round compared to FedAvg. This
  method tends to become unstable during training, as previous studies have shown (19).
  For initialization, we follow the same strategy with FedAvg.
• The Average Ensembles (16) train two models (initialized from the common expert) as
  in FedAvg, but with different random seeds. It then combines them by averaging outputs
  probabilities. While it provides flexibility w.r.t. resources, it has higher inference costs.

                                                      CIFAR 10                      CIFAR 100- Running
    Method                   # Clients   Rounds   M    K    Acc.    Acc.    Rounds    M    K   Acc.      Acc.
    Common Expert               –          –      –     –   73%     93%       –       –    –   67%       73%
    FedMix (28)                100        1250    2     2   31.3%   42.9%    2000      2   2   49.7%     48.3%
    FedAvg (23)                100        1250    –     –   31.2%   58.4%    2000      –   –   72.9%     74.0%
    FedProx (21)               100        1250    –     –   72.7%   71.4%    2000      –   –   72.8%     74.0%
    Average Ensembles (16)     100        1250    –     –   23.9%   53.7%    2000      –   –   72.8%     74.1%
    FedJETs                    100        1250    5     2   91.8%   95.7%    2000     10   2   75.7%     78.6%

Table 1: Average zero-shot personalization score for unseen test clients. The results are presented
using two different pretrained common experts as feature extractor for each dataset: a) The lower
bound model at which the gating function is able to outperform the initial common expert accuracy,
illustrated in Figure 4; b) The average model that represents a good accuracy that is relatively
easy to achieve using ResNet-34 architecture. Sampling is performed under the scheme of Na = 5
anchor + Nc = 5 normal clients per training round; here, N = Na + Nc = 10. Appendix D contains
a thorough assessment of the FedJETs gating function’s effectiveness on individual samples.
                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1 summarizes our findings on this setup. Whereas FedMix requires all experts be
transmitted to each client, i.e., M = K, FedJETs allows the selection of K experts, here
K = 2, enabling a larger battery of experts without having to send them all. This not only
reduces communication costs, but also ensures that the client is receiving the most pertinent
information from the relevant experts.
In terms of baselines, we observe that both datasets behave differently. We attribute this gap
to the number of classes each client holds. In the CIFAR10 scenario, each client has fewer
classes, which can amplify the model drift problem in all baselines. Furthermore, FedAvg’s
performance deteriorates sharply, when we test it on the new CIFAR10 clients that were not
used for training, due to the heterogeneous data distribution during training and then in
testing phase. Similarly, Average Ensembles faces a performance ceiling, as the ensembles
inherit the limitations of the FedAvg aggregation method. On the other hand, FedProx is
able to surpass the initial performance of the common expert for the CIFAR100 scenario,
but degrades quickly when using few labels per client as in the CIFAR10 setup. To the
best of our ability, we attempted multiple hyperparameter settings for Scaffold, yet we
were unable to produce a useful model under this distribution; it became unstable during
training (10% for CIFAR10 / <5% for CIFAR100). Further comparison against domain
adaptation methods, as in FedADG (33) and FedSR (25), is shown in Appendix G; for the
cases we consider, we observe that current implementations are bound to having a small
number of clients in order to perform competitively.
The global accuracy reported at the end of training demonstrates the effectiveness and
consistency of FedJETs in both datasets, with significantly better performance than other
algorithms. Please refer to Appendix B for a detailed end-to-end performance of the methods
in Table 1 under different clients’ distribution.
Ablation study: Initial common expert impact.                            0.8
We conduct a thorough evaluation of the performance
                                                         Test Accuracy


tradeoffs, when utilizing different common experts for                   0.6
the gating function decisions. Our findings indicate                                             64
that the amount of training allocated in the initial                     0.4                     65
common expert has a critical effect on the overall
                                                                                                 66
performance of FedJETs. E.g., if the gating function                     0.2                     67
uses a poor common expert for training, it can lead
                                                                                                 73
to poor performance (collapses to selecting a single                     0.0
expert), and therefore not be able to improve beyond                           0   1000   2000
the baseline.                                                    Communication Rounds
Figures 3-4 show that the breakpoint of the gating Figure 3: FedJETs’s performance on
function for the CIFAR100 dataset is approximately CIFAR100 dataset, using different initial
66% accuracy by the common expert. In Figure 4, it accuracy for common expert (legends of
becomes clear that a major cause of this breakpoint the plot); the setup in Table 1 is used.
is the fact that most of the experts are unable to surpass the initial accuracy of the common
expert. This is attributed to the lack of an effective selection of experts, which is essential
for the gradient updates of each expert to be aligned with the same part of the task. Figure
3 also reveals the following: the 67% case, given a few more iterations, is able to match the
performance of the 73% case. This suggests a “phase-transition” might exist, where more
effort (i.e., communication) is needed to improve beyond the common expert’s performance.
This implies also the performance of FedJETs depends on the quality of the experts.
Ablation study: Common expert boosts ex-
perts’ performance. In order to test this hypothe-            Common Expert       73.73%
sis, we initialize each expert from the common expert         FedMix              73.78%
and continue training for 2000 rounds. In Table 2, we         FedAvg              73.99%
                                                              Average Ensembles 74.10%
observe the final score of each method. Surprisingly,         FedJETs             83.27%
for FedJETs it takes a few more rounds to overcome
the baseline than when the experts are initialized Table 2: Average zero-shot accuracy for
from scratch. This is because the pretrained model is CIFAR100 after 2000 rounds.
optimal to the entire dataset. In order to successfully
specialize each expert, it is necessary to retrain the model on the specific subset of labels.


                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also plot in Figure 4 the performance of each expert (denoted as expX) over the com-
munication rounds for different initial accuracy of the common expert. It is obvious that,
for our setting, using a common expert with an accuracy below 67% does not allow the
gating function to improve sufficiently, thus preventing experts from improving beyond the
baseline. Once the gating function can utilize a slightly better common expert, we are able
to outperform the rest of the methods.
                           Initial Acc: 64%                                Initial Acc: 65%                              Initial Acc: 66%                                                Initial Acc: 67%
 Test Accuracy


                                                 Test Accuracy


                                                                                               Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                             Test Accuracy
                 0.8                                             0.8                                           0.8                                                           0.8

                 0.6                                             0.6                                           0.6                                                           0.6

                 0.4                                             0.4                                           0.4                                                           0.4

                 0.2                                             0.2                                           0.2                                                           0.2
                       0        1000      2000                         0       1000     2000                         0        1000                2000                             0         1000        2000
                       Communication Rounds                            Communication Rounds                          Communication Rounds                                          Communication Rounds

                       Common          exp0         exp1                    exp2       exp3                    exp4           exp5                    exp6                         exp7           exp8          exp9


                       Figure 4: Zero-shot personalization accuracy per expert during training on CIFAR100.
Ablation study: The “anchor/normal” client
ratio. To ensure the best performance of FedJETs,                                                                                           0.8


                                                                                                                            Test Accuracy
the sampling scheme must be carefully studied. This
is due to the fact that each expert has a distinct dis-                                                                                     0.6
tribution; i.e., their local objectives are only aligned                                                                                                                                             Baseline
with a particular subset of labels. It is essential to                                                                                      0.4                                                      Na 3 Nc 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Na 5 Nc 5
ensure consistency in the experts’ updates to prevent
                                                                                                                                            0.2                                                      Random
them from drifting away from their own “task”. As
previously mentioned, we assume we have some con-                                                                                                 0       250                      500      750      1000       1250
trol over the activation of the clients during training.                                                                                                 Communication Rounds
                                                        Figure 5: FedJETs_Na_X_Nc_Y means
Our solution is the proportional introduction of the
                                                        that XY = N a
                                                                      , and N = Na + Nc . 30%
anchor clients, whose main purpose is to act as reg-               Nc
                                                        anchor/normal client ration is enough
ularizers, ensuring consistency in the expert updates
                                                        to match baseline accuracy, however the
during training. To find the optimal ratio of an- model becomes more inconsistent by con-
chor/normal clients Nc we conduct experiments vary- verging slower.
                     Na

ing this ratio; see Figure 5. Sampling half of the
clients per round as anchor quickly surpasses the baseline of the common expert and main-
tains high consistency in subsequent iterations. Using a lower ratio of 30% anchor clients per
round also achieved similar performance, allowing some flexibility in the sampling. Contrarily,
when we sampled clients randomly from the available pool (i.e., no “anchor clients”), FedJETs
shows difficulty improving performance, as experts’ updates become inconsistent. Appendix
C shows the end-to-end performance difference across different methods using these sampling
ratios for both datasets.

6                      Conclusions
FedJETs is a novel distributed system that leverages multiple independent models –in contrast
to recent MoE applications, where parts of a single model are considered as experts– and
a pretrained common expert model to achieve just-on-time personalization in applications
with diverse data distributions, as in FL. Unlike existing methods that rely on predefined or
fixed expert assignments, FedJETs, via a novel gating functionality, can dynamically select a
subset of experts that best suits each client’s local dataset during training. Experiments
show that FedJETs achieve ∼ 95% accuracy on FL CIFAR10 and ∼ 78% accuracy on FL
CIFAR100 as a just-on-time personalization method on unseen clients, where the second
best state of the art method achieves ∼ 58% and ∼ 74%, respectively.
Overall, our work contributes to the development of more efficient and flexible ML systems
that, not only learn from, but also specialize on distributed data. Our approach can be
extended to other domains and applications –such as natural language processing models– and
we plan to investigate the potential of FedJETs in those areas as future work. Theoretically
understanding the mechanism behind FedJETs in simple scenarios is also considered an
interesting future research direction. We hope that our work will inspire further research on
this path and help build a more sustainable and equitable AI ecosystem.


                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


References
 [1] Ruqi Bai, Saurabh Bagchi, and David I. Inouye. Benchmarking algorithms for federated
     domain generalization, 2023.
 [2] H Barlow. Grandmother cells, symmetry, and invariance: how the term arose and what
     the facts suggest. The cognitive neurosciences, pages 309–320, 2009.
 [3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla
     Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al.
     Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
 [4] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra,
     Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann,
     et al. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311,
     2022.
 [5] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion
     parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning
     Research, 23(1):5232–5270, 2022.
 [6] Suchin Gururangan, Mike Lewis, Ari Holtzman, Noah A Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
     DEMix layers: Disentangling domains for modular language modeling. In Proceedings of
     the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 5557–5576, 2022.
 [7] Lars Kai Hansen and Peter Salamon. Neural network ensembles. IEEE transactions on
     pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 12(10):993–1001, 1990.
 [8] Chaoyang He, Alay Dilipbhai Shah, Zhenheng Tang, Di Fan1Adarshan Naiynar Sivashun-
     mugam, Keerti Bhogaraju, Mita Shimpi, Li Shen, Xiaowen Chu, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi,
     and Salman Avestimehr. FedCV: a federated learning framework for diverse computer
     vision tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11066, 2021.
 [9] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
     for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
     pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[10] Robert A Jacobs, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Adaptive
     mixtures of local experts. Neural computation, 3(1):79–87, 1991.
[11] Michael I Jordan and Robert A Jacobs. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the EM
     algorithm. Neural computation, 6(2):181–214, 1994.
[12] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebastian U.
     Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for
     federated learning, 2019.
[13] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebastian U.
     Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for
     federated learning, 2021.
[14] Vijay Korthikanti, Jared Casper, Sangkug Lym, Lawrence McAfee, Michael Andersch,
     Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Reducing activation recomputation in large
     transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05198, 2022.
[15] Alex Krizhevsky et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
[16] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with
     deep convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q.
     Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25.
     Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.


                                            10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[17] Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping
     Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. Gshard: Scaling giant models
     with conditional computation and automatic sharding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16668,
     2020.
[18] Margaret Li, Suchin Gururangan, Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Tim Althoff, Noah A
     Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Branch-train-merge: Embarrassingly parallel training of
     expert language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03306, 2022.
[19] Qinbin Li, Yiqun Diao, Quan Chen, and Bingsheng He. Federated learning on non-iid
     data silos: An experimental study, 2021.
[20] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and
     Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks, 2018.
[21] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and
     Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks, 2020.
[22] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera
     y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In
     Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
[23] H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera
     y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,
     2023.
[24] Basil Mustafa, Carlos Riquelme, Joan Puigcerver, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Neil Houlsby.
     Multimodal contrastive learning with LIMoE: the language-image mixture of experts.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02770, 2022.
[25] A. Tuan Nguyen, Philip Torr, and Ser Nam Lim. Fedsr: A simple and effective domain
     generalization method for federated learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
     D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, volume 35, pages 38831–38843. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
[26] Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme, Basil Mustafa, Cedric Renggli, André Susano Pinto,
     Sylvain Gelly, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. Scalable transfer learning with expert
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13239, 2020.
[27] Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis
     Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling
     language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training Gopher. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
[28] Matthias Reisser, Christos Louizos, Efstratios Gavves, and Max Welling. Federated
     mixture of experts, 2021.
[29] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey
     Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-
     of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
[30] Kangkang Wang, Rajiv Mathews, Chloé Kiddon, Hubert Eichner, Françoise Beaufays,
     and Daniel Ramage. Federated evaluation of on-device personalization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1910.10252, 2019.
[31] Zhao You, Shulin Feng, Dan Su, and Dong Yu. SpeechMoE: Scaling to large acoustic
     models with dynamic routing mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03036,
     2021.
[32] Tao Yu, Eugene Bagdasaryan, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Salvaging federated learning by
     local adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04758, 2020.
[33] Liling Zhang, Xinyu Lei, Yichun Shi, Hongyu Huang, and Chao Chen. Federated
     learning with domain generalization, 2023.


                                            11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[34] Simiao Zuo, Xiaodong Liu, Jian Jiao, Young Jin Kim, Hany Hassan, Ruofei Zhang, Tuo
     Zhao, and Jianfeng Gao. Taming sparsely activated transformer with stochastic experts.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04260, 2021.


                                            12
