Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B OOSTING E FFICIENCY IN TASK -AGNOSTIC E XPLO -
RATION T HROUGH C AUSAL K NOWLEDGE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The effectiveness of model training heavily relies on the quality of available train-
         ing resources. However, budget constraints often impose limitations on data col-
         lection efforts. To tackle this challenge, we introduce causal exploration in this
         paper, a strategy that leverages the underlying causal knowledge for both data
         collection and model training. We, in particular, focus on enhancing the sample
         efficiency and reliability of the world model learning within the domain of task-
         agnostic reinforcement learning. During the exploration phase, the agent actively
         selects actions expected to yield causal insights most beneficial for world model
         training. Concurrently, the causal knowledge is acquired and incrementally re-
         fined with the ongoing collection of data. We demonstrate that causal exploration
         aids in learning accurate world models using fewer data and provide theoretical
         guarantees for its convergence. Empirical experiments, on both synthetic data and
         real-world applications, further validate the benefits of causal exploration.



1   I NTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK

Deep neural network models have been incredibly successful in various domains, such as the mile-
stone achievements in Go games and control tasks (Silver et al., 2016; Tassa et al., 2018). One key
factor contributing to such remarkable performance is the availability of high-quality data for model
training. However, in many practical applications, it remains data-hungry due to limited data col-
lection efforts imposed by budget constraints (Settles, 2009; Fang et al., 2017; Yoo & Kweon, 2019;
Robine et al., 2023).
To tackle this challenge for data collection and model training, we introduce causal exploration
in this paper, a novel framework that makes use of the underlying causal knowledge to improve
learning efficiency. Causal discovery, a fundamental process involving the identification of causal
relationships between variables within a system, plays a crucial role in both processes (Pearl et al.,
2000). Acquiring and understanding such causal knowledge unveils the fundamental mechanisms
behind the data generation process, thus enhancing the performance of the learned model (Molina
et al., 2020; Jaber et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2022).
Specifically, we focus on boosting the sample efficiency and reliability of the world model in the
realm of task-agnostic reinforcement learning (RL). Different from methods that learn a fixed task
from scratch, task-agnostic RL agent first learns a global model that gathers information about the
true environment on the data collected during exploration. The learning process is exclusively driven
by intrinsic rewards, which measure the agent’s level of surprise at the outcome. Then based on the
predictions of the learned world model, the agent can make quick adaptations to downstream tasks in
a zero-shot manner provided with specific reward functions. However, the data collection and world
model learning processes are usually expensive due to extensive interactions with the environment,
especially in large state spaces where discovering the optimal policy can be highly challenging.
Hence, we introduce causal exploration to efficiently learn world models with causal knowledge.
Our causal exploration-based approach revolves around three primary aspects. First, how to extract
and identify causal knowledge of the environment? In this regard, we employ causal models to cap-
ture the factored Markov decision processes over state transitions and use constraint-based methods
to discover causal relationships among environment variables.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustrations of (a) causal relationships among variables in the RL system (b) causal dis-
covery with conditional independence (CI) tests.
Second, how to effectively utilize causal structures to enhance the reliability of a learned world
model? That is, when predicting future outcomes, the model is supposed to only take the parent
nodes as inputs according to the causal graph. Prior methods like ASR (Huang et al., 2022) embed
structural constraints into the world model and update them together through continuous optimiza-
tion. However, the adoption of such embedding methods often results in increased model complexity
and necessitates additional computational resources for training, which tends to yield sub-optimal
solutions in data-hungry scenarios (Liang et al., 2019; Van Leeuwen et al., 2021; Zhang & Zhang,
2023). In light of these potential limitations, we decouple the discovery of causal structure from
world model learning and design a sharing-decomposition schema to ensure that the model’s ini-
tialization and updating processes adhere to the causal constraints by zeroing out non-parent nodes.
Causal knowledge and the world model are continuously refined with the ongoing collection of data.
Third, how can we improve sample efficiency during the exploration process? While causal discov-
ery algorithms typically necessitate the collection of substantial causal information through data, it’s
important to note that accumulating more samples does not always confer an advantage: as the sam-
ple size increases, the time cost of causal algorithms also rises. Hence, prioritizing the enhancement
of data quality over quantity becomes paramount. In this paper, we present an efficient online causal
discovery method, based on PC (Spirtes et al., 2000). Instead of indiscriminately accumulating
all the coming data, our approach selectively eliminates redundant and noisy samples, strategically
gathering informative data points for causal discovery in an incremental manner.
On the other hand, selecting representative samples is advantageous for reducing the cost of model
training. We draw inspiration from active learning methods (Holub et al., 2008; Siddiqui et al., 2020)
to improve the data collection efficiency. To be specific, the agent explores by selecting actions that
will lead to samples with the largest contribution to the model training loss. The prediction error is
then calculated with a scaling factor as the agent’s intrinsic motivation. During causal exploration,
the agent keeps searching in the state space to select data that the model mostly unfamiliar with and
maximize its expected intrinsic rewards, while the world model optimizes to minimize the prediction
loss. These two steps facilitate each other through continuous exploration.
The work most closely related to ours is that of Seitzer et al. (2021). However, their focus is primarily
on detecting causal influences between actions and future states. In contrast, our approach extends
to encompass causal relationships among states as well. Furthermore, our objective centers around
enhancing exploration efficiency from an active learning standpoint, while the exploration policy in
Seitzer et al. (2021) relies on random sampling, which is usually less effective in scenarios involving
large state spaces. Our key contributions are summarized below.
• In order to enhance the sample efficiency and reliability of model training with causal knowledge,
  we introduce a novel concept: causal exploration, and focus particularly on the domain of task-
  agnostic reinforcement learning.
• To efficiently learn and use structural constraints during world model learning, we design a novel
  weight-sharing-decomposition schema that can avoid additional computational burden.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of causal exploration across a range of demanding reinforce-
  ment learning environments. Theoretically, we show that, given strong convexity and smoothness
  assumptions, our approach attains a superior convergence rate compared to non-causal methods.
  Empirically, experimental results on synthetic data demonstrate the ability to learn accurate world
  models with exceptional data utilization, surpassing existing exploration methods in complex sce-


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: (a)(b) Computational cost for the PC algorithm with KCI-tests. (c) Performance of online
version of PC using different coreset selection methods.
     narios. Notably, our approach also produces outstanding performance in challenging tasks such
     as traffic light control and MuJoCo, highlighting its practicality in real-world applications.

2     D ISCOVERING AND UTILIZING CAUSALITY FOR WORLD MODELS
We focus on causal exploration within a Markov decision process characterized by a fac-
tored state space S = S1 × . . . × Sn ∈ Rn and action space A = A1 × . . . ×
Ac ∈ Rc . We take into account the causal structure over the state-action variables V =
{s1,t−1 , . . . , sn,t−1 , a1,t−1 , . . . , ac,t−1 , s1,t , . . . , sn,t }, which can be represented by a binary ma-
                    (n+c)×n
trix D ∈ {0, 1}                indicating the structure from (st−1 , at−1 ) to st . Take the example in Figure
1(a): we have D(1, 1) = 1 because s1,t is causally related to s1,t−1 , while D(2, 1) = 0 because s1,t
does not have a causal edge to s2,t−1 . We assume that the structural constraints are invariant over
time t. In the following part of this section, we first give the identification procedure of the causal
graph, and then we show how to utilize the learned causal knowledge for model training.

2.1    E FFICIENT O NLINE C AUSAL R ELATIONSHIP D ISCOVERY

To identify the causal structure represented by the binary matrix D, a commonly employed approach
is the PC algorithm, which leverages conditional independence(CI) constraints implied by the data.
Roughly speaking, the original PC algorithm starts from a complete undirected graph C over all
variables in the vertex set V, and then removes the edge between each ordered pair of adjacent
vertices by testing CI. Edges are oriented for triples of vertices by further employing the results
from conditional independence tests, as well as the acyclic constraints. In our setting, the cardinality
of the vertex set V is 2n + c which contains state-action sequences {st , at } and next-state sequences
{st+1 }, and we only care about the structural relationships among state transitions. That is, the
initial causal graph G is a subgraph of C where instantaneous edges between variables have already
been dropped out as shown in Figure 1(b). Moreover, the causal directions can be directly oriented
by leveraging the temporal order.
Note that the reliability of the PC algorithm indeed requires substantial data collection. However,
the continual accumulation of data does not always result in favorable outcomes. Actually, the
implementation of causal discovery often encounters an computational bottleneck as the number of
samples increases. Figure 2(a) gives an example where the execution time of the PC algorithm based
on Kernel-based Conditional(KCI) test (Zhang et al., 2012) experiences exponential growth. There-
fore, in order to reduce the cost of the identification process, we design an efficient online causal
relationship discovery method: rather than use all of the coming data for causal identification, we
selectively collect representative data points during exploration in an incremental way. Specifically,
we use the minibatch similarity and sample diversity criteria introduced in Yoon et al. (2021) as our
selection strategies, which are defined as
                                                                            t−1
                     ∇fw (bit )∇fw (Bt )T                             −1 X   ∇fw (bit )∇fw (bpt )T
    Similarity =                                ,     Diversity =                                        .
                   ∥∇fw (bit )∥ · ∥∇fw (Bt )T ∥                      t−1   ∥∇fw (bit )∥ · ∥∇fw (bpt )T ∥
                                                                            p̸=i
                                                                                                 (1)
Here bit is the i-th data of the whole arrival batch Bt . f is the world model in our method with
parameter w, ∇fw (bit ) and ∇fw (Bt ) are the gradient and average gradient of the sample and batch,
respectively. A combination of batch similarity and diversity is used to rank and select the top-k


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: (a)(b)An illustration of model architecture before and after causal factorization; (c) An
illustration of the sharing-decomposition schema; (d)An overview of Causal Exploration framework.
data points of Bt for causal discovery during exploration. Experiments in section 4 have shown that
this online method significantly accelerates causal discovery without sacrificing overall accuracy.

2.2   C AUSAL C ONSTRAINTS FOR F ORWARD M ODEL

After acquiring the causal knowledge, we show how to make use of it for model training. Forward
world model fw enables agents to predict future state ŝt+1 based on current state st and action at ,
fw : (st , at ) → st+1 . Typically, the prediction loss is then used to optimize the network parameters
w as in Curiosity-driven Exploration (Burda et al., 2018a):
                                            1
                                    Lf =      ∥fw (st , at ) − st+1 ∥22 ,                             (2)
                                            2
where the neural network employs fully connected layers. However, Huang et al. (2022) shows that
such a framework could be redundant because causal graphs are often not fully connected in the data
generation process. For example, s1,t+1 is only causally related to s1,t and a1,t but not connected
with s2,t , s3,t and a2,t as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Therefore, we are suggested to partially take
s1,t together with a1,t as input instead of (st , at ). Utilizing this causal structure over variables to
formulate and learn a world model is believed to be more reliable and efficient.
The challenge for leveraging causal information into a world model is that each dimension has its
unique parents and needs special design. Instead of using a single model to predict next state ŝt+1 ,
we are supposed to design n decomposed neural networks fwic for the prediction of each factored
dimension ŝi,t+1 , formulated as
                                             n
                                             Y
                                    fw c =         fwic (P aG (si,t+1 )).                            (3)
                                             i=1
Figure 3(a) and (b) illustrate an example before and after factorization under the causal graph G in
Figure 1(b), respectively. Such method would be sufficient for simple models like single layer neural
network. However, it is likely to result in an explosive growth in computational complexity as the
state dimension and network size increase. This goes against our prime intention.
We propose a sharing-decomposition schema to address such a problem. It is unnecessary for all
of these n networks to be totally different. In other words, each of these models could share the
first several layers and design their specific architecture following the sharing module. Suppose
wic is the network parameter for the i-th dimension, it is a combination of the shared parameter
σ and decomposed parameter θi , written as wic = σ ∪ θi . What’s more, to reflect these causal
constraints for each forward model, we zero out values of the state and action nodes that are not
parents of the decomposed state (such as s2,t for s1,t+1 in Figure 1(a)) in the input layer of σ.
During the training time, each decomposed model focuses on a different aspect of the state in the


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decomposition part θi but shares a common knowledge σ. The number of the shared layers is a
hyperparameter that allows for a trade-off between the sharing and decomposition parts. By training
forward models under this schema, our approach can both utilize causal information of the ground
environment dynamics to generate accurate predictions and achieve a significant reduction in model
parameters and computation time compared with absolute decomposition. Figure 3(c) illustrates our
sharing-decomposition schema during causal exploration.

3     B OOSTING E FFICIENCY THROUGH C AUSAL E XPLORATION
We now return to the fundamental question: how to enhance the data collection efficiency during
causal exploration, thereby improving the performance of both causal discovery and model learn-
ing. The agent, following an exploration policy π, is supposed to take actions that are expected to
continually acquire data most beneficial for model training and updating causal beliefs. To attain
this goal, a commonly applied concept from active learning is the selection of samples that make the
largest contributions to the model’s training loss. These samples are typically considered as a subset
that the model is least familiar with. Hence, the prediction loss is used here as the intrinsic reward
to guide exploration with a scaling weight η:
                                           η
                                     rti = ∥f (st , at ) − st+1 ∥22 .                              (4)
                                           2
This prediction loss can also be viewed as a validation of the agent’s causal beliefs. The larger the
prediction error, the more surprised the agent is by the actual outcome, implying a greater deviation
from the estimated values based on the causal structure and the world model. The faster the error
rate drops, the more learning progress signals we acquire.
Apart from the prediction loss, we introduce active reward (Fang et al., 2017) as another intrinsic
motivation to guide agent to actively explore towards causal informative data. Note that not all data
has a positive impact on the model. On the contrary, some redundant data may lead the model to
an awful direction. To reflect this, we collect a test set Dh generated from episodes unseen before
training. The prediction accuracy on the test set reflects world model’s prediction ability. Once the
world model is updated, we calculate the change of performance before/after update as active reward
that provides feedback on the quality of training, indicating a beneficial/detrimental training caused
by the selected data. If the reward is always positive, it indicates that the agent has been selecting
beneficial samples for training the world model. We formulate active reward as
                                     rta = e(ϕt−1 ) − e(ϕt ),                                    (5)
where ϕ is the prediction model randomly initialized for calculation and e(ϕ) is the mean prediction
error on Dh . We combine prediction loss and active reward with a regularization weight β:
                                          rt = rti + βrta .                                    (6)
During causal exploration, the agent keeps searching for causal informative data by maximizing the
expected rewards, which is                            "          #
                                                         X
                                  ∗                          t
                                at = arg max Eτ ∼π          γ rt ,                             (7)
                                          a∈A             t
where τ represents the trajectory generated by the exploration policy π and γ is the discount fac-
tor. Meanwhile, the world model optimizes to minimize the prediction loss. Since both of them
contain the prediction error in equation (2) and (4), we can draw a conclusion that the learning of
world models and causal exploration facilitate each other . Figure 3(d) shows an overview of causal
exploration, details are shown in Algorithm 1.

3.1   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we present a theoretical analysis of causal exploration in learning global world
models. Learning to predict well in RL is typically a regression task. Thus, we consider the conver-
gence rate of gradient descent in linear regression, formulated as
                                    min    e(w) = ∥w⊤ x − y∥22 ,                              (8)
                                     w
                      n+c                                       n+c
where x = [s, a] ∈ R      is the state-action sequence, w ∈ R   is the linear weight of the world
model and y = w⋆ ⊤ x is the ground truth value. Moreover, we make the following assumption:


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3.1. e is strong convex and smooth such that ∃ m > 0, M > 0, for any w ∈ dom e,
we have M I ⪰ ∇2 e(w) ⪰ mI.

Experiments are conducted to show that causal exploration is still helpful to actively and efficiently
learn complex world models because the success of deep neural network remains unclear theoreti-
cally. Here we state the theorem under the smooth and convex assumption as follows.
Theorem 3.1. Suppose Assumption 3.1 holds, and the density of causal matrix D is δ. If we initialize
world model with w0 , update wtc and wt with/without causal structure, denote e⋆ the optimal of e(w),
then we have
                                                     Mh         m  it
                 e(wtc ) − e⋆ ≤ δ t (e(wt ) − e⋆ ) ≤    δ 1−            ∥w0 − w⋆ ∥22 .             (9)
                                                     2          M
Remark This theorem establishes that the advantages of causal exploration is relevant to the
sparseness of causal structure. The sparser the causal structure, the faster our method learns. When
the causal matrix D is a complete matrix (δ = 1), causal exploration degenerates into non-causal
prediction-based exploration. We prove Theorem 3.1 in appendix B.

Algorithm 1 Task-agnostic Causal Exploration
 1: Initialize: Forward world Model f with parameter w c
                Maximum training epoch K, trajectory length T , causal discovery period N
                Dataset Bt , exploration policy π with memory buffer M
 2: Output: Forward world model f
 3: for Episode = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 4:   Initialize a random forward model ϕ and collect test set Dh
 5:   Set current time t = 0
 6:   while t < T do
 7:      Choose action at = π(st ) and predict next state ŝt+1 = f (st , at )
 8:      Obtain st+1 from environment and calculate prediction reward rti
 9:      Update model ϕ and calculate active reward rta on Dh
10:      Store (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into M, store (st , st+1 ) into Bt
11:      Do online causal discovery on top-k of Bt per N steps and get causal graph G
12:      Train world model under G on Bt and update wic
13:      Train exploration policy on M and update π
14:   end while
15: end for
16: return Latest forward world model f



4   E XPERIMENTS
To verify the effectiveness of causal exploration in complex scenarios, we conduct several experi-
ments both on synthetic dataset and real world applications, namely the traffic light control task and
MuJoCo control suites (Todorov et al., 2012). In all of these settings, we share network parameters
except for the last layer which is separately decomposed. Note that the form of intrinsic reward
is not our primary focus, we use regression loss to train the agent and world model for simplicity.
Besides, causal exploration with some other forms of prediction loss are included in appendix E.
We compare our proposed causal exploration with prediction-based exploration methods with-
out leveraging causal information, including Curiosity-Driven Learning (Burda et al., 2018a) and
Plan2Explore (Pathak et al., 2019). The intrinsic reward in Curiosity-Driven Learning is equation
(4). Plan2Explore trains an ensemble of prediction models and uses the variance over forward
predictions of the these ensemble members as its intrinsic reward. We also conduct comparative ex-
periments with methods that attempt to gather causal information during exploration. CID (Seitzer
et al., 2021) only detects causal influence on local action nodes, we extend their work to causal dis-
covery between state transitions. Causal discovery and model learning are designed as two modules
that facilitate each other in causal exploration. Unlike our work and CID, ASR (Huang et al., 2022)
embeds structural constraints into the world model by employing a causal mask and train them to-
gether. Evaluation methods of these learned models include prediction errors during exploration and
zero-shot performance on downstream RL tasks.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure 4: Prediction errors on synthetic environment with large state and action spaces.


          Figure 5: A comparison of the discovered causal matrix with different methods.
4.1   S YNTHETIC DATASET

Environments We build our simulated environment following Deep Kalman Filters (Krishnan
et al., 2015), a generative model of state and action sequences. Whenever the agent takes an action
at based on current state, the environment provides feedback st+1 at the next time. We denote the
generative environment as
                                     s1 ∼ N (0, I)
                                                                                                (10)
                                     st ∼ N (h(st−1 , at−1 ), Σ),
where Σ is the covariance matrix and h is the mean value as the ground truth transition function im-
plemented by deep neural networks under causal graph G. Specifically, the linear condition consists
a single-layer network and the nonlinear function is three-layer MLPs with sigmoid activation.
Given that the sparsity of the causal graph is an important factor affecting the performance of our
method, we choose to demonstrate the superiority of our approach on relatively low density causal
structures. That is, G is generated by randomly connecting edges with a probability of p. Such sparse
causal structures allow us to evaluate the ability of our method to accurately learn world models with
limited data, which is a common scenario in many real-world applications.
Results We first validate the success of our online causal discovery method in improving the effi-
ciency. As can be seen in Figure 2(a), the execution time of the PC algorithm exhibits a noticeable
inflection when the sample size is around 350. This provides a valuable reference for determining
an appropriate value for the selection number k. Figure 2(b) further verifies this idea because the
curve of times of KCI-test performed during PC illustrates a similar change. Additionally, it re-
veals that the increase in the execution time for PC algorithm is mainly due to growth of KCI-test
times, especially when the depth of the condition set is 1. Figure 2(c) illustrates the corresponding
ROC curves of different selection methods including Uniform Sampling, K-center Features (Nguyen
et al., 2017), Hardest Sampling (Aljundi et al., 2019) and the Coreset Selection method (Yoon et al.,
2021) we use. We observe that our online method leads to a remarkable quality improve of the
causal discovery compared with no sampling while no other baseline could do this. This can be
attributed to the successful removal of redundant and noisy samples.
After that, we conduct 10 experiments on the synthetic dataset and take the average value to reduce
the impact of randomness. Figure 4 are prediction errors of the world models during exploration.
Causal exploration achieves lower prediction errors with fewer data, which outperforms baselines in
all of these environments. Note that the larger the dimension and the sparser the causal structure, the


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         s1,t−1   s2,t−1   s3,t−1     s4,t−1   s5,t−1      at−1


                                                              s1,t     s2,t     s3,t       s4,t     s5,t


                         (a)                                                    (b)
Figure 6: (a) Illustration of the traffic-signal-control environment. (b) Causal graph learned through
exploration.
more prominent the advantages of our proposed method over non-causal method will be. Moreover,
Figure 5 illustrates a concrete example of the causal matrix discovered by different methods, where
the depth of the color indicates the number of times each edge is detected as a causal connection.
The results reflect that the causal matrix learned through causal exploration obtains a smaller bias
from the ground-truth matrix than that of ASR, an explanation for better performances.
We also observe that many of the prediction error curves have a different y intercept, suggesting
that the causal methods are better even at iteration 0. This is because causal exploration exclusively
incorporates the parent nodes and eliminate extraneous input information when predicting future
states, a departure from prior methodologies where these nodes were treated and initialized on par
with parent nodes. Consequently, even under random weight initialization for the world model, the
prediction error of causal method are better at iteration 0. This initial advantage is also tied to the
sparsity of the causal graph as in Theorem 3.1. More implementation details and results are given
in appendix C.1. Moreover, we consider challenging scenarios where the agent is start with wrong
causal beliefs and encounters sudden structural changes in appendix C.2 and C.3.

4.2   R EAL WORLD APPLICATIONS

Application to Traffic Signal Control Task Traffic signal control is an important means of mit-
igating congestion in traffic management. Compared to using fixed-duration traffic signals, a RL
agent learns a policy to determine real-time traffic signal states based on current road conditions.
The state observed by the agent at each time consists of five dimensions of information, namely the
number of vehicles, queue length, average waiting time in each lane plus current and next traffic
signal states. Action here is to decide whether to change the traffic signal state or not. For example,
consider traffic signal is red at time t, if the agent takes action 1, then it will change to green at the
next time t + 1, otherwise it will remain red. The traffic environment used in our experiment is a
three-lane intersection in IntelliLight (Wei et al., 2018), illustrated in 6(a).
          Table 1: Performance of downstream policy learning in traffic signal control task.

                    Model                 Reward        Duration     Queue Length          Vehicles
                    ASR                   -1.698          8.23          0.915                312
                     CID                  -4.356         12.45          3.619                288
                   Curiosity              -3.505         10.92          1.550                304
           Causal World Model(ours)       -1.366         7.21           0.301                314
              True Environment            -1.007          7.61          0.112                316


During task-agnostic causal exploration, the agent first explores to efficiently learn a world model
under intrinsic motivation. After that, the agent is provided with downstream tasks and needs to
solve the tasks based on prediction of the learned world model instead of environment interactions.
Table 1 lists the performance of different learned world models on downstream policy learning. The
reward here is a combination of several terms including sum of queue length and so on, defined in
equation (3) in IntelliLight. Duration refers to average travel time vehicles spent on approaching
lanes (in seconds). Queue Length is the sum of the length of waiting vehicles over all approaching
lanes and Vehicles is the total number of vehicles that passed the intersection. We also train an agent
in the true environment to verify the reliable of the learned models through task-agnostic exploration.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: (a) Prediction errors in world model learning and (b) downstream policy learning perfor-
mance on MuJoCo tasks.

The performance of the policy learned on the world models trained during causal exploration is
comparable to, or even in some metrics better than, that of the true environment. The causal graph
on state variables in traffic signal control task is shown in 6(b), comparison of the prediction errors
during exploration and detailed analyses are included in appendix D.
Application to MuJoCo Tasks In addition to traffic light control scenario, we also evaluate causal
exploration on challenging MuJoCo tasks. MuJoCo is a popular physics simulation engine used for
modeling the motion and physical interactions of multi-joint robots in complex environments. In
these tasks, state variables typically include robot joint positions, velocity information, and some
other relevant factors, while actions are corresponding joint movements. The state-action dimen-
sions of Mujoco tasks range from tens (Hopper-v2) to hundreds (Humanoid-v2). We use PPO algo-
rithm (Schulman et al., 2017) for optimization during both the task-agnostic exploration and policy
learning stages. Appendix E gives a detailed description of the hyperparameters for the Mujoco task.
As is depicted in Figure 7(a), the world model learned during causal exploration always performs
lower prediction errors than others. This ability of our causal method stems from its focus on
causal relationships and structural constraints. By selectively incorporating relevant parent nodes
during state prediction, our approach maintains informed exploration even when exploratory signals
decline, which prevents the agent from getting stuck in sub-optimal behaviors.
Such a good performance is also achieved in a shorter time. Task performances in Figure 7(b) also
reflects the reliability of these world models. We see that our proposed method still works well when
the state space is large. As long as there is a strong causal relationship between the observed state
variables, and the causal discovery algorithm can accurately identify the corresponding causal struc-
ture, our causal exploration method is believed to be well applied to high-dimensional situations.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce causal exploration, a methodology designed to incorporate causal in-
formation from data for the purpose of learning world models efficiently. In particular, we employ
causal exploration within the domain of task-agnostic reinforcement learning and design a sharing-
decomposition schema to leverage causal structural knowledge for the world model. A series of
experiments in both simulated environments and real world tasks including traffic light control and
MuJoCo demonstrate the superiority of causal exploration, which highlight the importance of rich
causal prior knowledge for efficient data collection and model learning. We would like to point out
that this study primarily focuses on scenarios where we fully observe latent states rather than pixel
inputs. Future research directions include considering complex scenarios such as unobserved latent
state variables and designing better fault-tolerant mechanisms to enhance robustness. We believe
that this work provides a promising direction for future efficient exploration.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam and Shankar Sastry. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732, 2017.
Rahaf Aljundi, Lucas Caccia, Eugene Belilovsky, Massimo Caccia, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Online
  continual learning with maximally interfered retrieval. 2019.
Arthur Aubret, Laetitia Matignon, and Salima Hassas. A survey on intrinsic motivation in reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06976, 2019.
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Andrei Broder, and Tong Zhang. Margin based active learning. In Learning
 Theory: 20th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, COLT 2007, San Diego, CA, USA; June
 13-15, 2007. Proceedings 20, pp. 35–50. Springer, 2007.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information pro-
 cessing systems, 29, 2016.
Jr Blalock. Causal models in the social sciences. Routledge, 2017.
Ronen I Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-max-a general polynomial time algorithm for near-
  optimal reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Oct):213–231, 2002.
Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros.
  Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04355, 2018a.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018b.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, Gábor Lugosi, and Gergely Neu. Boltzmann exploration
  done right. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016.
Ehsan Elhamifar, Guillermo Sapiro, Allen Yang, and S Shankar Sasrty. A convex optimization
  framework for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 209–216, 2013.
Furkan Emirmahmutoglu and Nezir Kose. Testing for granger causality in heterogeneous mixed
  panels. Economic Modelling, 28(3):870–876, 2011.
Meng Fang, Yuan Li, and Trevor Cohn. Learning how to active learn: A deep reinforcement learning
 approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02383, 2017.
David Heckerman.      A bayesian approach to learning causal networks.              arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1302.4958, 2013.
Alex Holub, Pietro Perona, and Michael C Burl. Entropy-based active learning for object recogni-
  tion. In 2008 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  Workshops, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2008.
Biwei Huang, Chaochao Lu, Liu Leqi, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Clark Glymour, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Kun Zhang. Action-sufficient state representation learning for control with struc-
  tural constraints. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9260–9279. PMLR,
  2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amin Jaber, Murat Kocaoglu, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Elias Bareinboim. Causal discovery
 from soft interventions with unknown targets: Characterization and learning. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 33:9551–9561, 2020.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Aniket Didolkar, Sarthak Mittal, Anirudh Goyal, Guillaume Lajoie, Stefan
  Bauer, Danilo Rezende, Yoshua Bengio, Michael Mozer, and Christopher Pal. Systematic
  evaluation of causal discovery in visual model based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.00848, 2021.
Hyoungseok Kim, Jaekyeom Kim, Yeonwoo Jeong, Sergey Levine, and Hyun Oh Song. Emi: Ex-
  ploration with mutual information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01176, 2018.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A Al Sallab, Senthil Yoga-
  mani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2021.
Rahul G Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag.          Deep kalman filters.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.05121, 2015.
Steffen Lilholt Lauritzen and Nanny Wermuth. Graphical models for associations between variables,
  some of which are qualitative and some quantitative. The annals of Statistics, pp. 31–57, 1989.
Jian Liang, Yuren Cao, Chenbin Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Kun Bai, and Zenglin Xu. Additive ad-
   versarial learning for unbiased authentication. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
   Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11428–11437, 2019.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. Count-based exploration with the
 successor representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
 ume 34, pp. 5125–5133, 2020.
Arquımides Méndez Molina, Ivan Feliciano Avelino, Eduardo F Morales, and L Enrique Sucar.
  Causal based q-learning. Research in Computing Science, 149:95–104, 2020.
Cuong V Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D Bui, and Richard E Turner. Variational continual learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10628, 2017.
Hieu T Nguyen and Arnold Smeulders. Active learning using pre-clustering. In Proceedings of the
  twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 79, 2004.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration with
  neural density models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2721–2730. PMLR,
  2017.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR, 2019.
Judea Pearl et al. Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversityPress,
  19(2), 2000.
Shaohui Peng, Xing Hu, Rui Zhang, Ke Tang, Jiaming Guo, Qi Yi, Ruizhi Chen, Xishan Zhang,
  Zidong Du, Ling Li, et al. Causality-driven hierarchical structure discovery for reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06964, 2022.
Jan Robine, Marc Höftmann, Tobias Uelwer, and Stefan Harmeling. Transformer-based world mod-
  els are happy with 100k interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07109, 2023.
Lauren N Ross. Causal concepts in biology: How pathways differ from mechanisms and why it
  matters. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2021.
Nicholas Roy and Andrew McCallum. Toward optimal active learning through monte carlo estima-
  tion of error reduction. ICML, Williamstown, 2:441–448, 2001.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, et al. A tutorial on
  thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(1):1–96, 2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Maximilian Seitzer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Georg Martius. Causal influence detection for improv-
 ing efficiency in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 22905–22918, 2021.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. 2009.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019.
Yawar Siddiqui, Julien Valentin, and Matthias Nießner. Viewal: Active learning with viewpoint
  entropy for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9433–9443, 2020.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schul-
  man, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for
  deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Peter Jan Van Leeuwen, Michael DeCaria, Nachiketa Chakraborty, and Manuel Pulido. A frame-
  work for causal discovery in non-intervenable systems. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of
  Nonlinear Science, 31(12), 2021.
Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Causal networks: Semantics and expressiveness. In Machine
  intelligence and pattern recognition, volume 9, pp. 69–76. Elsevier, 1990.
Handing Wang, Yaochu Jin, and John Doherty. Committee-based active learning for surrogate-
  assisted particle swarm optimization of expensive problems. IEEE transactions on cybernetics,
  47(9):2664–2677, 2017.
Hua Wei, Guanjie Zheng, Huaxiu Yao, and Zhenhui Li. Intellilight: A reinforcement learning ap-
  proach for intelligent traffic light control. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2496–2505, 2018.
Donggeun Yoo and In So Kweon. Learning loss for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 93–102, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jaehong Yoon, Divyam Madaan, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Online coreset selection for
  rehearsal-based continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01085, 2021.
Kui Yu, Jiuyong Li, and Lin Liu. A review on algorithms for constraint-based causal discovery.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03977, 2016.
Kun Zhang, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Kernel-based conditional
  independence test and application in causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.3775, 2012.
Yichi Zhang and Wen Zhang. Cause: Towards causal knowledge graph embedding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.11610, 2023.
Rui Zhao and Volker Tresp. Curiosity-driven experience prioritization via density estimation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.08039, 2019.
Shengyu Zhu, Ignavier Ng, and Zhitang Chen. Causal discovery with reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1906.04477, 2019.


                                                13
