Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MPROVING L EARNING C ONDITIONS FOR C OMPUTER
S CIENCE S TUDENTS BY U SING THE F LIPPED C LASS -
ROOM

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The flipped classroom is a pedagogical strategy that provides the instructors with
         a method of minimizing the amount of traditional direct instructions during the
         teaching process while emphasizing the one-to-one interaction. The students
         watch some educational resources before attending the session in which they build
         the required knowledge and prepare questions to be discussed during the session.
         Such resources are accessed via technological tools, offering flexibility and ac-
         cessibility. The flipped classroom offers self-paced learning process supporting
         mastery learning and self-efficacy.
         In order to improve the learning conditions of Computer Science students at the
         Lebanese University - Faculty of Sciences - Fanar, we tested the flipped class-
         room in two master’s courses. We designed these courses based on the ADDIE
         pedagogical model, we used different tools to set up our teaching-learning activ-
         ities and we evaluated the work of our students by the rubrics-based evaluation
         method. We prefer to apply the flipped classroom in other courses, starting next
         academic year, to assess the student’s satisfaction.
         Keywords: flipped classroom, e-learning, teaching method, pedagogical scenario,
         pedagogical model.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The quality of education is the main target of the educational systems. Educational strategies and
methods are improved and enhanced continuously and regularly in order to facilitate the learning
process. E-learning is an educational system that uses technological sources to provide an effec-
tive and efficient learning environment, regardless of time and location. The E-learning helps the
students to obtain productivity by which they do their tasks and assignments efficiently Rahmelina
et al. (2019). To maintain quality learning, significant improvements for technological resources as
well as users are required. This has opened the door for teachers to alter the way they deliver the
lectures. This changing and transformation in teaching method require the integration of a new ped-
agogical approach which is the flipped classroom. Flipped classroom is a pedagogical model and
learning strategy altering and reorganizing the traditional learning environments. It integrates the
technological resources as a support to help students navigate the online material. The material is
first delivered as e-learning providing training and support videos, as well as using group discussion
and assignments. In this case, the teachers play the role of advisors to direct the students to the right
path of learning. The integration of flipped classroom in e-learning environments has offered irre-
placeable advantages in the modern teaching. For example, it has encouraged the students to watch
videos, access the material given and perform their assignments while forming the concept of learn-
ing done at home. The term “flipped” comes from the concept of turning homework into classwork.
The revised Bloom’s Taxonomy of the cognitive learning domain Krathwohl (2002) is an excellent
presentation that supports this concept Nechodomu et al. (2016), it is illustrated in Figure 1.
In traditional learning, the two lower levels of learning, remembering and understanding, take place
in class, the students must work on activities on higher levels of learning outside the classroom.
However, in the flipped classroom concept, learning is flipped, so students can finish the two lower
levels of cognitive work before attending the course and can participate in both levels of cognitive


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 1: Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy and flipped classroom approach.


learning, applying and analyzing, during the class, with their peers in the presence of the teacher.
Then they can start the two highest levels after class (Figure 2) Anderson & Krathwohl (2001).


                      Figure 2: Activity levels before, during and after class.

The flipped learning model using e-learning media facilitate the student’s learning process because
of its effectiveness Rahmelina et al. (2019). Upon the efficiency and effectiveness of flipped class-
room, teachers are implementing video tutorials as their teaching method Ash (2012).


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The concept of the flipped classroom is to build a learning environment under the light of techno-
logical advances and focusing on the student-centered approach Yilmaz (2017).
The traditional classroom learning environment that focuses on the transmission of knowledge from
the teacher to the student decreases the student’s interest and ability to comprehend after an hour.
This results in lowering the probability of student’s engagement with the classroom content. There-
fore, a new pedagogical method is required to overcome this issue. The flipped classroom provides
the students some autonomous work through the integration of technological resources before the
class and by practical activities during the classroom in order to build and strengthen the student’s
knowledge. The flipped classroom effects the active learning because it is a critical methodology
to enhance the active construction of knowledge, fostering a fruitful environment of interaction
between the students, and between them and the teachers. The active learning environment has fa-
cilitated the student’s learning process by acquiring knowledge at home, and then implementing this
knowledge individually in the class. Since the students engage with each other by sharing their ex-
periences and knowledge, the flipped classroom enhances the sense of belonging to the community.
This results in an opportunity to develop their communication skills and from different perspec-
tivesSantos & Serpa (2020). The video lecture is seen as a key factor for the flipped classroom
which typical lecture and homework elements are reversed. These short videos serve as a tutorial in
which the students move at their own pace, review options and skip the sessions they are familiar
with. These videos are designed specifically to suit each student by means of providing captions,
familiar languages Elazab & Alazab (2015).
To provide our students with pedagogical continuity following the health crisis resulting from the
Covid-19 pandemic and the unstable economic situation, we asked the following question: how can
we improve the learning conditions for the student?
To answer this question, the aim of our work is to design the scenario of a teaching sequence focuses
on the student according to the flipped classroom approach, to identify the relevant technological
tools in order to create the resources, manage the learning activities, and finally to evaluate the
acquired knowledge of the students following a teaching sequence.
We applied this approach at Lebanese University - Faculty of Sciences - Fanar, on two courses
(Mobile Application and Network) for first-year master’s students of Computer Science.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the flipped classroom effectiveness is described
in Section 2, the teachers’ perspective and the students’ perception regarding flipped classroom are
tackled in Sections 3 and 4, an overview about the challenges of the flipped classroom is presented
in Section 5, the methodology of our work is described in Section 6, and finally Section 7 concludes
this paper and presents our future perspectives.


2   F LIPPED CLASSROOM EFFECTIVENESS

Students have different learning or cognitive styles in acquiring and building their knowledge. Stud-
ies show that the flipped classroom is a positive learning strategy as it increases the student’s per-
formance. Watching and listening to recorded lectures is useful and promotes the student’s activity.
The flipped classroom enhances the sense of responsibility among students of while watching the
lectures to build their knowledge. In addition, students feel that they have more control as they
have to prepare themselves for the upcoming session in a more active way than the traditional class-
room’s. This has resulted in a sense of empowerment and control among the students. Furthermore,
the flipped classroom has offered mobility, flexibility and accessibility to watch the lectures Avdic
& Åkerblom (2015). Flipped classroom offers repetition through the ongoing access to educational
material, collaboration between students and teachers, and flexible preparation. The implementa-
tion of flipped classroom has altered the student’s performance positively. In addition, it has various
advantages in improving interactions, developing skills, and engaging the learner in the learning pro-
cessJones-Bonofiglio et al. (2018). The students’ understanding of basic concepts is more effective
during active engagement in learning rather than the passive environment. In addition, the students
believe that the flipped classroom helped them in taking notes easily at their own pace, watching
the missed sessions, and having a reference. Students have more time and pace to interact with
the teachers during the session rather than being passively listening to the lecture. Moreover, the
flipped classroom promotes mastery learning, which focuses on ensuring that the level of mastery is


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


met before moving to another set of learning outcomes. Students acquire the basic knowledge be-
fore attending the session, and after that the teacher assesses the student’s knowledge and performs
corrective tutoring in order to ensure learning mastery. Consequently, mastery learning has shown
positive impact on the student’s abilitiesJohnson (2013). The flipped classroom concentrates on
transforming the student from a passive role into an active role, learning and teaching regardless of
place and time, and designing content focusing on the purpose of the lectureColomo-Magaña et al.
(2020).


3    T EACHERS ’ PERSPECTIVE REGARDING FLIPPED CLASSROOM

Teachers have different perspectives regarding the flipped classroom implementation and effective-
ness. Although video tutorial materials are used in the learning process, yet if the lecture is still the
primary mode of learning, the shifting into flipped classroom is not accomplished. Other instructors
argue that the styles of learning of students differ; some might find the videos helpful while others
won’t even watch. Some used the flipped classroom as a supplementary style to provide more in-
structions to students after basically explaining the base concepts to them. Another strategy used
was to post educational videos and then ask students to take notes and come up with questions, thus
enhancing the learning process through sharing and discussing information. Instructors emphasized
that the flipped classroom provided a wide framework of instructional methods and styles to reach
students and help in their learning process Ash (2012). The flipped classroom environment provides
an optimal and efficient use of the instructors as well as students’ time. The flipped classroom pro-
vides an effective classroom time to display the intended content, open discussions regarding the
topics and offers interaction between the students. As students have access to the content online,
less time is spent in answering basic and repetitive questions. In addition, the recorded lectures are
being used years over years for their easy updating process of their content and fast adaptation to re-
spond to new learning styles and demands. Such lectures enhance the student’s understanding of the
material, facilitate the students’ preparation for exams and tests, and increase the test performance
of the students Elazab & Alazab (2015). In addition the teachers’ responsibility is more focused
on understanding the student’s knowledge structure in order to develop a suitable content Santos &
Serpa (2020).


4    S TUDENTS ’ PERCEPTION REGARDING FLIPPED CLASSROOM

One of the factors that effects the student’s motivation and satisfaction in the flipped classroom
model is the readiness of the students for the e-learning environment. The first step in the flipped
classroom courses is the successful completion of the online requirements which is contributed to
the student’s satisfaction as well as to his motivation to pursue the flipped classroom activities. Nev-
ertheless, the success of the flipped classroom courses is associated with intra-personal skills such
as self-efficacy, self-regulation, time management, communication skills as well as goal directed
behaviors. These skills alter the student’s perception of the e-learning experience and thus impacts
the satisfaction. Another factor that affects the readiness of the student is the desire having physi-
cal, mental and effective components ensuring the readiness conditions for e-learning. Studies have
shown that forcing students for an e-learning experience results in a negative experience and per-
ception for future experiences and similar activities. The level of satisfaction is also affected by the
habits the students are used to from previous traditional classes. In addition, students in flipped class-
room model have to watch instructional videos before going to class. This represents additional work
for students that require great motivation. Therefore, motivation is the most critical element of the
structural design of the instructional environment. The learning experience is considered unsuccess-
ful unless the students are motivated to complete the course. Students have habits from the previous
traditional experiences, thus switching into online learning environment requires motivation to en-
gage into. Taking into account that students nowadays are technologically natives, however, online
learning environment is a complex one. Therefore, improving the self-efficacy impacts the students’
satisfaction during the online experience. Studies have shown that students’ interaction, with other
students, content or with the teacher, is a major factor that determines student’s satisfaction Yilmaz
(2017). The flipped classroom has shed a greater responsibility on the students with greater work
and motivation, thus making it impossible to play the role of a passive learner in such environment.
The students play a critical and active role, giving more satisfaction Santos & Serpa (2020). In a


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


study focusing on the flipped classroom outcomes, students have reported gaining new knowledge,
engaging more in the learning setting as their confidence has increased, and meeting the course ob-
jectives Jones-Bonofiglio et al. (2018). The study was carried out in order to evaluate the perception
of students regarding the implementation of flipped classroom shows that the students have positive
perception. The students agreed that flipped classroom promotes learning Colomo-Magaña et al.
(2020).

5    F LIPPED CLASSROOM CHALLENGES

Although the flipped classroom has offered flexibility regarding the lectures’ accessibility, some
students have reported that self-discipline is necessary in the learning process. It is easier for students
to follow a specific schedule rather than allocating time according to their preferences. Moreover,
students feel the need to ask questions while watching the lectures, which is impossible during the
recorded lectures. Since the flipped classroom is associated with more responsibility among the
students, it created a source of discomfort. The unfamiliarity with the flipped classroom added a
burden on the student’s learning process Avdic & Åkerblom (2015). Studies have shown that the
psychological relationship between the teacher and learner affects the students’ performance and
satisfaction as it plays a role in establishing a sense of safety. Therefore, students have to create a
psychological relationship with the teacher before initiating the learning process Jones-Bonofiglio
et al. (2018). Furthermore, students feel more stressed since they play the leading role in the learning
process.

6    M ETHODOLOGY

To apply the flipped classroom, we started to design our course using the pedagogical engineering
model, ADDIE Molenda (2015), which is based on the following five consecutive steps: Analysis,
Design, Development, Implementation and Evaluation.

      1. Analysis: In this step, we, as teachers, have analyzed pedagogical needs. Since the student
         is the center of the learning system, we have studied their technological, educational, and
         material needs. An analysis of the resources was made, the working environment and the
         necessary means.
      2. Design: in this part we have determined the teaching method and its pedagogical scenario.
         We divided this educational scenario into two main parts. The first part describes the gen-
         eral presentation model of the course. This model is called macro design and includes
         the following items: Course title, General description, Target audience, General objec-
         tives, Targeted skills, Prerequisites, Duration, Teaching method (face-to-face, interactive
         sessions, practical work, and tutorials), and Language (French or English). The second
         part is dedicated to the planning of each teaching-learning activity such as exercises, prac-
         tical work, tutorials and project. This part is called micro design, it is presented in Table 1.
         The term “Synchronous” means that the activity is done by the student in the presence of the
         teacher in class or online. The term “Asynchronous” means that the activity is done without
         the presence of the teacher, the student works alone or in a group. The objective is an action
         verb, if it is correctly defined, it is half achieved. The content is only a means. For this,
         in both parts, the objectives are defined from the revised Bloom’s taxonomy Krathwohl
         (2002) which targets cognitive type learning (this is the type of our learning). Bloom’s
         taxonomy makes it possible to classify educational objectives into six levels and types of
         skills (Remember, Understand, Apply, Analyze, Evaluate, and Create) and for each level, a
         series of action verbs is proposed.
      3. Development: In this part, we have developed the content of our course and we determined
         the teaching aids to be used. To prepare a pedagogical scenario for our course (including
         exercises and problems), we used the Learning Design tool. The content of our course
         (enriched by pedagogical multimedia) was based on the principles of Mayer Mayer (2008)
         and on his three important foundations for multimedia learning:
            • Dual channels: humans possess separate channels for processing visual, sound, and
              verbal material.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 1: Planning teaching-learning activities

                                                     MODULE: mobile cross platform frameworks

                 Before class                During class                  After class
                 (asynchronous)              (synchronous)                 (asynchronous)

 Steps/Timing    -Consult videos and         -Present the research         -Develop a small mobile
                 websites / 12 mins          summaries / 30 mins           application project / 80
                 -Collaborate     together   -Exercises    (practical      mins
                 (group of 2) to summa-      work + tutorials) / 60
                 rize their research / 60    mins
                 mins

 Objectives      -Know how to find the       -Practice the use of dif-     -Design mobile applica-
                 right resources             ferent functions              tions

 What     the    -Consult (alone)            -Participate in tutorials     -Work together (group of
 student does    -Search (alone)             (in groups)                   2) Develop the project
 (Alone/in a     -Collaborate (in groups)    -Solve the practical exer-
 group)          -Summarize (in groups)      cises (alone)

 What      the   -Put resources              -Answer the questions         -Support students
 teacher does    -Provide websites           -Guiding the students
                 -Be available to students   -Correct answers

 Tools           -Documents                  -Software                     -Internet
                 -Internet                                                 -Software

 Resources       -Videos                     -Presentation                 -Documents
                 -Websites                   -Documents


           • Limited capacity: each channel can process only a small amount of material at any
             one time.
           • Active processing: deep learning depends on the learner’s cognitive processing during
             learning.
        Other tools have been made available to us, such as:
           • Padlet: collaborative wall that allows students to introduce themselves in a few words
             and share their ideas in a few lines.
           • Quiz-Maker: allows the teacher to create a set of short and effective quizzes to test the
             knowledge of his students, to check if they have studied the course and understood the
             educational activity. The teacher can also add a score to each quiz.
           • Answergarden: allows students to answer more elaborate and detailed exercises pro-
             posed by the teacher.
     4. Implementation: we have implemented and applied the flipped classroom in two courses,
        Network and Mobile Application, for Master Computer - Science students.
     5. Evaluation: students must participate in graded practical work. These are presented in the
        form of problems to be solved in class or at home and in the form of a project to be presented
        when the course is finished. To evaluate the work of the students, we used a rubrics-based
        evaluation which is only of interest in the context of the use of open evaluation methods
        such as oral presentation, group project, etc. Dominguez et al. (2019). In this grid, our
        evaluation criteria are as follows:
           • The presentation of the work must meet the quality criteria.
           • The student’s written and oral expression must not contain any syntax or spelling
             errors.


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            • The vocabulary must be varied.
            • Answers and information must be relevant to understand the subject presented.
            • Finally, the student’s ability to carry out research and provide a summary on the sub-
              ject is assessed.
         Each criterion is evaluated by one of the following terms: Excellent, Very Good, Satisfac-
         tory, or Fair.

7   C ONCLUSION
The flipped classroom pedagogical method encompasses an innovative and transformative teaching
model, shifting the classroom from teacher-centered into student-centered environment. The stu-
dent is considered a real player in flipped Classroom. However, the success of the flipped classroom
environment is impacted by several factors including the adaptation and preparation of the teach-
ers as well as the student’s satisfaction. If this teaching-learning system is not well designed and
developed, it will result in learning difficulties among the students and teaching difficulties among
the teachers in transferring knowledge. However, if the flipped classroom method is well imple-
mented, it enhances the learning potential of the students. To model such teaching and integrate it
into the educational program, we followed the ADDIE pedagogical engineering model. We applied
two models, macro and micro design, for the scenario of the educational activity. We used several
tools to enrich our teaching. Our objective, which is to improve the student’s learning conditions
by offering him an education based on the flipped classroom, complementary to his face-to-face
teaching and accessible without time or space constraints, has been achieved, but this is just a first
step. To continue our work, certain perspectives are already envisaged. Indeed, we tried and tested
the flipped classroom only in two courses. For a better continuity in its use, it must be applied in
many courses of the four years of studying Computer Science at the Lebanese University - Faculty
of Sciences - Fanar. When all the courses are scripted, the flipped classroom becomes a veritable
library of digital resources at the student’s service. This will also strengthen the regular follow up
of the students throughout their learning. In this perspective, many other teachers must be trained to
use and apply this method.

R EFERENCES
Lorin W. Anderson and David R. Krathwohl. A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing:
  A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives: complete edition. Addison Wesley
  Longman, Inc., 2001.
Katie Ash. Educators evaluate flipped classrooms. Education week, 32(2):s6–s8, 2012.
Anders Avdic and Leif Åkerblom. Flipped classroom and learning strategies. In Proceedings of
  14th European Conference on e-learning, pp. 41–49, 2015.
Ernesto Colomo-Magaña, Roberto Soto-Varela, Julio Ruiz-Palmero, and Melchor Gómez-Garcı́a.
  University students’ perception of the usefulness of the flipped classroom methodology. Educa-
  tion Sciences, 10(10):275, 2020.
Deborah Dominguez, Jean-Philippe Maitre, and Jérémy Pouille. Comment réaliser pas à pas une
  grille d’évaluation critériée?, 2019.
Samia Elazab and Mohamed Alazab. The effectiveness of the flipped classroom in higher education.
  In 2015 Fifth International Conference on e-Learning (econf), pp. 207–211. IEEE, 2015.
Graham Brent Johnson. Student perceptions of the flipped classroom. PhD thesis, University of
  British Columbia, 2013.
Kristen Dawn Jones-Bonofiglio, Timothy Willett, and Stella Ng. An evaluation of flipped e-learning
  experiences. Medical teacher, 40(9):953–961, 2018.
David R. Krathwohl. A revision of bloom’s taxonomy: An overview. Theory into practice, 41(4):
  212–218, 2002.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard E. Mayer. Applying the science of learning: evidence-based principles for the design of
  multimedia instruction. American psychologist, 63(8):760, 2008.
Michael Molenda. In search of the elusive addie model. Performance improvement, 54(2):40–42,
 2015.
Thomas Nechodomu, Melissa Falldin, and Sheila Hoover. Cehd flipped learning guide, 2016.
Liranti Rahmelina, Fadil Firdian, Ilham Maulana, Hesty Aisyah, and Jufriadif Na‘am. The effec-
  tiveness of the flipped classroom model using e-learning media in introduction to information
  technology course. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (IJET), 14(21):
  148–162, 2019.
Ana Isabel Santos and Sandro Serpa. Flipped classroom for an active learning. Journal of Education
  and E-Learning Research, 7(2):167–173, 2020.
Ramazan Yilmaz. Exploring the role of e-learning readiness on student satisfaction and motivation
  in flipped classroom. Computers in Human Behavior, 70:251–260, 2017.


                                                8
