Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T RUE K NOWLEDGE C OMES FROM P RACTICE :
A LIGNING LLM S WITH E MBODIED E NVIRONMENTS
VIA R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Weihao Tan1 , Wentao Zhang1 , Shanqi Liu2 , Longtao Zheng1 , Xinrun Wang1∗, Bo An1, 3*
 1
   Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Zhejiang University 3 Skywork AI
 {weihao001, wt.zhang, longtao001, xinrun.wang, boan}@ntu.edu.sg
 shanqiliu@zju.edu.cn

                                              A BSTRACT
            Despite the impressive performance across numerous tasks, large language mod-
            els (LLMs) often fail in solving simple decision-making tasks due to the mis-
            alignment of the knowledge in LLMs with environments. On the contrary, rein-
            forcement learning (RL) agents learn policies from scratch, which makes them
            always align with environments but difficult to incorporate prior knowledge for
            efficient explorations. To narrow the gap, we propose TWOSOME, a novel gen-
            eral online framework that deploys LLMs as decision-making agents to efficiently
            interact and align with embodied environments via RL without requiring any pre-
            pared datasets or prior knowledge of the environments. Firstly, we query the joint
            probabilities of each valid action with LLMs to form behavior policies. Then, to
            enhance the stability and robustness of the policies, we propose two normaliza-
            tion methods and summarize four prompt design principles. Finally, we design a
            novel parameter-efficient training architecture where the actor and critic share one
            frozen LLM equipped with low-rank adapters (LoRA) updated by PPO. We con-
            duct extensive experiments to evaluate TWOSOME. i) TWOSOME exhibits sig-
            nificantly better sample efficiency and performance compared to the conventional
            RL method, PPO, and prompt tuning method, SayCan, in both classical decision-
            making environment, Overcooked, and simulated household environment, Virtu-
            alHome. ii) Benefiting from LLMs’ open-vocabulary feature, TWOSOME shows
            superior generalization ability to unseen tasks. iii) Under our framework, there is
            no significant loss of the LLMs’ original ability during online PPO finetuning. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
LLMs have demonstrated remarkable success
in natural language generation and understand-
ing (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023). Re-
cent studies show that LLMs can manage other
AI models and tools to address complex mul-
timodal tasks (Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2023), assist or play sophisticated games, such
as TextWorld (Yao et al., 2023), Handbi (Hu
& Sadigh, 2023), and MineCraft (Wang et al.,
2023a), or be deployed on robots for real-world      (a) Only tomato, lettuce (b) LLMs guide the agent
interactions (Brohan et al., 2023; Driess et al.,    and onion are provided in to put the lettuce on the
2023). While LLMs can provide insightful sug-        the game. LLMs may cutting board,                which
gestions for complex tasks, they often fail in       choose to pick up addi- already contains tomato,
solving simple decision-making tasks due to          tional ingredients, such as without knowing that each
misalignment issues (Brohan et al., 2023).           cucumber and pepper to cutting board can only
                                                     cook the dish.              contain one item at a time.
There are two main misalignment issues lead-               Figure 1: Two misalignment examples
ing to the failures of LLMs in decision-making
    ∗
        Co-corresponding Authors
    1
        Code is available at https://github.com/WeihaoTan/TWOSOME.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks. i) LLMs may generate invalid actions. As the example shown in Figure 1a, LLMs may keep
adding cucumber and pepper when asked to make a tomato and lettuce salad, while these ingredients
are not provided. ii) LLMs may not know accurately the dynamic transitions of the environments,
especially when some specific constraints are introduced in the environments. This incorrect esti-
mation will make LLMs tend to choose actions that fit their learned common sense, resulting in the
failure to solve domain-specific tasks. As the example shown in Figure 1b, LLMs may keep trying
to put both tomato and lettuce on the same cutting board, without knowing that only one item can be
placed on the board in this environment. Addressing these two misalignment issues requires careful
alignment between LLMs and environments.
On the contrary, reinforcement learning (RL) learns agents’ policies from scratch through trial and
error in environments (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which ensures that RL agents are well aligned with
environments. Most RL methods start from random policies, updated according to the return from
the environments, which leads to poor sample efficiency as most policies have poor performance at
the early stage of learning. One way to improve the sample efficiency is to incorporate the prior
knowledge with the initialization of the policy and the exploration during training (Kumar et al.,
2023). LLMs are ideal sources of prior knowledge for RL agents as LLMs are trained with enormous
data from the corpus. Therefore, by leveraging RL to align LLMs with embodied environments
to solve decision-making tasks, we can address the misalignment issues in LLMs and the sample
efficiency issue in RL simultaneously.
Motivated by this idea, we propose True knoWledge cOmeS frOM practicE (TWOSOME), a gen-
eral online framework that deploys LLMs as embodied agents to efficiently interact and align with
environments via RL to solve decision-making tasks without requiring any prepared datasets or
prior knowledge of the environments. Instead of letting LLMs directly generate actions, we use the
loglikelihood scores of each token provided by LLMs to calculate the joint probabilities of each
action and form valid behavior policies. This process eliminates the misalignment caused by invalid
actions. Moreover, the LLM agents are optimized with proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schul-
man et al., 2017) using rewards from the environments, which eliminates the misalignment caused
by dynamic transitions. We observe that the formed behavior policies suffer a severe issue that
longer actions tend to have lower joint probabilities, resulting in an unreasonable unbalance over the
action distribution. To overcome this issue, we propose token normalization and word normalization
in terms of the number of tokens and words in actions to rectify the unbalance. Furthermore, we
design a novel architecture for efficient training, where both the actor and critic in RL methods share
the same frozen LLaMA-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023), updated by parameter efficient finetuning
methods, e.g., LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). During training, we observe that prompts for observations
and actions can greatly influence the initial policies of LLM agents, therefore, we also summarize
four principles for designing efficient prompts to enhance the reasoning ability of LLMs.
We first evaluate our methods on a classical RL decision-making environment, Overcooked, and a
simulated physical environment, VirtualHome, with various tasks to show that our proposed word
normalization method can remarkably improve stability and accelerate convergence during the train-
ing process. TWOSOME with word normalization exhibits significantly better sample efficiency and
performance compared to the conventional RL method, PPO, and prompt tuning method, SayCan,
in all tasks. Then, we test our trained TWOSOME agents in eight new unseen tasks and find that
TWOSOME has superior generalization ability across unseen tasks. Finally, we evaluate our trained
TWOSOME agents on traditional NLP benchmarks to demonstrate that under our framework, there
is no significant loss of the LLMs’ original ability during online PPO fine-tuning.

2   R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we present a brief overview of related work. More discussions are in Appendix A.
Embodied Agents with LLMs. Recent methods use LLMs to assist planning and reasoning in
robot learning (Brohan et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022) and simulation environ-
ments (Fan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023). LLMs are also applied to help robot
navigation (Parisi et al., 2022; Majumdar et al., 2020) and manipulation (Jiang et al., 2022; Ren
et al., 2023; Khandelwal et al., 2022). Among them, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) uses chain-of-thought
prompting by generating both reasoning traces and action plans with LLMs. SayCan (Brohan et al.,
2023) leverages the ability of LLMs to understand human instructions to make plans for completing


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks without finetuning LLMs. Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a) leverages GPT-4 to learn and con-
tinually discover skills during learning. While these works exhibit promising results, they rely too
heavily on the inherent capabilities of powerful LLMs, which are difficult to apply to smaller LLMs
with weaker reasoning abilities. Concurrent to our work, GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) uses RL to
ground LLMs. However, they focus on simple primitive actions in toy environments without rich
semantics, resulting in underutilizing the capabilities of LLMs, and failing to observe the impact of
prompt design and address the unbalance over action space.
Finetuning LLMs. Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) can significantly reduce the number of
parameters to tune LLMs while with minor loss of the performance (Ding et al., 2023). Prompt
tuning (Lester et al., 2021) and prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) prepend additional tunable tokens
to the input or hidden layers, and adapter tuning (Houlsby et al., 2019) introduces the adapter to
LLMs, where only the introduced tokens and adapters are finetuned. Recently, low-rank adaption
(LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) introduces low-rank matrices to approximate parameter updates. Rein-
forcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is effective in finetuning LLMs (Ouyang et al.,
2022), where the reward for RL is learned from human feedback. Another concurrent work (Xiang
et al., 2023) leverages embodied environments to provide feedback to finetune LLMs. Different
from our method, they use supervised learning to finetune LLMs with pre-collected embodied expe-
riences by random sampling in environments instead of doing decision-making tasks from scratch.

3   P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide a brief background on LLM and the RL problem formulation.
LLMs learn from text data using unsupervised learning. LLMs optimize the joint probabili-
ties of variable-length symbol sequences as the product of conditional probabilities by P (x) =
Q  n
   i=1 P (si |s1 , ..., si−1 ), where (s1 , s2 , ..., sn ) is variable length sequence of symbols.

LoRA is a parameter- and compute-efficient finetuning method that incorporates trainable rank de-
composition matrices into each layer of an LLM. It allows indirect training of dense layers with
weight matrix, W0 ∈ Rd×k by optimizing the rank-decomposition matrices by W0 + ∆W =
W0 + BA, where B ∈ Rd×r , A ∈ Rr×k , and the rank r is much smaller than d and k.
RL formulates decision-making problems as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). An MDP is
defined by the tuple (S, A, T, R, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, T is the
transition dynamics, R is the reward function and γ is the discount factor. Agents select actions
based on observations, aiming to maximize the expected discounted accumulative reward.
PPO is a state-of-the-art actor-critic RL method that optimizes the policy based on the accumulative
reward with advantage function A(st , at ) = Q(st , at ) − V (st ), where V (st ) is the value function
and Q(st , at ) is the action-value function. The objective of PPO can be expressed as:
                              πθ (a|s)                         πθ (a | s)
         J(θ) = Es,a [min(               Aπθold (s, a), clip(               , 1 ± ϵ)Aπθold (s, a))]
                             πθold (a|s)                      πθold (a | s)
where Aπθold represents the advantage function of the policy before updating, and the clip operator
controls the size of policy updates.
Aligning LLMs with Embodied Environments. We intend to deploy LLMs as interactive agents
in embodied environments, where LLMs receive textual observations and generate textual actions
executed in the environments. The textual observations and actions can be transferred from images
or vectors by vision-language modes (VLMs) or scripts. Compared to primitive actions, high-level
actions, such as macro-actions (Theocharous & Kaelbling, 2003) and learned skills (Konidaris et al.,
2011) usually have richer semantics, benefiting LLMs to leverage their prior knowledge.


4   TWOSOME

In this section, we present TWOSOME, a general online framework to align LLMs with embodied
environments via RL. We first describe how to deploy LLMs as embodied agents to generate valid
actions. Secondly, we investigate the influence of lengths of action prompts on the generated policies
and propose two normalization techniques, i.e., token normalization and word normalization, to al-


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Observation Prompt
                             You see a tomato,                          pick    up    the    tom       ato             0.4
                        a bowl and a cutting board.
                          To make a tomato salad,
                                                                        take   the    bow      l                     0.3
                           you should first

                                                         LLM         move       to    the   cutting   board    0.1
                             Action Prompt
                            pick up the tomato                          ch      op    the    tom       ato      0.15
                               take the bowl
                         move to the cutting board                   serve     the     d      ish             0.05
                             chop the tomato
                               serve the dish                                  Token probability               Policy


Figure 2: Overview of how TWOSOME generates a policy using joint probabilities of actions. The
color areas in the token blocks indicate the probabilities of the corresponding token in the actions.

leviate the unbalance over actions. Then, we design a parameter-efficient training method under the
PPO framework. Finally, we summarize four principles for efficient prompt design for TWOSOME.

4.1   VALID P OLICY G ENERATION

Actions directly generated by LLMs could be invalid in environments. This issue can be partially
resolved by prompt design, i.e., adding the restrictions of actions in the prompt. However, most of
the current LLMs cannot exactly follow the restrictions, especially for small and medium LLMs,
i.e., less than 65B. Therefore, novel methods are required to let LLMs generate valid policies.
Instead of letting LLMs generate actions directly, TWOSOME queries the scores of all available
actions from LLMs. These scores are used to determine the probabilities of executing the actions,
which is similar to SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023). The process of the generation of policy is illustrated
in Figure 2. Specifically, we associate a unique semantic prompt, e.g., pick up the tomato, to each
action in the embodied environments, named action prompt, and observation prompt for the raw
observation. The action prompt ak ∈ A is a sequence of tokens ak = {wk1 , . . . , wkNk } where Nk is
the length of the action prompt k. We note that the action prompts are not necessarily of the same
length. At each step, the observation prompt s ∈ S is concatenated with each of the valid action
prompts ak , which forms the input of the LLM. We use the probabilities of tokens generated by the
LLMs to compute the probability of the action prompt. Note that this probability differs from the
probability of executing the action in the environment. For convenience, we call this probability
token-level probability. The token-level probability of ak is
                                                             YNk
                Ptoken (ak |s) = P (wk1 , . . . , wkNk |s) =     P (wki |s, wk1 , . . . , wki−1 )    (1)
                                                                  i=1
Normally, scores provided by LLMs are the loglikelihood of each token, namely the logits,
log Ptoken . We use softmax to normalize token-level probabilities over actions to get the policy:
                                                      exp(log Ptoken (ak |s))
                                P (ak |s) = P                                                                          (2)
                                                      a∈A exp(log Ptoken (a|s))

There are two main advantages of this method: i) the generated policy is always valid for execution
in the embodied environments and ii) leveraging the compositionability, our method can be applied
to enormous actions representable by the vocabulary.

4.2   ACTION P ROMPT N ORMALIZATION

In this subsection, we will illustrate the issue in the method presented in the above section and
present two normalization techniques to alleviate them.

Issue of Eq. (1). One key issue in Eq. (1) is that the probability of each token P (wki |·) is always
less than 1. Therefore, longer action prompts tend to have lower token-level probabilities, even
though the longer action prompts may be more reasonable in the environment. For example, in
Figure 2, pick up the tomato has more tokens than serve the dish but is the optimal action in terms of
the given observation. A simple remedy for this issue is forcing all action prompts to have similar
lengths, which is the case in GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) where all primitive actions have similar
lengths. However, this will harm the applicability of the methods which makes the design of the


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


action prompts difficult, even impossible sometimes. Therefore, we propose two normalization
techniques, token normalization and word normalization, to address this issue.

Token and Word Normalization. A simple idea to solve this issue is to normalize the token-level
probabilities of the actions with the number of tokens, which can be defined as:
                                   tn
                              log Ptoken (ak |s) = log Ptoken (ak |s)/Nk                           (3)
We note that log Ptoken (ak |s) will always be negative, the longer action prompts will have smaller
negative values, therefore, dividing by the number of tokens will make the token-level probabilities
of longer action prompts fall in the same magnitude with short action prompts. Another option
is that instead of dividing the number of tokens, we can normalize the token-level probability by
dividing the number of words, i.e.,
                                  wn
                             log Ptoken (ak |s) = log Ptoken (ak |s)/Wk                            (4)
where Wk is the number of words in the action prompt k. For the example of pick up the tomato,
Nk = 5 while Wk = 4.

Comparing the Two Normalizations. Though token normalization can eliminate the influence
brought by the length of action prompts, it is slightly excessive. We observe that if a word is divided
into several tokens, the first token usually has a relatively low probability, while the probabilities
of the rest of the tokens tend to be remarkably high, which are often almost close to 100%. For
example, another important action, chop, in the Overcooked environment, is made up of two tokens,
ch and op. The probabilities of ch are usually in the range of 0 − 20%, depending on the priority
given by the LLM agent according to the observation, however, once ch appears, the probability
of op will boost to 90 − 99% in the next word since there are no other words starting with ch
in the observation prompts. The same phenomenon is also observed in tomao and dish as shown
in Figure 2. LLMs discovered and learned this statistical law during the autoregressive training
process. Thus, instead of normalizing the probabilities of actions according to the number of tokens,
it is more reasonable to regard the several tokens made up of one word as an integrated symbol.
Therefore, word normalization is a more suitable normalization, where the log probabilities of action
get averaged according to the number of words in the action prompts.

4.3   PARAMETER -E FFICIENT PPO FINETUNING

In this section, we present the parameter-efficient finetuning method to align LLMs and embodied
environments with the generated policies under the PPO framework. We first introduce the network
design and then the training procedure.
Architecture. As shown in Figure 3, we add ad-
ditional MLP layers to the last transformer block of                  value       action
LLaMA-7B model as the critic. The critic’s MLPs use
the last token of the observation prompt as input and                 MLP
output the estimated value of the observation prompt.                                          Env
On the other hand, the actor is formed by the frozen              LLaMA-7B
                                                                                  LoRA
LLaMA-7B model with the augmentation of LoRA pa-                    (frozen)
rameters. We also note that the dropout layers would
bring additional training instabilities, because the ran-     obs prompt & reward
domness of the dropout may violate the KL divergence
constraint in PPO, therefore, we do not use dropout in
our LoRA modules. During training, only the MLPs for Figure 3: Parameter-efficient architecture
the critic and the LoRA parameters for the actor are updated, which makes the training efficient. The
LLaMA-7B model can also serve as the reference model to regularize the update of the parameters,
which is not explored in this work. Though we focus on the decoder-only models, our method can
be seamlessly extended to the encoder-decoder architecture, e.g., T5 (Raffel et al., 2020).
Training. The training procedure generally follows PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), which is demon-
strated to be effective in finetuning LLMs with human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022). We observe
the training instability when updating the actor multiple times with the same data, which is also


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observed in DeepSpeed Chat blog2 . Therefore, every sampled data is discarded after training once.
Given the fact that the newly added MLPs in the critic are initialized randomly, while the LoRA
parameters in the actor are initialized as zero, i.e., the output of the actor is exactly the same as the
LLaMA-7B model, which is reasonable, therefore, a larger learning rate for the critic and a smaller
learning rate for the actor is preferred for stable training and fast convergence.
Inference. During inference, the critic is discarded and only the actor is needed. Furthermore, the
alignment of the LLMs and embodied environments is fully encoded in the LoRA parameters, which
is normally 20 times less than the LLMs, e.g., 4.2M for LLaMA-7B. Therefore, the LoRA parame-
ters can be a plug-and-play module of LLMs for generalizability across different environments.

4.4   P ROMPT D ESIGN

The prompts of observations and actions will significantly influence the generated policies by LLMs,
which is a path orthogonal way to the finetuning for the alignment between LLMs and embodied
environments. We summarize four principles for designing efficient prompts:
• Prompts of observations and actions should be cohesive for concatenation. Observation prompts
  end with you should and the next step is to, indicating the start of action prompts.
• Articles, i.e., the, a, and an, are important for action prompts. Most action prompts consist of a
  verb and a noun, e.g., pick up the tomato. As LLMs are trained with high-quality corpus, they are
  sensitive to the articles. Therefore, pick up the tomato is better than pick up tomato, where the
  latter leads to the extremely low probability on tomato.
• Preferred actions should appear in the observation prompt. As observed in (Xu et al., 2022; Fu
  et al., 2021), LLMs tend to assign higher probabilities to the repetitive tokens. Therefore, we
  can encourage LLMs to assign higher probability on preferred actions by emphasizing the nouns
  several times in the observation prompts. For example, if the observation prompt is I see a tomato.
  My task is to make a tomato salad. I should, then the tomato will have a relatively high probability.
• The same action can have different action prompts under different observations. For example, in
  Overcooked, when the agent carries a bowl in hand, pick up the toamto can be replaced with put
  the tomato in the plate, where both action prompts have the same function in the environment, the
  latter one better fits with the context and thus has higher probability.
The objective of the prompt design is to represent the observations and actions in the understandable
manner of LLMs, thus improving the alignment between LLMs and embodied environments.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTS S ETUP

We deploy our methods on the LLaMA-7B model with half-precision and compare the performance
among five methods: PPO (adapted from CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022a)), TWOSOME without
finetuning (similar to SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023) with affordance value set to 1), TWOSOME
without action prompt normalization (similar to GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) under decoder-only ar-
chitecture and high-level actions) and TWOSOME with token normalization or word normalization.
We mainly evaluate these methods in a typical decision-making environment, Overcooked, and a
simulated physical household environment, VirtualHome.

Overcooked An agent is placed in the 7×7 Overcooked kitchen, aiming to make and serve a
tomato salad and tomato-lettuce salad with the provided ingredients and tools in two tasks shown
in Figure 4a and 4b. In the second task, we add an additional ingredient, onion as a disruptor, to
show the robustness of our method. The agent needs to explore and learn the correct order to cook
the dish with the provided macro-actions, such as Chop, Get-Tomato, and Go-Cutting-Board. The
environment is partially observable. The agent only observes the objects within 5×5 square centered
on the agent. The reward involves +0.2 for chopping a correct ingredient, +1 terminal reward for
delivering the correct dish, −0.1 for delivering any wrong item, and −0.001 for every time step.
The environment is adapted from Xiao et al. (2022) and Wu et al. (2021).
  2
    https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeedExamples/blob/master/
applications/DeepSpeed-Chat/training/step3_rlhf_finetuning/README.md


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a) Tomato Salad                                 (b) Tomato-lettuce Salad


               (c) Food Preparation                                  (d) Entertainment

Figure 4: Experimental environments. Figure 4a and 4b show two tasks in Overcooked. Figure 4c
and 4d show two tasks in VirtualHome.
VirtualHome An agent is placed in a fully furnished household with various rich objects. Com-
pared to Overcooked, this environment is more complex with a larger action space. The agent uses
macro-actions to interact with the environment such as walk to the living room, turn on the TV and
sit on the sofa. As shown in Figure 4c and 4d, we design two tasks. For the first task in Figure 4c,
the agent needs to find the cold pancake on the table and heat it with the microwave in the kitchen.
For the second task shown in Figure 4d, the agent plans to have some entertainment so it wants to
find something to enjoy while watching TV. Thus, it needs to pick up chips and milk in the kitchen,
bring them to the living room, turn on the TV, sit on the sofa and enjoy. The challenge arises when
the agent already holding both the milk and chips, lacks an additional hand to turn on the TV. Con-
sequently, it needs to learn to put at least one item on the nearby coffee table before operating the
TV. Both tasks adopt a sparse reward setting, only when the task is finished, will the agent receive
+1 reward. The environment is also partially observable. The agent can only see the objects in the
current room. The environment is adapted from (Puig et al., 2018). A more detailed introduction of
these two environments can be found in Appendix C. Our parameter-efficient framework enables us
to complete all the experiments in one NVIDIA Tesla A100 40GB GPU. All the hyperparameters
can be found in Appendix D.2. Finally, we provide the policy visualization and a detailed analysis
of prompt design for all tasks in Appendix E and F.

5.2   T HE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT N ORMALIZATIONS IN TWOSOME
Figure 5a shows the performance of finetuned TWOSOMEs. TWOSOME with word normalization
succeeds in learning the optimal policy among all tasks, exhibiting great performance, and high sam-
ple efficiency over other methods, which is consistent with the analysis in Section 4.2. Except for the
second Overcooked task, which is more difficult, TWOSOME without normalization learns quickly
at the beginning but suffers a severe sudden drop in the the other three tasks. Without normaliza-
tion, the unbalance over action distribution can accelerate the training process if the shorter action
prompts happen to be reasonable actions but introduce extra training instability. TWOSOME with
token normalization alleviates this instability slightly excessively, resulting in less data efficiency
and slow convergence, as shown in the two overcooked tasks.

5.3   TWOSOME VS . BASELINES
Figure 5b shows the performance among the typical RL method, PPO, prompt tuning method, TWO-
SOME without finetuning, and our best method, TWOSOME with word normalization.

Comparison with Prompt Tuning. TWOSOME without finetuning fully relies on the capabilities
of pre-trained LLMs with the designed prompts, demonstrating the LLM’s decision-making ability


                                                  7
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               1.0        Tomato Salad         1.0     Tomato-lettuce Salad                 Food Preparation                    Entertainment
                                                                                   0.8                               0.6
               0.8                             0.8
Total Return   0.6                             0.6                                 0.6                               0.4
               0.4                             0.4
               0.2                             0.2                                 0.4                               0.2
               0.0                             0.0
               0.2                             0.2                                 0.2                               0.0
                     0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k         0k 100k 200k 300k 400k 500k         0k 10k 20k 30k 40k 50k            0k   50k 100k 150k 200k
                              Steps                            Steps                              Steps                             Steps
                              Without Normaliztion           Token Normaliztion             Word Normalization             Optimal
                                         (a) Comparison of performance among finetuned TWOSOME.
               1.0        Tomato Salad         1.0     Tomato-lettuce Salad                 Food Preparation                    Entertainment
                                                                                   0.8                               0.6
               0.8
               0.6                             0.5
Total Return


                                                                                   0.6                               0.4
               0.4
                                               0.0
               0.2                                                                 0.4                               0.2
               0.0                             0.5
               0.2                                                                 0.2                               0.0
                     0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k         0k 100k 200k 300k 400k 500k         0k 10k 20k 30k 40k 50k            0k   50k 100k 150k 200k
                              Steps                            Steps                              Steps                             Steps
                                      PPO             Without Fintuning            Word Normalization            Optimal
                       (b) Comparison of performance among TWOSOME with word normalization and baselines.
   Figure 5: Comparison of performance among PPO and four TWOSOME variants: i) without fine-
   tuning, ii) without normalization, iii) with token normalization, and iv) with word normalization.
   PPO masks unrelated actions in both VirtualHome tasks. The results are averaged over 3 seeds. The
   non-trained method is averaged over 100 episodes.
   and the difficulty of the task. For the second task, which is the most difficult task, the non-finetuned
   LLM agent fails to finish the task completely. For the other three tasks, the low total returns with
   large variations indicate that the non-finetuned LLM agent can only finish these tasks with low
   probabilities. Prompt tuning can improve LLMs in solving easy decision-making tasks but difficult
   to solve complex and long-horizontal tasks with more interferents in the environment. We conclude
   that all training methods including PPO and all TWOSOME variants surpass the performance of the
   prompt tuning method, emphasizing the necessity of aligning LLMs with environments via RL.

   Comparison with PPO. TWOSOME with word normalization succeeds in learning the optimal
   policies in both Overcooked tasks using 10k and 80k sampled data, respectively. In contrast, PPO
   fails to learn the optimal policy and gets stuck in the suboptimal due to partial observability. For the
   more complex second task, PPO even needs more than 500K steps to converge. As for the two tasks
   in VirtualHome, we find that vanilla PPO cannot deal with the large action space and learns nothing,
   as shown in Appendix C.3.1. So we mask all the unrelated actions in VirtualHome for PPO. The
   masked PPO manages to learn the optimal policy in the task of Food Preparation but still fails in the
   task of Entertainment. The results demonstrate that by leveraging the power of LLM, our method
   can defeat the traditional RL methods in solving decision-making tasks with large action spaces.
   All finetuned TWOSOME methods, no matter whether they are normalized, manage to overcome
   partial observability and achieve optimal performance in at least two seeds in the two Overcooked
   tasks. Even though the agent does not see the target object, e.g., tomato, it can still appear in the
   goal part of the observation prompt, such as your task is to make a salad consisting of tomato, main-
   taining the high probabilities of tomato related actions, while other unrelated objects like onion, not
   appeared in neither the observation nor the observation prompt, remain relatively low probabilities.
   This feature greatly facilitates the exploration process and helps agents to sample good actions.

    5.4              O PEN - VOCABULARY TASK G ENERALIZATION

   We also evaluate the generalization ability of TWOSOME in eight new unseen tasks. LLMs’ open-
   vocabulary feature enables TWOSOME to transfer learned skills to different tasks, while traditional
   RL agents do not have such ability. We compare the performance between our finetuned TWO-
   SOME and non-tuned TWOSOME. Figure 6 shows that for the first four tasks, which are similar to
   the agent’s original trained task, though non-tuned TWOSOME can somehow finish the tasks, fine-


                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          Task Generalization
               1.0                                                                              TWOSOME without Fintuning
                                                                                                TWOSOME with Word Normalization
Success Rate   0.8
               0.6
               0.4
               0.2
               0.0
                         Cheese   Hamburger   Apple Pie   Pizza       Washing Plate   Laundry   Food Preparation Entertainment
                                                                  Tasks

Figure 6: Task Generalization Tests. TWOSOME without Finetuning and TWOSOME with word
normalization are tested in eight unseen tasks. Each task is tested over 100 episodes. For the first
four tasks, Cheese, Hamburger, Apple Pie and Pizza, we replace the pancake in the original Food
Preparation task with the corresponding food to see whether the agent can still finish the task. The
following Washing Plate and Laundry tasks are more different but still have similar procedures to
Food Preparation (agent needs to put dishes or clothes into the dishwasher or washing machine). For
the last two crossover tests, TWOSOME agent trained in Food Preparation is tested in Entertainment
and TWOSOME trained in Entertainment is tested in Food Preparation.
tuned TWOSOME achieves perfect performance. Replacing objects has little impact on finetuned
TWOSOME. For the following two more different tasks, Washing Plate and Laundry, there is an ob-
vious drop in the success rate of non-tuned TWOSOME, while finetuned TWOSOME still manages
to complete the task. For the last two crossover tasks, where agents are tested in a completely differ-
ent task, TWOSOME still exhibits remarkable performance. Especially in the Entertainment task,
where non-tuned TWOSOME can barely finish the task and finetuned TWOSOME still maintains a
97% success rate. Total returns of each task are provided in Appendix B.2.

5.5                  I MPACT OF O NLINE F INETUNING

To investigate the impacts of online fine- Table 1: Zero-shot performance on Language Model
tuning on the LLM’s abilities, we eval- Evaluation Harness (Gao et al., 2021).
uate the models trained by TWOSOME
with word normalization in Virtualhome                          ARC_C HellaSwag PIQA MMLU
on widely used NLP benchmarks (Gao
et al., 2021). The models trained in            LLaMA-7B-hf       0.42       0.57     0.79    0.33
Food Preparation and Entertainment are TWOSOME-FP 0.43                       0.58     0.79    0.32
named TWOSOME-FP and TWOSOME-                   TWOSOME-E         0.43       0.58     0.79    0.30
E, respectively. The four benchmarks are
ARC_C, HellaSwag, PIQA and MMLU, which are also reported in Touvron et al. (2023). Results of
the zero-shot performance are displayed in Table 1, which demonstrates that there is no significant
loss of the ability of the language understanding of LLMs after the aligning with embodied environ-
ments, and even sometimes brings minor improvements. The full results are in Appendix B.3.

6                    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose TWOSOME, a general online framework for efficiently aligning LLMs
with embodied environments via RL to solve decision-making tasks without requiring any prepared
datasets or prior knowledge of environments and without significant loss of LLMs’ original ability.
Instead of letting LLMs generate actions directly, TWOSOME is more controllable and feasible with
better interpretability, since the impact of tuning prompts can be clearly reflected by the change of
action probabilities. TWOSOME with word normalization exhibits significantly better sample effi-
ciency and performance compared to traditional RL methods and prompt tuning methods. Moreover,
TWOSOME exhibits a remarkable generalization ability to transfer learned skills and knowledge to
unseen tasks. However, our method suffers a major limitation that training a PPO agent from scratch
is far faster and cheaper than finetuning an LLM. TWOSOME needs to feed all the valid actions to
the LLMs for every action sampling, resulting in multiple times the amount of computation and a
small batch size. We hope this work can provide a step toward the general autonomous agent, where
LLMs can self-improve by interacting with the world and harvesting true knowledge from practice.


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
This work does not use any dataset. All the TWOSOME experimental code and environment code
of Overcooked and VirtualHome are included in the Supplementary Materials. We also provide
videos for each task recorded by our best agent in the Supplementary Materials. All the hyperpa-
rameters and network architecture we use can be found in Appendix D.1 and D.2. We provide the
policy visualization and a detailed analysis of prompt design for all tasks in Appendix E and F.
Our parameter-efficient framework enables us to complete all the experiments in one NVIDIA Tesla
A100 40GB GPU. Additional experimental results such as success rate and NLP benchmarks can be
found in Appendix B. A detailed introduction to the Overcooked and VirtualHome environments,
including observation space, action space, and macro actions we use can be found in Appendix C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore and DSO National Labo-
ratories under the AI Singapore Programme (AISGAward No: AISG2-GC-2023-009). This research
is also supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its Industry Alignment
Fund – Pre-positioning (IAF-PP) Funding Initiative. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views
of National Research Foundation, Singapore. The computational work for this work was partially
performed on resources of the National Supercomputing Centre, Singapore (https://www.nscc.sg).

R EFERENCES
Josh Abramson, Arun Ahuja, Iain Barr, Arthur Brussee, Federico Carnevale, Mary Cassin, Rachita
  Chhaparia, Stephen Clark, Bogdan Damoc, Andrew Dudzik, et al. Imitating interactive intelli-
  gence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05672, 2020.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318, 2023.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02662, 2023.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of
 grounded language learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08272, 2018.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Ishita Dasgupta, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Kenneth Marino, Arun Ahuja, Sheila Babayan, Felix Hill,
   and Rob Fergus. Collaborating with language models for embodied reasoning. In Second Work-
   shop on Language and Reinforcement Learning, 2022.
Ning Ding, Yujia Qin, Guang Yang, Fuchao Wei, Zonghan Yang, Yusheng Su, Shengding Hu, Yulin
  Chen, Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, et al. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large-scale pre-trained
  language models. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(3):220–235, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. PaLM-E: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. MineDojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08853, 2022.
Zihao Fu, Wai Lam, Anthony Man-Cho So, and Bei Shi. A theoretical analysis of the repetition
  problem in text generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  12848–12856, 2021.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence
  Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric
  Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot lan-
  guage model evaluation, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  5371628.
Yicong Hong, Qi Wu, Yuankai Qi, Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo, and Stephen Gould. Vln-bert: A
  recurrent vision-and-language bert for navigation. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1643–1653, 2021.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  NLP. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hengyuan Hu and Dorsa Sadigh. Language instructed reinforcement learning for human-AI coor-
  dination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07297, 2023.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand JulienDossa Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty,
  Kinal Mehta, and João GM Araújo. CleanRL: High-quality single-file implementations of deep
  reinforcement learning algorithms. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):12585–
  12602, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147, 2022b.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022c.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-
  Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with
  multimodal prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03094, 2022.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Megha Srivastava, Percy Liang, and Dorsa Sadigh. LILA: Language-
  informed latent actions. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1379–1390, 2021.
Apoorv Khandelwal, Luca Weihs, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Simple but ef-
  fective: CLIP embeddings for embodied AI. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14809–14818, 2022.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.
George Konidaris, Scott Kuindersma, Roderic Grupen, and Andrew Barto. Autonomous skill acqui-
  sition on a mobile manipulator. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  pp. 1468–1473, 2011.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Xinyang Geng, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Offline Q-
  learning on diverse multi-task data both scales and generalizes. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 3045–3059, 2021.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, Jacob Andreas, Igor Mordatch, Antonio Torralba, and Yuke
  Zhu. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2022.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 4582–4597, 2021.
J. Liang, Wenlong Huang, F. Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Peter R. Florence,
   and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. ArXiv,
   abs/2209.07753, 2022.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
Arjun Majumdar, Ayush Shrivastava, Stefan Lee, Peter Anderson, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra.
  Improving vision-and-language navigation with image-text pairs from the web. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part VI 16, pp. 259–274. Springer, 2020.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Simone Parisi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Senthil Purushwalkam, and Abhinav Kumar Gupta. The un-
  surprising effectiveness of pre-trained vision models for control. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2022.
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Tor-
  ralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Allen Z Ren, Bharat Govil, Tsung-Yen Yang, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Anirudha Majumdar.
  Leveraging language for accelerated learning of tool manipulation. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 1531–1541, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hug-
  gingGPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in Huggingface. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: An autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11302, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Georgios Theocharous and Leslie Kaelbling. Approximate planning in pomdps with macro-actions.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 16, 2003.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023b.
Sarah A Wu, Rose E Wang, James A Evans, Joshua B Tenenbaum, David C Parkes, and Max
  Kleiman-Weiner. Too many cooks: Bayesian inference for coordinating multi-agent collabora-
  tion. Topics in Cognitive Science, 13(2):414–432, 2021.
Jiannan Xiang, Tianhua Tao, Yi Gu, Tianmin Shu, Zirui Wang, Zichao Yang, and Zhiting Hu.
   Language models meet world models: Embodied experiences enhance language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2305.10626, 2023.
Yuchen Xiao, Weihao Tan, and Christopher Amato. Asynchronous actor-critic for multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Jin Xu, Xiaojiang Liu, Jianhao Yan, Deng Cai, Huayang Li, and Jian Li. Learning to break the loop:
   Analyzing and mitigating repetitions for neural text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02369,
   2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Andy Zeng, Adrian S. Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek
  Purohit, Michael S. Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Peter R. Flo-
  rence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. ArXiv,
  abs/2204.00598, 2022.
Longtao Zheng, Rundong Wang, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar
  prompting with memory for computer control. 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    M ORE R ELATED W ORK
Embodied Agent with LLMs. The successful integration of language as a semantically rich input
for interactive decision-making highlights the crucial role of LLMs in facilitating interaction and
decision-making processes (Abramson et al., 2020; Karamcheti et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022). LLMs
are also applied in various environments to aid robot navigation (Parisi et al., 2022; Hong et al.,
2021; Majumdar et al., 2020) and manipulation (Jiang et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2023; Khandelwal
et al., 2022). Recently, there have been a large number of methods that utilize LLMs to enhance
planning and reasoning capabilities in embodied agents. SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023) assesses
the affordance of candidate actions by multiplying their probabilities under LLMs with a value
function. Zeng et al. (2022) combine the LLM with a visual-language model and a pre-trained
language-conditioned policy (Shridhar et al., 2022) to enable open vocabulary robotic tasks. Huang
et al. (2022b) demonstrate that LLMs can be employed for planning and executing simple household
tasks. They ground LLM-generated actions by comparing their embeddings with a predefined list of
acceptable actions. To incorporate environment feedback, Inner Monologue (Huang et al., 2022c)
extends SayCan using a closed-loop principle. This principle is also applied in related works such
as (Yao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022c; Kim et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022;
Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b;a) to continuously monitor agent behaviors and refine and
adjust plans accordingly for tasks such as computer automation, Minecraft, etc. Furthermore, there
are approaches that prompt LLMs to generate temporal-abstracted actions (Zheng et al., 2023).
Dasgupta et al. (2022) employ the LLM as a planner and success detector for an agent with their actor
module necessitates pre-training with RL to enable the agent to follow natural language instructions.
While these works demonstrate impressive results, they rely too heavily on the inherent capabilities
of powerful LLMs, like GPT4 and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), which are difficult to apply to
smaller LLMs with weaker reasoning abilities, like LLaMA-7B.
Concurrent to our work, GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) utilizes RL finetuning to achieve functional
grounding of LLMs. However, they focus on simple primitive actions (turn left, turn right, go
forward, etc.) evaluated in toy environments, BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) with a much
smaller encoder-decoder LLM, Flan-T5-780M. These primitive actions have a similar number of
tokens and less meaningful semantics, resulting in underutilizing the capabilities of LLMs, and
failing to observe the impact of prompt design and address the unbalance over action space, resulting
in additional instability and poor robustness.

Finetuning LLMs. Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) can significantly reduce the number of
parameters to tune LLMs while with minor loss of the performance (Ding et al., 2023). Prompt
tuning (Lester et al., 2021) and prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) prepend additional tunable tokens
to the input or hidden layers, and adapter tuning (Houlsby et al., 2019) introduces the adapter,
i.e., the bottleneck layers, to LLMs, where only the introduced tokens and adapters are finetuned.
Recently, low-rank adaption (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) introduces low-rank matrices to approximate
parameter updates.
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) proves that RL is an
effective way to make alignments with human preferences and proposes a novel perspective regard-
ing LLMs as actors under actor-critic framework. Our work is also motivated by this method. While
RLHF needs to train a reward model to simulate human preferences, these signals are naturally
present in most RL environments, which makes it possible to align LLMs with certain environments.
Another concurrent work (Xiang et al., 2023) leverages VirtualHome to collect embodied experi-
ences by random sampling and use supervised learning to finetune LLMs to these embodied knowl-
edge. They finally apply a simple RL method, MCTS, to plan without training, instead of directly
generating plans. It is worth pointing out that our method also applies their supervised learning pro-
cess to learn the embodied knowledge and get more familiar with the environments. Our online PPO
sampling is much more efficient and feasible than their random sampling, e.g. in the overcooked
tasks, it is almost impossible to complete the task by random sampling. In addition, an online learn-
ing PPO is obviously better than a simple MCTS without training. Compared with this work, our
method is a simpler end-to-end online framework, which can automatically acquire new knowledge
and solve decision-making tasks by interacting with environments without any prepared datasets.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1   S UCCESS R ATE IN OVERCOOKED AND V IRTUAL H OME

Besides the total reward provided in 5b, here we also provide the final success rates of all methods
in Table 2, which tells almost the same story. Our TWOSOME with word normalization method
achieves a 100% success rate across all tasks, exhibiting great stability and remarkable performance.

Table 2: Final success Rate of different methods in Overcooked and VirtualHome. Results are
averaged over three seeds. Each seed is run for 100 episodes. Norm is short for normalization.

                                                                       TWOSOME
         Task                 PPO
                                          W/O Finetuning          W/O Norm Token Norm               Word Norm
    Tomato Salad             1±0           0.36 ± 0.04            0.67 ± 0.47  1±0                    1±0
 Tomato-lettuce Salad        1±0              0±0                    1±0       1±0                    1±0
   Food Preparation          1±0           0.81 ± 0.01               1±0       1±0                    1±0
    Entertainment         0.33 ± 0.47      0.45 ± 0.05            0.67 ± 0.47  1±0                    1±0


B.2   P ERFORMANCE OF TWOSOME AND S AY C AN IN E IGHT U NSEEN TASKS

Table 3 and 4 show the final success rate and total return of our best method TWOSOME with word
normalization and our baseline, SayCan(non-finetuned TWSOME) in eight unseen tasks. Each task
is run for 100 episodes. TWOSOME exhibits superior generalization across all tasks.

           Table 3: Final success rate of TWOSOME and SayCan in eight unseen tasks.

   Task         Cheese    Hamhurger     Applepie    Pizza      Washing Plate    Laundry     Food Preparation    Entertainment
 TWOSOME          1          1             1          1             1              1              0.77              0.97
  SayCan         0.66       0.79         0.85       0.64           0.65          0.35             0.66              0.04



              Table 4: Total return of TWOSOME and SayCan in eight unseen tasks.
   Task         Cheese    Hamhurger    Applepie       Pizza     Washing Plate    Laundry    Food Preparation   Entertainment
 TWOSOME      0.77±0.01   0.77±0.01   0.77±0.01    0.77±0.01     0.77±0.02      0.76±0.04      0.26±0.24        0.43±0.14
  SayCan      0.18±0.17   0.21±0.17   0.23±0.17    0.17±0.18     0.18±0.17      0.08±0.13      0.20±0.16        0.01±005


B.3   E VALUATION ON NLP B ENCHMARKS

To investigate the impacts of the PPO online finetuning on the LLM’s abilities, we evaluate the
models trained by TWOSOME with word normalization in the virtual home tasks on widely used
NLP benchmasrks (Gao et al., 2021). The models trained in Food Preparation and Entertainment
are named TWOSOME-FP and TWOSOME-E, respectively. The four benchmarks are ARC_C,
HellaSwag, PIQA and MMLU, which are also reported in (Touvron et al., 2023). The results on
ARC_Challenge, HellaSwag and PIQA are displayed in Table 5 and the results of MMLU are dis-
played in Table 6. All results are calculated following the default configurations in (Gao et al.,
2021).

                Table 5: Zero-shot performance on Common Sense Reasoning tasks.

                                  LLaMA            TWOSOME-FP           TWOSOME-E
                   ARC_C        0.42 ± 0.01         0.43 ± 0.01           0.43 ± 0.01
                  HellaSwag     0.57 ± 0.00         0.58 ± 0.00           0.58 ± 0.00
                    PIQA        0.79 ± 0.01         0.79 ± 0.01           0.79 ± 0.01


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 6: Zero-shot performance on Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU).

                                               LLaMA     TWOSOME-FP     TWOSOME-E
                abstract_algebra           0.33 ± 0.05    0.30 ± 0.05     0.28 ± 0.05
                     anatomy               0.38 ± 0.04    0.39 ± 0.04     0.36 ± 0.04
                    astronomy              0.34 ± 0.04    0.32 ± 0.04     0.24 ± 0.03
                 business_ethics           0.37 ± 0.05    0.31 ± 0.05     0.32 ± 0.05
              clinical_knowledge           0.37 ± 0.03    0.35 ± 0.03     0.31 ± 0.03
                college_biology            0.37 ± 0.04    0.35 ± 0.04     0.34 ± 0.04
               college_chemistry           0.28 ± 0.05    0.30 ± 0.05     0.27 ± 0.04
         college_computer_science          0.25 ± 0.04    0.26 ± 0.04     0.31 ± 0.05
             college_mathematics           0.34 ± 0.05    0.35 ± 0.05     0.31 ± 0.05
               college_medicine            0.31 ± 0.04    0.32 ± 0.04     0.27 ± 0.03
                college_physics            0.25 ± 0.04    0.25 ± 0.04     0.20 ± 0.04
              computer_security            0.38 ± 0.05    0.40 ± 0.05     0.40 ± 0.05
              conceptual_physics           0.32 ± 0.03    0.34 ± 0.03     0.31 ± 0.03
                  econometrics             0.23 ± 0.04    0.20 ± 0.04     0.21 ± 0.04
            electrical_engineering         0.26 ± 0.04    0.26 ± 0.04     0.26 ± 0.04
          elementary_mathematics           0.24 ± 0.02    0.23 ± 0.02     0.23 ± 0.02
                  formal_logic             0.34 ± 0.04    0.32 ± 0.04     0.27 ± 0.04
                   global_facts            0.32 ± 0.05    0.29 ± 0.05     0.26 ± 0.04
             high_school_biology           0.32 ± 0.03    0.32 ± 0.03     0.27 ± 0.03
           high_school_chemistry           0.21 ± 0.03    0.21 ± 0.03     0.19 ± 0.03
      high_school_computer_science         0.24 ± 0.04    0.27 ± 0.04     0.28 ± 0.05
       high_school_european_history        0.40 ± 0.04    0.38 ± 0.04     0.41 ± 0.04
           high_school_geography           0.28 ± 0.03    0.29 ± 0.03     0.26 ± 0.03
   high_school_government_and_politics     0.30 ± 0.03    0.30 ± 0.03     0.27 ± 0.03
       high_school_macroeconomics          0.28 ± 0.02    0.26 ± 0.02     0.24 ± 0.02
          high_school_mathematics          0.24 ± 0.03    0.25 ± 0.03     0.27 ± 0.03
       high_school_microeconomics          0.26 ± 0.03    0.26 ± 0.03     0.24 ± 0.03
             high_school_physics           0.26 ± 0.04    0.27 ± 0.04     0.28 ± 0.04
          high_school_psychology           0.33 ± 0.02    0.32 ± 0.02     0.27 ± 0.02
            high_school_statistics         0.22 ± 0.03    0.19 ± 0.03     0.17 ± 0.03
           high_school_us_history          0.40 ± 0.03    0.41 ± 0.03     0.40 ± 0.03
         high_school_world_history         0.38 ± 0.03    0.40 ± 0.03     0.42 ± 0.03
                  human_aging              0.43 ± 0.03    0.40 ± 0.03     0.41 ± 0.03
                human_sexuality            0.34 ± 0.04    0.32 ± 0.04     0.34 ± 0.04
               international_law           0.47 ± 0.05    0.43 ± 0.05     0.36 ± 0.04
                  jurisprudence            0.36 ± 0.05    0.35 ± 0.05     0.35 ± 0.05
                logical_fallacies          0.36 ± 0.04    0.35 ± 0.04     0.26 ± 0.03
               machine_learning            0.27 ± 0.04    0.28 ± 0.04     0.33 ± 0.04
                   management              0.28 ± 0.04    0.31 ± 0.05     0.22 ± 0.04
                    marketing              0.38 ± 0.03    0.38 ± 0.03     0.39 ± 0.03
               medical_genetics            0.42 ± 0.05    0.38 ± 0.05     0.36 ± 0.05
                  miscellaneous            0.45 ± 0.02    0.45 ± 0.02     0.42 ± 0.02
                 moral_disputes            0.35 ± 0.03    0.34 ± 0.03     0.29 ± 0.02
                moral_scenarios            0.24 ± 0.01    0.24 ± 0.01     0.24 ± 0.01
                     nutrition             0.33 ± 0.03    0.33 ± 0.03     0.30 ± 0.03
                   philosophy              0.37 ± 0.03    0.34 ± 0.03     0.27 ± 0.03
                    prehistory             0.39 ± 0.03    0.34 ± 0.03     0.31 ± 0.03
           professional_accounting         0.27 ± 0.03    0.28 ± 0.03     0.26 ± 0.03
                professional_law           0.28 ± 0.01    0.28 ± 0.01     0.29 ± 0.01
            professional_medicine          0.25 ± 0.03    0.24 ± 0.03     0.25 ± 0.03
          professional_psychology          0.34 ± 0.02    0.31 ± 0.02     0.30 ± 0.02
                public_relations           0.35 ± 0.05    0.33 ± 0.04     0.32 ± 0.04
                security_studies           0.27 ± 0.03    0.27 ± 0.03     0.23 ± 0.03
                    sociology              0.41 ± 0.03    0.37 ± 0.03     0.37 ± 0.03
               us_foreign_policy           0.42 ± 0.05    0.41 ± 0.05     0.41 ± 0.05
                     virology              0.36 ± 0.04    0.36 ± 0.04     0.33 ± 0.04
                world_religions            0.46 ± 0.04    0.48 ± 0.04     0.44 ± 0.04
                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     D ETAILS OF E MBODIED E NVIRONMENTS
In this section, we present the details of the embodied environments Overcooked and VirtualHome.

C.1   OVERCOOKED


                             (a) Tomato Salad                                (b) Tomato-lettuce Salad

                                Figure 7: Overcooked environments.

Goal. An agent is placed in the Overcooked kitchen and aims to cook a certain dish with the provided
ingredients and tools and deliver it to the ‘star’ cell as soon as possible. Agents have to learn the
correct procedure in terms of picking up raw vegetables, chopping them, and merging them in a bowl
before delivering. Figure 7a and 7b show the recipes for making tomato salad and tomato-lettuce
salad.
Observation Space. The environment is a 7×7 grid world involving ingredients, bowls, cutting
boards, and a delivery counter. For the task of making tomato salad, there is only one tomato, one
bowl, one cutting board, and one delivery counter available in the environment. For the task of
making a tomato-lettuce salad, one tomato, one lettuce, one onion, one bowl, two cutting boards,
and one delivery cell are provided in the environment. The onion serves as an interferent, though
it does not appear in the recipe. The global state information consists of the positions of the agent
and the above objects, and the status of each ingredient: chopped or unchopped. The environment
is partially observable. For the observation, the agent only observes the positions and status of
the entities within a 5 × 5 square centered on the agent. Other unseen objects are masked in the
observation. And the initial positions of all the objects are known to agents. The symbolic raw
observations are directly fed into PPO as input and converted to prompts with scripts to serve as
LLMs’ input.
Primitive-Action Space. Agents use five primitive actions: up, down, left, right, and stay to interact
with the environment. Agents can move around and achieve picking, placing, chopping, and deliv-
ering by standing next to the corresponding cell and moving against it. All the macro-actions are
based on these primitive actions.
Macro-Action Space. In this work, we mainly focus on using high-level macro-actions, since they
usually have richer semantics. Every macro-action may take several time steps to complete. The
main function of each macro-action and the corresponding termination conditions is exactly the
same as the setting in (Xiao et al., 2022) despite that we only have one agent. Here we list and
briefly describe all the macro-actions we use: Chop, chops a raw ingredient into pieces when the
agent stands next to a cutting board with an unchopped ingredient on it. Get-Tomato, Get-Lettuce,
Get-Onion, Get-Bowl, Go-Cutting-Board-1/2 and Deliver, which navigate the agent to the location
of the corresponding object and execute the corresponding action.
In the first task of making tomato salad, Get-Tomato, Get-Bowl, Go-Cutting-Board-1 and Deliver
are available. In the second task of making tomato-lettuce salad all the macro-actions are valid.
Dynamics: The transition in this task is deterministic. If an agent delivers any wrong item, the item
will be reset to its initial position.
Reward: +0.2 for chopping a correct ingredient, +1 terminal reward for delivering the correct dish,
−0.1 for delivering any wrong dish, and −0.001 for every timestep.
Episode Termination: Each episode terminates either when the agent successfully delivers the
target dish to the delivery counter or reaches the maximal time steps, 200.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   V IRTUAL H OME


                    (a) Food Preparation                       (b) Entertainment

                               Figure 8: VirtualHome environments.

Goal. An agent, represented as a humanoid avatar, is placed in a fully furnished household with
various rich objects to interact with. Figure 8a and 8b show two tasks we design for the agent to
complete. For the first task of food preparation, the agent needs to find the pancake on the table in
the kitchen and put it in the microwave to heat. For the second task of entertainment, the agent needs
to find and bring chips and milk, from the kitchen to the living room and succeed sitting on the sofa
with the TV open and the milk and chips are nearby. The challenge arises when the agent, already
holding both the milk and chips, lacks an additional hand to turn on the TV. Consequently, it needs
to learn to put at least one item on the nearby coffee table before operating the TV.
Observation Space. The environment is also partially observable. The agent can only see the
objects in the current room and does not the objects in the other room. The observation consists of a
set of bool values, representing whether the agent sees the relative object, whether these objects are
close to the agent and the status of the objects, such as whether the TV is turned on and whether the
milk is on the coffee table. The symbolic raw observations are directly fed into PPO as input and
converted to prompts with scripts to serve as LLMs’ input.

C.3   ACTION S PACE

To simulate the daily activities, all the actions in VirtualHome are macro-actions. Every macro-
action takes only time step for execution. Here, we list and briefly describe all the macro-actions as
Table 7.
               Table 7: Actions in VirtualHome and their corresponding descriptions

                         Action                                                     Description
                      [STANDUP]                                                      Stand up
           [SIT] <Object> <Object> (object_id)                             Sit on the Object(object_id)
              [WALK] <Object> (object_id)                                 Walk to the Object(object_id)
               [GRAB] <Object> (object_id)                                  Grab the Object(object_id)
               [OPEN] <Object> (object_id)                                  Open the Object(object_id)
              [CLOSE] <Object> (object_id)                                 Close the Object(object_id)
            [SWITCHON] <Object> (object_id)                            Switch/Turn on the Object(object_id)
           [SWITCHOFF] <Object> (object_id)                            Switch/Turn off the Object(object_id)
   [PUTIN] <Object1> (object1_id) <Object2> (object2_id)      Put the Object1(object1_id) in the Object2(object2_id)
 [PUTBACK] <Object1> (object1_id) <Object2> (object2_id)      Put the Object1(object1_id) on the Object2(object2_id)

For the first task of heating pancake, there are four rooms and two items in the environment and
their corresponding object id are as follows: livingroom(267), kitchen(11), bathroom(172), bed-
room(210), pancake(62), microwave(109). For the second task of watching TV, there are four
rooms and five items in the environment and their corresponding object id are as follows: livin-
groom(267), kitchen(11), bathroom(172), bedroom(210), chips(61), milk(46), TV(297), sofa(276),
coffeetable(268). For their actions, corresponding action prompts and abbreviated labels, please
refer to Table 8 and Table 9.
Only when the agent is close to the object, can the agent operate the object. For example, the agent
needs to walk to the TV before turning it on.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 8: Actions, action prompts and abbreviated labels in the heating pancake task

                  Action                                                         Action Prompt                       Label
        [WALK] <livingroom> (267)                                           walk to the living room             Walk-Livingroom
            [WALK] <kitchen> (11)                                              walk to the kitchen                Walk-Kitchen
         [WALK] <bathroom> (172)                                             walk to the bathroom                Walk-Bathroom
          [WALK] <bedroom> (210)                                              walk to the bedroom                Walk-Bedroom
           [WALK] <pancake> (62)                                             reach for the pancake                Walk-Pancake
        [WALK] <microwave> (109)                                            move to the microwave               Walk-Microwave
           [GRAB] <pancake> (62)                                                grab the pancake                  Grab-Pancake
        [OPEN] <microwave> (109)                                              open the microwave                Open-Microwave
       [CLOSE] <microwave> (109)                                              close the microwave               Close-Microwave
 [PUTIN] <pancake> (62) <microwave> (109)                              put the pancake in the microwave     Putin-Pancake-Microwave

         Table 9: Actions, action prompts and abbreviated labels in the watching TV task

                    Action                                                        Action Prompt                       Label
        [WALK] <livingroom> (267)                                            walk to the living room            Walk-Livingroom
           [WALK] <kitchen> (11)                                               walk to the kitchen                Walk-Kitchen
         [WALK] <bathroom> (172)                                              walk to the bathroom               Walk-Bathroom
          [WALK] <bedroom> (210)                                              walk to the bedroom                Walk-Bedroom
            [WALK] <chips> (61)                                                reach for the chips                 Walk-Chips
             [WALK] <milk> (46)                                                 reach for the milk                 Walk-Milk
        [WALK] <coffeetable> (268)                                          move to the coffee table            Walk-Coffeetable
             [WALK] <TV> (297)                                                   move to the TV                     Walk-TV
            [WALK] <sofa> (276)                                                  move to the sofa                  Walk-Sofa
            [GRAB] <chips> (61)                                                    grab the chips                  Grab-Chips
             [GRAB] <milk> (46)                                                    grab the milk                   Grab-Milk
          [SWITCHON] <TV> (297)                                                   turn on the TV                  Switchon-TV
         [SWITCHOFF] <TV> (297)                                                  turn off the TV                  Switchoff-TV
              [SIT] <sofa> (276)                                             take a seat on the sofa                 Sit-Sofa
                 [STANDUP]                                                   stand up from the sofa               Standup-Sofa
 [PUTBACK] <chips> (61) <coffeetable> (268)                             put the chips on the coffee table   Putback-Chips-Coffeetable
  [PUTBACK] <milk> (46) <coffeetable> (268)                             put the milk on the coffee table    Putback-Milk-Coffeetable


Dynamics: The transition in this task is deterministic.
Reward: We adopt a sparse reward setting, where only when the task is finished will the agent
receive +1 reward.
Episode Termination: Each episode terminates either when the agent successfully finishes the task
or reaches the maximal time steps, 50 since every macro-action takes only time step for execution.
For the task of heating pancake, the agent succeeds when it places the pancake in the microwave and
closes the microwave. For the task of watching TV, the agent succeeds when it sits on the sofa with
TV turned on and chips and milk are on the coffee table or hold in hand.

C.3.1   VANILLA PPO VS PPO W ITH ACTION M ASK
As mentioned in Section 5.3, in VirtualHome environment, vanilla PPO without action mask cannot
learn anything for the two tasks due to the large action space. Figure 9 shows the performance of
vanilla PPO without action mask and PPO with action mask.

                                                        Heat Pancake                  Watch TV
                                             0.8                             0.6
                                             0.6
                              Total Return


                                                                             0.4
                                             0.4
                                                                             0.2
                                             0.2
                                             0.0                             0.0
                                                   0k 10k 20k 30k 40k 50k         0k 50k 100k 150k 200k
                                                            Steps                        Steps
                                                        PPO       PPO with Action Mask     Optimal


Figure 9: Performance of PPO without action mask and PPO with action mask in VirtualHome tasks.


                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     T RAINING D ETAILS
Our results are mainly generated on a single NVIDIA Tesla A100 and NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU.
For all domains, we use the same architecture, which is shown in Figure 10. Throughout all the
experiments, we conducted training and testing using the half-precision float16.


                                     value         action


                                     MLP
                                                                  Env
                                LLaMA-7B-hf
                                   (frozen)        LoRA


                             obs prompt & reward


                            Figure 10: Parameter efficient architecture


D.1   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

The same neural network architecture is applied to both the actor and critic networks across TWO-
SOME method. In the LLaMA-7B model, additional MLP layers are incorporated into the last
transformer block to serve as the critic. The critic’s MLPs take the last token of the observation
prompt as input and output the estimated value of the observation prompt. The critic utilizes a 3-
layer MLP structure, with the number of neurons in each layer being 1024, 512, and 1, respectively.
ReLU is employed as the activation function. On the other hand, the actor consists of the frozen
LLaMA-7B model with the augmentation of LoRA parameters. The policy optimizer uses AdamW
with an epsilon value of 1e-5 and a weight decay of 0. The critic optimizer uses Adam with an ep-
silon value of 1e-5 and the default weight decay of 0. In our experiments, we found that the default
epsilon value of 1e-8 in the policy optimizer’s AdamW can lead to unstable training and potential
"nan" outputs in Lora.
In the PPO method, the critic network remains a 3-layer MLP architecture with 64 neurons in each
layer and a single neuron as the final output. However, the main distinction from TWOSOME lies
in the choice of activation function, which is Tanh. Meanwhile, the actor in the PPO method also
adopts a 3-layer MLP architecture. The number of neurons in the first two layers is the same as the
critic, which is 64. The activation function used is Tanh. The final layer’s output depends on the
number of actions in the task. For example, in the Entertainment task, there are 17 actions, while in
the Food Preparation task, there are 10 actions. The optimizer uses Adam with an epsilon value of
1e-5 and a weight decay of 0.

D.2   H YPERPARAMETERS FOR TWOSOME AND PPO

                                                            In following subsections, we first list
the hyper-parameter candidates used for training TWOSOME via grid search in the corresponding
task, and then show the hyper-parameter table with the parameters used by TWOSOME and PPO
achieving the best performance. We choose the best performance of each method depending on its
final convergence value and convergence efficiency.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 10: Overcooked hyper-parameter candidates of TWOSOME for grid search training

        Learning rate pair (policy,critic)                 (1e-6, 5e-5), (5e-7, 5e-5), (5e-7, 1e-5)
                                                                  (3e-6, 5e-5), (1e-6, 1e-5)
         Max episode steps and gamma                               (200, 0.99), (50, 0.95)
               Total time steps                                            1e5, 5e5
                                                    First group parameters Second group parameters
           Number of environments                             4                        4
 Number of steps per environment policy rollout              32                      128
      Number of mini-batches of policy                       32                      128
      Number of mini-batches of critic                        4                       16
     Number of epochs to update policy                        1                        1
          Gradient checkpoint steps                           8                       32
        Surrogate clipping coefficient                       0.2                      0.2
          Coefficient of the entropy                        0.01                     0.01
      Coefficient of the value function                      0.5                      0.5
   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping                    0.5                      0.5
       Target KL divergence threshold                       0.02                     0.02



        Table 11: Overcooked hyper-parameter used of TWOSOME in Tomato Salad task

                       Learning rate pair (policy,critic)          (5e-7, 1e-5)
                       Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99)
                               Total time steps                        5e5
                           Number of environments                        4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout         32
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  32
                      Number of mini-batches of critic                   4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                   1
                          Gradient checkpoint steps                      8
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                  0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                   0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                 0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping               0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                  0.02



    Table 12: Overcooked hyper-parameter used of TWOSOME in Tomato Lettuce Salad task

                       Learning rate pair (policy,critic)          (5e-7, 1e-5)
                       Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99)
                               Total time steps                        5e5
                           Number of environments                        4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout         32
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  32
                      Number of mini-batches of critic                   4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                   1
                          Gradient checkpoint steps                      8
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                  0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                   0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                 0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping               0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                  0.02



                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 13: Overcooked hyper-parameter candidates of PPO for grid search training

                            Learning rate                    1e-4, 2.5e-4, 5e-4, 1e-3
                  Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99), (50, 0.95)
                          Total time steps                           1e5, 5e5
                      Number of environments                             4
            Number of steps per environment policy rollout             128
                 Number of mini-batches of policy                        4
                Number of epochs to update policy                        4
                   Surrogate clipping coefficient                       0.2
                     Coefficient of the entropy                        0.01
                 Coefficient of the value function                      0.5
              Maximum norm for the gradient clipping                    0.5
                  Target KL divergence threshold                       0.02


           Table 14: Overcooked hyper-parameter used of PPO in Tomato Salad task

                                 Learning rate                        1e-4
                       Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99)
                               Total time steps                       5e5
                           Number of environments                       4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout       128
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                  4
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                 0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                  0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping              0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                 0.02


        Table 15: Overcooked hyper-parameter used of PPO in Tomato Lettuce Salad task

                                 Learning rate                        5e-4
                       Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99)
                               Total time steps                       5e5
                           Number of environments                       4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout       128
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                  4
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                 0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                  0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping              0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                 0.02


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 16: Virtualhome hyper-parameter candidates of TWOSOME for grid search training

            Learning rate pair (policy,critic)        (1e-6, 5e-5), (5e-7, 5e-5), (5e-7, 1e-5)
                                                             (3e-6, 5e-5), (1e-6, 1e-5)
             Max episode steps and gamma                      (200, 0.99), (50, 0.95)
                   Total time steps                                5e4, 1e5, 2e5
                                                      First Second Third             Forth
               Number of environments                   4        4         4           4
     Number of steps per environment policy rollout    32       32        32         128
          Number of mini-batches of policy             32       64        64         128
          Number of mini-batches of critic              4        8         4          16
         Number of epochs to update policy              1        1         1           1
              Gradient checkpoint steps                 8       16        16          32
            Surrogate clipping coefficient             0.2      0.2       0.2         0.2
              Coefficient of the entropy              0.01     0.01      0.01        0.01
          Coefficient of the value function            0.5      0.5       0.5         0.5
       Maximum norm for the gradient clipping          0.5      0.5       0.5         0.5
           Target KL divergence threshold             0.02     0.02      0.02        0.02



   Table 17: Virtualhome hyper-parameter used of TWOSOME in the task of Food Preparation

                       Learning rate pair (policy,critic)          (1e-6, 5e-5)
                       Max episode steps and gamma                  (50, 0.95)
                               Total time steps                        5e4
                           Number of environments                        4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout         32
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  32
                      Number of mini-batches of critic                   4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                   1
                          Gradient checkpoint steps                      8
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                  0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                   0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                 0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping               0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                  0.02



    Table 18: Virtualhome hyper-parameter used of TWOSOME in the task of Entertainment

                       Learning rate pair (policy,critic)          (1e-6, 5e-5)
                       Max episode steps and gamma                  (50, 0.95)
                               Total time steps                        2e5
                           Number of environments                        4
                 Number of steps per environment policy rollout         32
                      Number of mini-batches of policy                  32
                      Number of mini-batches of critic                   4
                     Number of epochs to update policy                   1
                          Gradient checkpoint steps                      8
                        Surrogate clipping coefficient                  0.2
                          Coefficient of the entropy                   0.01
                      Coefficient of the value function                 0.5
                   Maximum norm for the gradient clipping               0.5
                       Target KL divergence threshold                  0.02



                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 19: Virtualhome hyper-parameter candidates of PPO for grid search training

                            Learning rate                    1e-4, 2.5e-4, 5e-4, 1e-3
                  Max episode steps and gamma                 (200, 0.99), (50, 0.95)
                          Total time steps                        5e4, 1e5, 2e5
                      Number of environments                             4
            Number of steps per environment policy rollout             128
                 Number of mini-batches of policy                        4
                Number of epochs to update policy                        4
                   Surrogate clipping coefficient                       0.2
                     Coefficient of the entropy                        0.01
                 Coefficient of the value function                      0.5
              Maximum norm for the gradient clipping                    0.5
                  Target KL divergence threshold                       0.02


      Table 20: Virtualhome hyper-parameter used of PPO in the task of Food Preparation

                                  Learning rate                      1e-3
                        Max episode steps and gamma                (50, 0.95)
                                Total time steps                      5e4
                            Number of environments                      4
                  Number of steps per environment policy rollout      128
                       Number of mini-batches of policy                 4
                      Number of epochs to update policy                 4
                         Surrogate clipping coefficient                0.2
                           Coefficient of the entropy                 0.01
                       Coefficient of the value function               0.5
                    Maximum norm for the gradient clipping             0.5
                        Target KL divergence threshold                0.02


        Table 21: Virtualhome hyper-parameter used of PPO in the task of Entertainment

                                  Learning rate                      1e-3
                        Max episode steps and gamma                (50, 0.95)
                                Total time steps                      2e5
                            Number of environments                      4
                  Number of steps per environment policy rollout      128
                       Number of mini-batches of policy                 4
                      Number of epochs to update policy                 4
                         Surrogate clipping coefficient                0.2
                           Coefficient of the entropy                 0.01
                       Coefficient of the value function               0.5
                    Maximum norm for the gradient clipping             0.5
                        Target KL divergence threshold                0.02


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     B EHAVIOR V ISUALIZATION
In this section, we display the optimal behaviors learned by TWOSOME with word normalization
under all considered domains. We also provide corresponding videos for each task in the Supple-
mentary Materials.

E.1   V ISUALIZATION OF T OMATO S ALAD


(a) The initial state of the environ- (b) The   agent    executes   Get- (c) After picking up the tomato, the
ment, the agent is in the kitchen Tomato.                                agent executes Go-Cutting-Board-
without grabbing anything.                                               1.


(d) After approaching the cutting (e) After chopping the tomato,          (f) After picking up the chopped
board, the agent executes the action the agent executes the action Get-   tomato, the agent executes the ac-
Chop to chop the tomato.             Tomato to pick up the chopped        tion Get-Bowl to take a bowl and
                                     tomato.                              place the chopped tomato inside it.


                                    (g) After placing the chopped
                                    tomato inside the bowl, the agent
                                    executes the action Deliver to com-
                                    plete the task.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2   V ISUALIZATION OF T OMATO L ETTUCE S ALAD


      (a) The initial state of the en- (b) The agent executes Get- (c) After picking up the
      vironment, the agent is in the Tomato.                       tomato, the agent executes
      kitchen without grabbing any-                                Go-Cutting-Board-1.
      thing.


      (d) After approaching the cut- (e) After chopping the tomato, (f) After picking up the let-
      ting board 1, the agent executes the agent executes Get- tuce, the agent executes Go-
      the action Chop to chop the Lettuce.                          Cutting-Board-2.
      tomato.


      (g) After approaching the cut- (h) After chopping the lettuce,   (i) After taking a bowl, the
      ting board 2, the agent executes the agent executes the action   agent executes the action Get-
      the action Chop to chop the let- Get-Bowl to take a bowl.        Tomato to place the chopped
      tuce.                                                            tomato inside the bowl.


                      (j) After picking up the         (k) After placing the chopped
                      chopped tomato, the agent        lettuce inside the bowl, the
                      executes Get-Lettuce to place    agent executes the action De-
                      the chopped lettuce inside the   liver to complete the task.
                      bowl.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3   V ISUALIZATION OF Food Preparation


(a) The initial state of the environment, the agent is in      (b) The agent executes Walk-Pancake.
the kitchen without grabbing the pancake.


(c) After approaching the pancake, the agent executes (d) After grabbing the pancake, the agent executes
Grab-Pancake.                                         Walk-Microwave.


(e) After approaching the microwave, the agent exe- (f) After opening the microwave, the agent executes
cutes Open-Microwave.                               Putin-Pancake-Microwave.


                             (g) After placing the pancake into the microwave, the
                             agent executes Close-Microwave.


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4   V ISUALIZATION OF THE Entertainment


(a) The initial state of the environment, the agent is in     (b) The agent executes Walk-Chips.
the kitchen without grabbing anything.


(c) After approaching the chips, the agent executes (d) After grabbing the chips, the agent executes Walk-
Grab-Chips.                                         Milk.


(e) After approaching the milk, the agent executes (f) After grabbing the milk, the agent executes Walk-
Grab-Milk.                                         Livingroom.


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(g) The agent leaves the kitchen and enters the living (h) After approaching the coffee table, the agent exe-
room, then executes Walk-Coffeetable.                  cutes Putback-Chips-Coffeetable.


(i) With the chips on the coffee table, the agent exe- (j) After approaching the television, the agent exe-
cutes Walk-TV.                                         cutes Switchon-TV.


(k) After turning on the television, the agent executes (l) After approaching the sofa, the agent executes the
Walk-Sofa.                                              action Sit-Sofa to complete the task.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P ROMPT DESIGN
In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the design of the observation prompt and action
prompt and their impacts on the probabilities of each action. All the prompts are converted from raw
observations and actions by scripts. For each observation shown in the visualization, we first present
the observation prompt of the corresponding observation and then show the action prompts, tokens
that make up the action prompts, the probability of each token, and the policy of TWOSOME without
normalization, TWOSOME with token normalization and TWOSOME with word normalization,
sequentially.

F.1     T OMATO S ALAD


                                                 (a) The initial state of the environ-
                                                 ment, the agent is in the kitchen
                                                 without grabbing anything.

Observation prompt in step (a): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. You notice a tomato
on the table. Currently you don’t have anything in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing
chopped tomato, you should first

                                              Table 22: Action Prompt in Step (a)
                                                                                                        Action Probability of TWOSOME
          Action                         Token                         Token Probability
                                                                                                     W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   pick up the tomato          [pick, up, the, tom, ato]       [13.73, 77.67, 72.82, 28.54, 98.87]     55.24         48.34        49.61
      take the bowl               [take, the, bow, l]              [14.81, 48.69, 24.65, 99.72]        44.66         37.87        33.61
 walk to the cutting board   [walk, to, the, cutting, board]    [0.06, 42.28, 89.96, 15.79, 96.56]      0.09         13.33        16.56
      serve nothing                 [serve, nothing]                        [4.65, 0.0]                 0.01          0.16         0.19
       chop nothing                [ch, op, nothing]                    [0.53, 98.64, 0.0]              0.00          0.31         0.02


Analysis: To ensure a high probability of items that are useful for completing the task like tomato
and bowl, we need to mention them in the observation prompt. However, due to the partial observ-
ability, the agent cannot see bowl in the current position. So we need to mention the bowl in the
task by mentioning To serve the dish of a bowl, which can increase the probability of serve, too.
Because currently there is nothing for the agent to serve and chop, so we can use nothing to lower
the probability of these two actions. These two actions are actually not necessary to appear in the
action prompt list, which is what we do in the VirtualHome environment. To show the performance
of our method, which can solve typical decision-making tasks, we do not mask these actions here,
for a fair comparison with PPO.


                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (b) The               agent          executes             Get- (c) After picking up the tomato, the
                             Tomato.                                                        agent executes Go-Cutting-Board-
                                                                                            1.

Observation prompt step (b): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. Currently you are carrying
an unchopped tomato in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato, you
should first
                                                           Table 23: Action Prompt in Step (b)
                                                                                                                                                    Action Probability of TWOSOME
              Action                                      Token                                          Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                 W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
         pick up the tomato                      [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                        [0.31, 72.1, 64.94, 20.24, 97.16]                 3.28         17.67        15.73
            take the bowl                           [take, the, bow, l]                               [3.46, 37.33, 5.29, 99.34]                   7.73          14.56        10.61
put the tomato on the cutting board    [put, the, tom, ato, on, the, cutting, board]   [11.44, 60.03, 36.08, 96.9, 46.14, 87.94, 53.74, 96.81]     57.69         46.60        56.71
           serve the dish                           [serve, the, d, ish]                              [2.98, 57.96, 16.23, 97.9]                   31.29         20.66        16.90
            chop nothing                             [ch, op, nothing]                                    [6.24, 99.45, 0.0]                        0.00          0.51         0.05



Observation prompt step (c): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. An unchopped tomato
is on the cutting board. Currently you are standing in front of the cutting board without anything in
hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato, you should first

                                                           Table 24: Action Prompt in Step (c)
                                                                                                                                       Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                   Token                                   Token Probability
                                                                                                                                    W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   pick up the tomato                   [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                 [11.26, 78.92, 81.57, 30.95, 98.76]                 38.32         32.52        36.21
      take the bowl                        [take, the, bow, l]                         [13.38, 52.9, 19.33, 99.75]                    23.59         23.81        22.42
 walk to the cutting board            [walk, to, the, cutting, board]              [0.08, 37.29, 89.38, 37.08, 98.33]                  0.18         11.11        14.97
      serve nothing                          [serve, nothing]                                  [3.23, 0.01]                            0.00          0.10         0.14
     chop the tomato                     [ch, op, the, tom, ato]                    [4.55, 99.57, 57.2, 88.8, 95.28]                  37.91         32.45        26.27



Analysis: In Step (b), because the agent has already picked up the tomato, the third action walk to
the cutting board can be replaced to put the tomato on the cutting board, which is more contextually
appropriate and thus has a high probability. And the agent now can serve the tomato, so the fourth
action is replaced with serve the dish, though it is not a correct action. LLMs need to learn which
dish is the correct dish, namely the alignment. It is worth noting that for TWOSOME without
normalization, serve the dish also has a high probability, if the agent happens to sample this action
several times, it may learn to avoid entering this state and refuse to pick up the tomato, resulting in
the divergence.
In Step (c), the tomato is put on the cutting board, so the final action is replaced with chop the
tomato.


                                                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (d) After approaching the cutting (e) After chopping the tomato,
                       board, the agent executes the action the agent executes the action Get-
                       Chop to chop the tomato.             Tomato to pick up the chopped
                                                            tomato.

Observation prompt step (d): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. A chopped tomato is on
the cutting board. Currently you are standing in front of the cutting board without anything in hand.
To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato, you should first

                                             Table 25: Action Prompt in Step (d)
                                                                                                       Action Probability of TWOSOME
          Action                         Token                        Token Probability
                                                                                                    W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   pick up the tomato          [pick, up, the, tom, ato]       [16.68, 73.75, 82.4, 19.69, 98.68]     38.27         33.49        37.31
      take the bowl               [take, the, bow, l]             [15.05, 54.08, 34.69, 99.76]        54.75         30.09        30.31
 walk to the cutting board   [walk, to, the, cutting, board]   [0.12, 36.22, 89.51, 39.64, 98.38]      0.30         12.69        17.21
      serve nothing                 [serve, nothing]                      [3.28, 0.01]                 0.00          0.11         0.15
     chop the tomato            [ch, op, the, tom, ato]        [0.76, 98.79, 54.96, 90.12, 92.33]      6.68         23.62        15.03



Observation prompt step (e): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. Currently you are standing
in front of the cutting board, carrying a chopped tomato in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only
containing chopped tomato, you should first

                                             Table 26: Action Prompt in Step (e)
                                                                                                       Action Probability of TWOSOME
          Action                         Token                        Token Probability
                                                                                                    W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   pick up the tomato          [pick, up, the, tom, ato]       [0.94, 76.54, 73.57, 20.2, 98.13]      20.00         31.26        31.87
      take the bowl               [take, the, bow, l]             [4.99, 42.45, 13.73, 99.54]         55.44         28.62        25.26
 walk to the cutting board   [walk, to, the, cutting, board]   [0.19, 38.87, 87.37, 6.89, 95.86]       0.84         16.57        23.80
      serve the dish              [serve, the, d, ish]             [1.25, 63.08, 15.9, 98.87]         23.72         23.15        19.04
       chop nothing                [ch, op, nothing]                   [0.77, 97.96, 0.0]              0.00          0.40         0.03


                                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              (f) After picking up the chopped
                                                              tomato, the agent executes the ac-
                                                              tion Get-Bowl to take a bowl and
                                                              place the chopped tomato inside it.

Observation prompt step (f): There is a fixed cutting board in the room. Currently you are carrying
a bowl containing chopped tomato. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato,
you should first

                                                          Table 27: Action Prompt in Step (f)
                                                                                                                                                Action Probability of TWOSOME
             Action                                   Token                                         Token Probability
                                                                                                                                             W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   put the tomato in the bowl          [put, the, tom, ato, in, the, bow, l]       [11.87, 51.27, 5.92, 89.86, 21.92, 70.82, 61.58, 99.5]       1.16         24.12        22.45
          take the bowl                         [take, the, bow, l]                              [5.83, 52.13, 51.05, 99.67]                   58.43         23.36        21.52
put the bowl on the cutting board   [put, the, bow, l, on, the, cutting, board]   [11.87, 51.27, 58.39, 99.63, 28.88, 88.37, 59.89, 97.23]     19.87         34.38        40.82
          serve the dish                        [serve, the, d, ish]                              [3.71, 69.93, 21.5, 97.56]                   20.54         17.99        15.19
          chop nothing                           [ch, op, nothing]                                    [0.17, 94.86, 0.0]                        0.00          0.15         0.01


Analysis: Even for the final step, serve the dish still has a not high probability, which reflects the
ability of LLaMA 7B. LLMs need to learn what is the correct dish to serve and make alignment with
the environment.


                                                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2       T OMATO L ETTUCE S ALAD


                                (a) The initial state of the environ- (b) The                                                   agent          executes             Get-
                                ment, the agent is in the kitchen Tomato.
                                without grabbing anything.

Observation prompt step (a): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. You notice a tomato,
a lettuce and an onion on the different tables. Currently you don’t have anything in hand. To serve
the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                Table 28: Action Prompt in Step (a)
                                                                                                                                                           Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                           Token                                          Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                        W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       pick up the tomato                           [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                        [7.09, 61.35, 62.92, 31.68, 95.21]                   73.79         29.66        30.23
       pick up the lettuce                          [pick, up, the, lett, uce]                         [7.09, 61.35, 62.92, 6.1, 99.72]                   14.88         21.54        20.26
        pick up the onion                            [pick, up, the, on, ion]                         [7.09, 61.35, 62.92, 4.68, 92.45]                   10.58         20.11        18.60
      take the empty bowl                          [take, the, empty, bow, l]                        [15.35, 50.98, 0.14, 75.08, 98.35]                    0.70         11.69         9.44
 walk to the first cutting board              [walk, to, the, first, cutting, board]              [0.08, 40.31, 84.18, 2.55, 39.84, 94.17]                 0.02         9.11         11.81
walk to the second cutting board             [walk, to, the, second, cutting, board]              [0.08, 40.31, 84.18, 0.66, 41.69, 94.06]                 0.01          7.32         9.49
          serve nothing                                  [serve, nothing]                                        [2.97, 0.01]                              0.01         0.10          0.13
          chop nothing                                  [ch, op, nothing]                                     [0.96, 99.17, 0.0]                           0.00          0.46         0.05



Observation prompt step (b): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. You notice a lettuce
and an onion on the different tables. Currently you are carrying an unchopped tomato in hand. To
serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                Table 29: Action Prompt in Step (b)
                                                                                                                                                                       Action Probability of TWOSOME
                 Action                                             Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                                    W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
            pick up the tomato                               [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                            [1.07, 66.26, 68.49, 15.88, 98.79]                  16.23         15.69        15.24
            pick up the lettuce                              [pick, up, the, lett, uce]                            [1.07, 66.26, 68.49, 30.14, 99.8]                  31.12         17.87        17.93
             pick up the onion                                [pick, up, the, on, ion]                              [1.07, 66.26, 68.49, 3.2, 97.0]                    3.21         11.35        10.16
           take the empty bowl                              [take, the, empty, bow, l]                             [6.38, 46.73, 0.06, 65.47, 98.34]                   0.24         6.75          5.31
 put the tomato on the first cutting board     [put, the, tom, ato, on, the, first, cutting, board]   [8.52, 62.29, 15.2, 97.76, 35.8, 81.18, 0.43, 56.07, 96.25]      0.11         17.12        20.12
put the tomato on the second cutting board   [put, the, tom, ato, on, the, second, cutting, board]    [8.52, 62.29, 15.2, 97.76, 35.8, 81.18, 0.28, 57.29, 96.58]      0.07         16.34        19.09
               serve the dish                                   [serve, the, d, ish]                                   [4.47, 71.08, 7.44, 97.06]                     49.00         14.44        12.11
               chop nothing                                      [ch, op, nothing]                                         [5.07, 99.63, 0.0]                          0.01          0.43         0.05



Analysis: In Step (a), to ensure a high probability of items that are useful for completing the task
like tomato, lettuce and bowl, we need to mention them in the observation prompt. However, due to
the partial observability, the agent cannot see bowl in the current position. So we need to mention
the bowl in the task by mentioning To serve the dish of a bowl, which can increase the probability of
serve, too. Compared with onion, tomato and lettuce appear twice in the observation prompt, thus
having higher probabilities. We add the status empty to the bowl to lower the probability of holding
the plate at the beginning, where the agent can do nothing but to serve the plate to the delivery
counter and receive a negative reward.
In Step (b), because the agent has already picked up the tomato, the third action walk to the first
cutting board can be replaced to put the tomato on the first cutting board, which is more contex-
tually appropriate and thus has a high probability. It is worth noting that TWOSOME without the
normalization method has an extremely low probability of long action prompts, such as walk to
the first cutting board , and put the tomato on the first cutting board, which is consistent with the
disadvantage mentioned in the main paper. Thus, this method has a poor performance in this task.


                                                                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          (c) After picking up the tomato, the (d) After approaching the cutting
                          agent executes Go-Cutting-Board- board 1, the agent executes the ac-
                          1.                                   tion Chop to chop the tomato.

Observation prompt step (c): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. An unchopped
tomato is on the first cutting board. Currently you are standing in front of the first cutting board
without anything in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce,
you should first

                                                   Table 30: Action Prompt in Step (c)
                                                                                                                            Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                 Token                                Token Probability
                                                                                                                         W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       pick up the tomato                 [pick, up, the, tom, ato]              [5.33, 77.33, 71.0, 15.17, 97.87]         25.69         19.24        19.46
       pick up the lettuce                [pick, up, the, lett, uce]              [5.33, 77.33, 71.0, 10.77, 99.9]         18.61         18.04        17.95
        pick up the onion                  [pick, up, the, on, ion]               [5.33, 77.33, 71.0, 0.01, 56.95]         0.01           4.05         2.78
      take the empty bowl                [take, the, empty, bow, l]             [13.95, 48.59, 0.16, 75.06, 99.64]          0.47          8.64         7.16
 walk to the first cutting board    [walk, to, the, first, cutting, board]    [0.3, 42.93, 93.27, 5.1, 92.08, 97.85]        0.33         11.16        14.82
walk to the second cutting board   [walk, to, the, second, cutting, board]   [0.3, 42.93, 93.27, 55.23, 92.63, 97.89]       3.60         16.62        22.07
          serve nothing                        [serve, nothing]                              [4.7, 0.01]                    0.04         0.14          0.19
         chop the tomato                   [ch, op, the, tom, ato]               [2.48, 99.61, 63.38, 61.1, 90.68]         51.26         22.09        15.57


Observation prompt step (d): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. A chopped tomato
is on the first cutting board. Currently you are standing in front of the first cutting board without
anything in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you
should first
                                                  Table 31: Action Prompt in Step (d)
                                                                                                                            Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                 Token                                Token Probability
                                                                                                                         W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       pick up the tomato                 [pick, up, the, tom, ato]               [7.99, 75.02, 73.47, 9.43, 97.66]        33.89         19.71        19.72
       pick up the lettuce                [pick, up, the, lett, uce]             [7.99, 75.02, 73.47, 13.72, 99.89]        50.44         21.34        21.79
        pick up the onion                  [pick, up, the, on, ion]               [7.99, 75.02, 73.47, 0.01, 53.76]        0.02           4.45         3.07
      take the empty bowl                [take, the, empty, bow, l]               [15.99, 51.55, 0.13, 77.09, 99.6]         0.68          9.03         7.43
 walk to the first cutting board    [walk, to, the, first, cutting, board]    [0.36, 41.54, 92.93, 9.12, 92.14, 97.87]      0.97         13.10        17.26
walk to the second cutting board   [walk, to, the, second, cutting, board]   [0.36, 41.54, 92.93, 44.85, 91.56, 97.92]      4.74         17.06        22.49
          serve nothing                        [serve, nothing]                              [3.67, 0.01]                   0.04         0.13          0.17
         chop the tomato                   [ch, op, the, tom, ato]               [0.47, 99.03, 65.17, 41.12, 88.77]         9.23         15.19         8.08


Analysis: In Step (c) and (d), TWOSOME without normalization shows high probabilities on the
optimal actions for both steps, namely chop the tomato and pick up the lettuce, due to the fewer
tokens these actions have. So if all the optimal actions happen to have very few tokens, this method
can achieve very good performance.


                                                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 (e) After chopping the tomato, the (f) After picking up the lettuce, the
                                 agent executes Get-Lettuce.        agent executes Go-Cutting-Board-
                                                                    2.

Observation prompt step (e): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. You notice an onion
on the table. Currently you are carrying an unchopped lettuce in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl
only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                  Table 32: Action Prompt in Step (e)
                                                                                                                                                                          Action Probability of TWOSOME
                  Action                                              Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                                       W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
             pick up the tomato                               [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                                [0.7, 69.47, 67.35, 5.15, 94.95]                  2.09          11.48        10.30
             pick up the lettuce                              [pick, up, the, lett, uce]                              [0.7, 69.47, 67.35, 19.88, 99.87]                  8.50          15.20        14.63
              pick up the onion                                [pick, up, the, on, ion]                                 [0.7, 69.47, 67.35, 8.1, 98.17]                   3.40         12.66        11.64
            take the empty bowl                              [take, the, empty, bow, l]                               [4.77, 47.86, 0.05, 69.81, 98.91]                   0.10         6.23          4.80
 put the lettuce on the first cutting board     [put, the, lett, uce, on, the, first, cutting, board]   [6.93, 57.59, 47.31, 99.9, 34.26, 85.28, 0.12, 69.79, 97.24]      0.06         16.79        19.66
put the lettuce on the second cutting board   [put, the, lett, uce, on, the, second, cutting, board]     [6.93, 57.59, 47.31, 99.9, 34.26, 85.28, 0.27, 69.9, 97.55]      0.13         18.38        21.77
                serve the dish                                   [serve, the, d, ish]                                      [4.6, 70.07, 20.74, 97.9]                     85.71         18.76        17.14
                chop nothing                                      [ch, op, nothing]                                           [10.62, 99.71, 0.0]                         0.01          0.51         0.06


Observation prompt step (f): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. A chopped tomato
is on the first cutting board. An unchopped lettuce is on the second cutting board. Currently you are
standing in front of the second cutting board without anything in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl
only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                  Table 33: Action Prompt in Step (f)
                                                                                                                                                               Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                            Token                                            Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                            W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       pick up the tomato                            [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                            [4.97, 76.56, 67.6, 7.96, 97.22]                    8.06          16.67        16.20
       pick up the lettuce                           [pick, up, the, lett, uce]                           [4.97, 76.56, 67.6, 16.6, 99.87]                    17.27         19.41        19.60
        pick up the onion                             [pick, up, the, on, ion]                            [4.97, 76.56, 67.6, 0.01, 30.74]                    0.00           3.43         2.25
      take the empty bowl                           [take, the, empty, bow, l]                           [15.65, 46.8, 0.08, 73.45, 99.64]                     0.17          7.70         6.17
 walk to the first cutting board               [walk, to, the, first, cutting, board]               [0.18, 49.84, 94.62, 61.28, 93.27, 98.43]                  1.93         16.15        21.43
walk to the second cutting board              [walk, to, the, second, cutting, board]                [0.18, 49.84, 94.62, 4.99, 93.69, 98.46]                  0.16         10.64        14.12
          serve nothing                                   [serve, nothing]                                          [4.77, 0.01]                               0.02         0.14          0.18
         chop the lettuce                              [ch, op, the, lett, uce]                          [3.39, 98.94, 69.9, 76.36, 99.83]                    72.38         25.85        20.05


                                                                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (g) After approaching the cutting (h) After chopping the lettuce, the
                                board 2, the agent executes the ac- agent executes the action Get-Bowl
                                tion Chop to chop the lettuce.      to take a bowl.

Observation prompt step (g): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. A chopped tomato
is on the first cutting board. A chopped lettuce is on the second cutting board. Currently you are
standing in front of the second cutting board without anything in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl
only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                               Table 34: Action Prompt in Step (g)
                                                                                                                                                          Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                          Token                                          Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                       W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       pick up the tomato                         [pick, up, the, tom, ato]                           [6.34, 77.54, 68.8, 10.22, 97.71]                  31.69         19.38        19.38
       pick up the lettuce                        [pick, up, the, lett, uce]                          [6.34, 77.54, 68.8, 12.52, 99.88]                  39.69         20.27        20.50
        pick up the onion                          [pick, up, the, on, ion]                            [6.34, 77.54, 68.8, 0.01, 31.62]                  0.01           3.74         2.48
      take the empty bowl                        [take, the, empty, bow, l]                          [18.07, 45.56, 0.09, 77.65, 99.69]                   0.54          8.59         7.01
 walk to the first cutting board            [walk, to, the, first, cutting, board]                [0.27, 49.33, 94.7, 57.71, 93.07, 98.53]                6.29         17.89        23.78
walk to the second cutting board           [walk, to, the, second, cutting, board]                 [0.27, 49.33, 94.7, 5.63, 93.91, 98.55]                0.62         12.16        16.16
          serve nothing                                [serve, nothing]                                           [3.9, 0.01]                             0.03         0.11          0.14
         chop the lettuce                           [ch, op, the, lett, uce]                         [0.56, 98.19, 61.88, 66.44, 99.82]                  21.12         17.87        10.54



Observation prompt step (h): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. Currently you are
carrying a bowl in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce,
you should first

                                                               Table 35: Action Prompt in Step (h)
                                                                                                                                                                     Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                           Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                                  W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
        put the tomato in the bowl                  [put, the, tom, ato, in, the, bow, l]              [20.52, 56.65, 1.22, 92.99, 7.5, 66.35, 56.18, 99.37]        0.90          15.01        13.52
        put the lettuce in the bowl                 [put, the, lett, uce, in, the, bow, l]           [20.52, 56.65, 2.39, 99.84, 23.52, 68.19, 43.22, 99.31]        4.68          18.44        17.80
        put the onion in the bowl                    [put, the, on, ion, in, the, bow, l]             [20.52, 56.65, 0.03, 65.18, 10.4, 73.74, 34.36, 99.26]        0.02           9.05         6.89
           take the empty bowl                           [take, the, empty, bow, l]                               [9.0, 36.86, 0.3, 79.57, 98.48]                   1.89           8.09         6.95
 put the bowl on the first cutting board     [put, the, bow, l, on, the, first, cutting, board]    [20.72, 56.65, 59.31, 99.41, 52.52, 86.8, 0.42, 64.3, 95.3]      1.99          18.89        22.85
put the bowl on the second cutting board   [put, the, bow, l, on, the, second, cutting, board]    [20.72, 56.65, 59.31, 99.41, 52.52, 86.8, 0.18, 62.49, 95.96]     0.85          17.19        20.55
              serve the dish                                 [serve, the, d, ish]                                   [2.96, 64.42, 21.04, 91.06]                     89.67         13.23        11.43
               chop nothing                                   [ch, op, nothing]                                          [0.12, 95.65, 0.0]                         0.00          0.10          0.01


Analysis: In Step (g), because the word empty has an extremely low probability, TWOSOME with-
out normalization agent struggles with getting the bowl.
In Step (h), because other action prompts happen to be relatively long, though the probability of
serve is still low, the probability of serve the dish is extremely high compared with other actions
for TWOSOME without the normalization method. This step also explains why this method cannot
have good performance in this task.


                                                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (i) After taking a bowl, the agent                                       (j) After picking up the chopped
                                executes the action Get-Tomato to                                        tomato, the agent executes Get-
                                place the chopped tomato inside the                                      Lettuce to place the chopped let-
                                bowl.                                                                    tuce inside the bowl.

Observation prompt step (i): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. A chopped lettuce is
on the second cutting board. Currently you are standing in front of the first cutting board, carrying
a bowl containing chopped tomato in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped
tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                Table 36: Action Prompt in Step (i)
                                                                                                                                                                      Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                           Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                                   W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
        put the tomato in the bowl                  [put, the, tom, ato, in, the, bow, l]             [10.16, 69.12, 4.23, 96.87, 25.63, 81.21, 65.79, 99.59]         1.29         14.67        13.56
        put the lettuce in the bowl                 [put, the, lett, uce, in, the, bow, l]             [10.16, 69.12, 27.55, 99.92, 9.05, 73.3, 55.06, 99.6]          2.31         15.79        14.95
        put the onion in the bowl                    [put, the, on, ion, in, the, bow, l]             [10.16, 69.12, 0.01, 30.38, 11.58, 75.65, 42.65, 99.54]         0.00          4.87         3.12
               take the bowl                                 [take, the, bow, l]                                    [8.55, 54.69, 39.66, 99.76]                      60.81         14.43        13.26
 put the bowl on the first cutting board     [put, the, bow, l, on, the, first, cutting, board]    [10.16, 69.42, 42.7, 99.75, 36.04, 90.13, 19.9, 93.96, 98.81]      5.92         19.39        22.75
put the bowl on the second cutting board   [put, the, bow, l, on, the, second, cutting, board]    [10.16, 69.42, 42.7, 99.75, 36.04, 90.13, 19.29, 92.64, 98.65]      5.65         19.29        22.62
              serve the dish                                 [serve, the, d, ish]                                   [4.54, 76.52, 21.19, 99.23]                      24.01         11.44         9.73
               chop nothing                                   [ch, op, nothing]                                          [0.49, 98.79, 0.0]                           0.00         0.12          0.01


Observation prompt step (j): There are two fixed cutting boards in the room. Currently you are
standing in front of the second cutting board, carrying a bowl containing chopped tomato and lettuce
in hand. To serve the dish of a bowl only containing chopped tomato and lettuce, you should first

                                                                Table 37: Action Prompt in Step (j)
                                                                                                                                                                      Action Probability of TWOSOME
                Action                                           Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                                   W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
        put the tomato in the bowl                  [put, the, tom, ato, in, the, bow, l]              [12.59, 61.53, 2.4, 97.88, 3.03, 68.96, 58.64, 99.42]          0.08         11.26         9.45
        put the lettuce in the bowl                 [put, the, lett, uce, in, the, bow, l]            [12.59, 61.53, 3.25, 99.9, 20.56, 71.54, 52.21, 99.49]          0.69         14.76        13.55
        put the onion in the bowl                    [put, the, on, ion, in, the, bow, l]             [12.59, 61.53, 0.01, 60.24, 7.82, 71.34, 34.39, 99.43]          0.00          5.65         3.77
               take the bowl                                 [take, the, bow, l]                                   [7.17, 47.24, 53.19, 99.74]                       64.48         15.75        14.78
 put the bowl on the first cutting board     [put, the, bow, l, on, the, first, cutting, board]   [12.69, 61.52, 59.05, 99.71, 39.62, 87.89, 6.33, 83.94, 98.12]      2.99         19.57        23.26
put the bowl on the second cutting board   [put, the, bow, l, on, the, second, cutting, board]    [12.69, 61.52, 59.05, 99.71, 39.62, 87.89, 7.82, 87.65, 98.27]      3.87         20.13        24.01
              serve the dish                                 [serve, the, d, ish]                                  [3.39, 70.08, 33.37, 98.12]                       27.89         12.77        11.18
               chop nothing                                   [ch, op, nothing]                                          [0.15, 98.0, 0.0]                            0.00         0.10          0.01


Analysis: In both Step (i) and Step (j), short actions prompts, take the bowl and serve the dish still
dominates the probabilities, making it difficult for TWOSOME without normalization to sample
optimal action and learn good policy.


                                                                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3     F OOD P REPARATION


 (a) The initial state of the environment, the agent is in                           (b) The agent executes Walk-Pancake.
 the kitchen without grabbing the pancake.

Observation prompt step (a): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. Currently, you are not grab-
bing anything in hand. The pancake and the microwave are not within your immediate reach. The
microwave is not opened. In order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                               Table 38: Action Prompt in Step (a)
                                                                                                           Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                        Token                           Token Probability
                                                                                                        W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room    [walk, to, the, living, room]         [0.06, 41.87, 87.8, 4.58, 97.74]        2.06          13.84        24.51
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]           [0.06, 41.87, 87.8, 1.19, 99.3]         0.54         10.61         9.84
  walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]           [0.06, 41.87, 87.8, 0.59, 98.43]         0.27          9.20         8.24
  reach for the pancake     [reach, for, the, pan, ca, ke]   [1.31, 24.77, 76.49, 14.72, 99.0, 100.0]     80.76         37.56        34.36
 move to the microwave     [move, to, the, mic, row, ave]     [0.19, 8.96, 85.27, 50.8, 99.85, 99.04]     16.37         28.79        23.05


Observation prompt step (b): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. Currently, you are not grabbing
anything in hand. The pancake is within your immediate reach. The microwave is not opend. In
order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                               Table 39: Action Prompt in Step (b)
                                                                                                           Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                        Token                           Token Probability
                                                                                                        W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room    [walk, to, the, living, room]       [0.05, 37.46, 86.09, 5.58, 98.02]         0.12          12.14        21.74
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]         [0.05, 37.46, 86.09, 0.93, 99.3]          0.02          8.51         7.80
  walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]         [0.05, 37.46, 86.09, 0.42, 98.47]          0.01          7.26         6.39
 move to the microwave     [move, to, the, mic, row, ave]    [0.17, 9.25, 84.83, 60.45, 99.8, 99.12]       1.04         25.63        20.86
   grab the pancake            [grab, the, pan, ca, ke]        [2.08, 74.95, 47.42, 99.49, 99.99]         98.81         46.46        43.22


Analysis: In the Food Preparation task, to ensure a high probability of the items necessary for task
completion, we increase the loglikelihood of their occurrence by mentioning task-related objects
observed in the current room. For example, in the kitchen, we use You notice a pancake and a
microwave to raise the chances of the pancake and microwave appearing. To distinguish the prob-
ability of each action, our design utilizes different phrases. For approaching a room, we use walk
to. For approaching food, we use reach for. And for approaching furniture, we use move to. This
differentiation helps to convey the varying probabilities associated with each action.
In Step (a), because the agent is currently not next to the pancake, there is no action available in the
options for grabbing objects. To increase the probability of approaching the pancake, we emphasize
in the observation prompt that it is not within your immediate reach and we also use the word reach
in the available actions to raise the probability.
In Step (b), as the agent is currently close to the pancake, the action grab the pancake is included,
while the action reach for the pancake is removed from the options.


                                                                        39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (c) After approaching the pancake, the agent executes (d) After grabbing the pancake, the agent executes
 Grab-Pancake.                                         Walk-Microwave.

Observation prompt step (c): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. Currently, you have grabbed the
pancake in hand. The microwave is not within your immediate reach. The microwave is not opend.
In order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                                               Table 40: Action Prompt in Step (c)
                                                                                                                                                Action Probability of TWOSOME
           Action                                  Token                                        Token Probability
                                                                                                                                             W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room            [walk, to, the, living, room]                     [0.06, 42.72, 89.77, 5.7, 98.03]                         5.99          15.80        28.45
  walk to the bathroom               [walk, to, the, bath, room]                     [0.06, 42.72, 89.77, 0.77, 99.35]                          0.82         10.63         9.85
  walk to the bedroom                [walk, to, the, bed, room]                      [0.06, 42.72, 89.77, 0.48, 98.72]                          0.51          9.66         8.74
  reach for the pancake             [reach, for, the, pan, ca, ke]                [1.31, 21.15, 80.7, 2.52, 98.01, 99.99]                      26.78         29.56        23.51
 move to the microwave             [move, to, the, mic, row, ave]                [0.19, 14.16, 87.89, 59.33, 99.87, 99.29]                     65.89         34.35        29.45


Observation prompt step (d): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. Currently, you have grabbed the
pancake in hand. The microwave is within your immediate reach. The microwave is not opend. In
order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                                               Table 41: Action Prompt in Step (d)
                                                                                                                                                               Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                     Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                            W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
     walk to the living room                [walk, to, the, living, room]                              [0.03, 36.68, 89.09, 1.12, 98.06]                       0.00          3.15         4.43
      walk to the bathroom                   [walk, to, the, bath, room]                                [0.03, 36.68, 89.09, 0.16, 99.3]                       0.00          2.14         1.37
       walk to the bedroom                   [walk, to, the, bed, room]                                [0.03, 36.68, 89.09, 0.08, 98.13]                       0.00          1.84         1.14
      reach for the pancake                 [reach, for, the, pan, ca, ke]                         [0.45, 24.79, 79.23, 2.25, 97.99, 99.99]                    0.00          8.12         4.63
put the pancake in the microwave   [put, the, pan, ca, ke, in, the, mic, row, ave]   [0.3, 81.66, 91.57, 99.41, 99.99, 55.36, 90.36, 96.73, 99.77, 99.27]      0.23         25.02        22.34
       open the microwave                    [open, the, mic, row, ave]                               [59.42, 82.24, 96.79, 99.74, 99.23]                     98.70         42.55        54.14
       close the microwave                   [close, the, mic, row, ave]                                [0.67, 81.83, 92.87, 99.8, 99.1]                       1.06         17.19        11.96


Analysis: In Step (c) and Step (d), we control the probability of the agent approaching the microwave
and opening it by describing the current state of whether the agent is grabbing the pancake or not.


                                                                                                 40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (e) After approaching the microwave, the agent exe- (f) After opening the microwave, the agent executes
 cutes Open-Microwave.                               Put-in-Pancake-Microwave.

Observation prompt step (e): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. Currently, you have grabbed the
pancake in hand. The microwave is within your immediate reach. The microwave is opened. In
order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                                               Table 42: Action Prompt in Step (e)
                                                                                                                                                               Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                     Token                                                 Token Probability
                                                                                                                                                            W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
     walk to the living room                [walk, to, the, living, room]                               [0.14, 33.01, 90.28, 0.35, 98.68]                      0.00          3.18         4.65
      walk to the bathroom                   [walk, to, the, bath, room]                                [0.14, 33.01, 90.28, 0.06, 99.67]                      0.00          2.25         1.55
       walk to the bedroom                   [walk, to, the, bed, room]                                 [0.14, 33.01, 90.28, 0.04, 97.63]                      0.00          2.05         1.37
      reach for the pancake                 [reach, for, the, pan, ca, ke]                         [0.54, 31.01, 81.89, 10.92, 99.39, 100.0]                   0.10         10.71         7.51
put the pancake in the microwave   [put, the, pan, ca, ke, in, the, mic, row, ave]   [2.96, 83.64, 92.77, 99.74, 100.0, 56.31, 93.23, 95.9, 99.93, 99.74]      7.33         29.73        32.27
       open the microwave                    [open, the, mic, row, ave]                               [16.93, 86.19, 85.44, 99.92, 99.66]                     79.13         30.61        33.88
       close the microwave                   [close, the, mic, row, ave]                               [2.56, 87.98, 94.12, 99.92, 99.62]                     13.44         21.47        18.76


Observation prompt step (f): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen. You notice pancake and microwave. The microwave is opened. In
order to heat up the pancake in the microwave, your next step is to

                                                               Table 43: Action Prompt in Step (f)
                                                                                                                                            Action Probability of TWOSOME
           Action                                    Token                                     Token Probability
                                                                                                                                         W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room            [walk, to, the, living, room]                     [0.05, 35.97, 86.86, 7.82, 98.96]                     0.01          7.44        10.70
  walk to the bathroom               [walk, to, the, bath, room]                      [0.05, 35.97, 86.86, 2.31, 99.56]                     0.00          5.84         4.49
  walk to the bedroom                [walk, to, the, bed, room]                        [0.05, 35.97, 86.86, 1.3, 99.07]                     0.00          5.20         3.89
  open the microwave                 [open, the, mic, row, ave]                        [14.45, 81.0, 64.52, 99.9, 99.4]                    60.07         42.43        43.21
  close the microwave                [close, the, mic, row, ave]                     [6.47, 85.02, 91.19, 99.88, 99.45]                    39.91         39.10        37.71



Analysis: In Step (e), despite the microwave being already open, the action open the microwave still
has the highest probability, while the optimal action put the pancake in the microwave is just slightly
lower. During the training process, the agent will gradually increase the probability of sampling the
optimal action. It is worth noting that for TWOSOME without normalization, open the microwave
remains excessively high, if the agent happens to sample this action several times, it may learn to
avoid entering this state and refuse to put the pancake in the microwave, resulting in the divergence.
In Step (f), open the microwave still has the highest probability, while the optimal action close the
microwave is the second highest, which reflects the ability of LLaMA 7B. LLMs need to learn what
is the correct open and close and make alignment with the environment.


                                                                                                 41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4    E NTERTAINMENT


                                   (a) The initial state of the environment, the agent is in
                                   the kitchen without grabbing anything.

Observation prompt step (a): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. But they are not within your immediate
reach. Currently, you are not grabbing anything in hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk
while watching TV, your next step is to

                                            Table 44: Action Prompt in Step (a)
                                                                                                   Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                       Token                       Token Probability
                                                                                                W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room   [walk, to, the, living, room]    [3.79, 48.38, 81.0, 11.0, 98.36]       4.13         17.78        20.89
  walk to the bathroom      [walk, to, the, bath, room]      [3.79, 48.38, 81.0, 20.1, 99.5]       7.62         20.11        17.66
  walk to the bedroom       [walk, to, the, bed, room]      [3.79, 48.38, 81.0, 5.98, 98.92]       2.26         15.76        13.02
   reach for the chips       [reach, for, the, ch, ips]    [16.71, 48.0, 53.21, 72.95, 99.96]     79.94         32.17        31.77
   reach for the milk         [reach, for, the, milk]           [16.7, 48.12, 52.9, 5.54]          6.05         14.19        16.66


Ablation Observation prompt step (a): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom,
and living room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. But they are not close to you.
Currently, you are not grabbing anything in hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk while
watching TV, your next step is to

                                     Table 45: Ablation Action Prompt in Step (a)
                                                                                                   Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                       Token                       Token Probability
                                                                                                W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room   [walk, to, the, living, room]    [3.87, 44.14, 80.22, 9.86, 98.81]     11.26         20.19        24.45
  walk to the bathroom      [walk, to, the, bath, room]     [3.87, 44.14, 80.22, 14.11, 99.4]     16.21         21.71        19.24
  walk to the bedroom       [walk, to, the, bed, room]       [3.87, 44.14, 80.22, 5.53, 98.5]      6.30         17.97        15.19
   reach for the chips       [reach, for, the, ch, ips]    [6.48, 23.32, 64.79, 74.24, 99.94]     61.26         28.32        26.82
   reach for the milk         [reach, for, the, milk]           [6.49, 23.32, 64.82, 5.99]         4.96         11.81        14.31


Analysis: In the task of Entertainment, to ensure a high probability of the items necessary for task
completion, we increase the loglikelihood of their occurrence by mentioning task-related objects
observed in the current room. For example, in the kitchen, we use notice chips and milk to raise
the chances of the chips and milk appearing, in the living room, we use notice a coffee table, a
TV and a sofa to raise the chances of the coffee table, TV and sofa appearing. To distinguish the
probability of each action, our design utilizes different phrases. For approaching a room, we use
walk to. For approaching food, we use reach for. And for approaching furniture, we use move to.
This differentiation helps to convey the varying probabilities associated with each action.
In Step (a), we have found that the combination of within your immediate reach and reach for has a
higher probability of occurrence compared to the combination of close to and reach for.


                                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (b) The agent executes Walk-Chips.

Observation prompt step (b): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. The chips are within your immediate reach.
But you have not grabbed the chips. Currently, you are not grabbing anything in hand. In order to
enjoy the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                            Table 46: Action Prompt in Step (b)
                                                                                                   Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                       Token                       Token Probability
                                                                                                W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room   [walk, to, the, living, room]   [0.08, 50.83, 87.12, 29.02, 99.06]      0.50         16.55        21.19
  walk to the bathroom      [walk, to, the, bath, room]     [0.08, 50.83, 87.12, 20.9, 99.24]      0.36         15.50        12.37
  walk to the bedroom       [walk, to, the, bed, room]      [0.08, 50.83, 87.12, 9.27, 97.89]      0.16         13.14        10.06
   reach for the milk         [reach, for, the, milk]           [3.32, 29.07, 76.17, 7.37]         2.49         15.68        20.07
     grab the chips             [grab, the, ch, ips]           [3.45, 75.04, 81.22, 99.96]        96.50         39.13        36.31



Analysis: In Step (b), as the agent is currently close to the chips, the action grab the chips is included,
while the action reach for the chips is removed from the options. However, despite the presence of
the option reach for the milk, grab the chips still obtains the highest probability.


                                                                    43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (c) After approaching the chips, the agent executes (d) After grabbing the chips, the agent executes Walk-
 Grab-Chips.                                         Milk.

Observation prompt step (c): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. The milk is not within your immediate
reach. Currently, you have grabbed the chips in hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk while
watching TV, your next step is to

                                            Table 47: Action Prompt in Step (c)
                                                                                                   Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                       Token                       Token Probability
                                                                                                W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room   [walk, to, the, living, room]    [0.3, 44.83, 87.01, 40.11, 98.8]      15.45         27.58        32.75
  walk to the bathroom      [walk, to, the, bath, room]    [0.3, 44.83, 87.01, 17.79, 99.44]       6.90         23.47        18.24
  walk to the bedroom       [walk, to, the, bed, room]     [0.3, 44.83, 87.01, 10.79, 98.43]       4.14         21.20        16.05
   reach for the milk         [reach, for, the, milk]         [1.26, 29.88, 88.35, 66.42]         73.51         27.75        32.95



Observation prompt step (d): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. The milk is within your immediate reach.
But you have not grabbed the milk. Currently, you have grabbed the chips in hand. In order to enjoy
the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                            Table 48: Action Prompt in Step (d)
                                                                                                   Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                       Token                       Token Probability
                                                                                                W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room   [walk, to, the, living, room]   [4.93, 52.67, 93.82, 46.07, 99.14]     20.09         29.30        33.09
  walk to the bathroom      [walk, to, the, bath, room]     [4.93, 52.67, 93.82, 19.81, 99.4]      8.66         24.76        21.41
  walk to the bedroom       [walk, to, the, bed, room]      [4.93, 52.67, 93.82, 10.94, 98.6]      4.74         21.96        18.42
     grab the milk              [grab, the, milk]                  [5.67, 88.74, 73.16]           66.51         23.97        27.07


                                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (e) After approaching the milk, the agent executes (f) After grabbing the milk, the agent executes Walk-
 Grab-Milk.                                         Livingroom.

Observation prompt step (e): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the kitchen and notice chips and milk. Currently, you have grabbed the chips and
the milk in hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                             Table 49: Action Prompt in Step (e)
                                                                                                      Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                        Token                        Token Probability
                                                                                                   W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
 walk to the living room    [walk, to, the, living, room]    [2.18, 46.82, 92.81, 65.93, 98.53]      79.68         43.25        52.18
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]      [2.18, 46.82, 92.81, 11.11, 99.4]      13.55         30.34        25.98
  walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]        [2.18, 46.82, 92.81, 5.59, 98.8]       6.77         26.41        21.84



Observation prompt step (f): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room and notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. They are not close to
you. Currently, you have grabbed the chips and the milk in hand. To enjoy the chips and the milk
while watching TV, your next step is to

                                             Table 50: Action Prompt in Step (f)
                                                                                                      Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                        Token                         Token Probability
                                                                                                   W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   walk to the kitchen         [walk, to, the, kitchen]            [3.66, 47.61, 90.77, 46.41]       40.70         19.59        22.68
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]        [3.67, 47.91, 90.77, 0.7, 99.49]      0.62         10.85         7.97
  walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]        [3.67, 47.91, 90.77, 1.82, 98.62]      1.59         13.10        10.09
 move to the coffee table   [move, to, the, coffee, table]    [11.49, 28.79, 89.56, 3.26, 98.59]      5.28         16.65        19.28
    move to the TV               [move, to, the, TV]              [11.44, 28.82, 89.53, 21.56]       35.32         18.91        21.89
    move to the sofa            [move, to, the, so, fa]      [11.49, 28.79, 89.56, 10.04, 99.96]     16.49         20.91        18.10



Analysis: In Step (e), since the agent now has grabbed the chips and milk, its only choice is to leave
the kitchen and move to another room.
In Step (f), currently, the agent is in the living room. Since the agent is not close to the coffee table,
TV, or sofa, it does not have any actions related to interacting with those furniture pieces. It is worth
mentioning that the action walk to the kitchen has the highest probability. However, the difference
in probabilities between the action move to "furniture" and walk to the kitchen is not significant.


                                                                      45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (g) The agent leaves the kitchen and enters the living (h) After approaching the coffee table, the agent exe-
 room, then executes Walk-Coffeetable.                  cutes Putback-Chips-Coffeetable.

Observation prompt step (g): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room and notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. The coffee table is close
to you. Currently, you have grabbed the chips and the milk in hand. In order to enjoy the chips and
the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                                            Table 51: Action Prompt in Step (g)
                                                                                                                                                 Action Probability of TWOSOME
            Action                                     Token                                         Token Probability
                                                                                                                                              W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
       walk to the kitchen                    [walk, to, the, kitchen]                            [1.96, 40.29, 92.74, 15.44]                   4.70           9.24        10.40
      walk to the bathroom                  [walk, to, the, bath, room]                        [1.96, 40.27, 92.72, 0.23, 99.61]                 0.07          5.59         3.63
      walk to the bedroom                   [walk, to, the, bed, room]                         [1.96, 40.27, 92.72, 0.33, 97.82]                 0.10          6.00         3.97
         move to the TV                         [move, to, the, TV]                               [9.41, 23.75, 90.57, 19.12]                   16.11         12.57        14.15
        move to the sofa                       [move, to, the, so, fa]                        [9.36, 23.75, 90.54, 26.99, 99.98]                22.60         17.76        15.39
put the chips on the coffee table    [put, the, ch, ips, on, the, coffee, table]   [20.56, 78.62, 84.28, 99.98, 11.51, 95.85, 81.33, 99.17]     50.42         29.03        30.19
put the milk on the coffee table      [put, the, milk, on, the, coffee, table]          [20.56, 78.63, 4.54, 28.88, 95.2, 72.08, 99.16]          6.00         19.80        22.28


Observation prompt step (h): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room. You notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. The TV is not close to
you. Currently, you have the chips on the coffee table and the milk in your hand. In order to enjoy
the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                                            Table 52: Action Prompt in Step (h)
                                                                                                                                  Action Probability of TWOSOME
          Action                                 Token                                  Token Probability
                                                                                                                               W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
  walk to the kitchen                 [walk, to, the, kitchen]                     [1.68, 44.48, 92.17, 9.36]                    14.16         18.49        22.91
 walk to the bathroom               [walk, to, the, bath, room]                 [1.68, 44.44, 92.2, 0.2, 99.68]                   0.30         12.34         8.73
 walk to the bedroom                [walk, to, the, bed, room]                 [1.68, 44.44, 92.2, 0.22, 98.18]                   0.33         12.57         8.93
   move to the TV                       [move, to, the, TV]                       [5.69, 12.39, 89.18, 42.93]                    59.25         26.45        32.77
   move to the sofa                    [move, to, the, so, fa]                [5.73, 12.39, 89.32, 18.64, 99.97]                 25.97         30.15        26.66



Analysis: In Step (g), since the agent is next to the coffee table, there is now actions available to
place chips and milk on the coffee table.
In Step (h), we emphasize that the chips are already on the coffee table, reminding the agent to move
to other furniture nearby.


                                                                                            46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (i) With the chips on the coffee table, the agent exe- (j) After approaching the television, the agent exe-
 cutes Walk-TV.                                         cutes Switchon-TV.

Observation prompt step (i): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room. You notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. The TV is close to
you. Currently, you have the chips on the coffee table and the milk in your hand. In order to enjoy
the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                                   Table 53: Action Prompt in Step (i)
                                                                                                                Action Probability of TWOSOME
          Action                            Token                            Token Probability
                                                                                                             W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
   walk to the kitchen           [walk, to, the, kitchen]               [0.59, 41.18, 93.12, 15.95]             5.90         12.24        14.14
  walk to the bathroom         [walk, to, the, bath, room]           [0.59, 41.2, 93.13, 0.17, 99.72]          0.06          7.32          4.54
  walk to the bedroom          [walk, to, the, bed, room]             [0.59, 41.2, 93.13, 0.19, 98.0]          0.07          7.46          4.64
 move to the coffee table     [move, to, the, coffee, table]        [3.92, 15.52, 91.54, 13.48, 99.22]         12.11         21.00        24.27
    move to the sofa              [move, to, the, so, fa]           [3.92, 15.52, 91.54, 23.29, 99.98]         21.08         23.46        19.45
     turn on the TV                [turn, on, the, TV]                  [0.53, 78.05, 94.08, 94.97]            60.27         21.88        25.29
    turn off the TV                [turn, off, the, TV]                  [0.53, 0.97, 94.56, 64.39]            0.51          6.64          7.67



Observation prompt step (j): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room. You notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. The sofa is not close
to you. Currently, the TV is turned on, you have the chips on the coffee table and the milk in your
hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                                   Table 54: Action Prompt in Step (j)
                                                                                                                    Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                         Token                                Token Probability
                                                                                                                 W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
    walk to the kitchen        [walk, to, the, kitchen]                    [1.72, 45.72, 91.41, 6.41]               5.86          9.67        11.83
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]               [1.71, 45.34, 91.44, 0.09, 99.68]           0.08          5.98          4.02
   walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]               [1.71, 45.34, 91.44, 0.16, 97.46]           0.14          6.76          4.68
 move to the coffee table   [move, to, the, coffee, table]             [5.62, 16.76, 87.12, 8.05, 99.14]            8.34         15.24        18.64
     move to the sofa           [move, to, the, so, fa]               [5.62, 16.76, 87.12, 57.68, 99.98]           60.23         22.64        21.19
  take a seat on the sofa   [take, a, seat, on, the, so, fa]   [7.79, 14.31, 27.5, 72.98, 95.85, 90.65, 99.97]     24.72         27.06        28.53
 stand up from the sofa     [stand, up, from, the, so, fa]         [0.21, 71.61, 6.97, 56.23, 82.01, 99.97]        0.63          12.64        11.11



Analysis: In Step (i), the agent is next to the TV, and it is emphasized that the TV is not turned on,
increasing the probability of turning on the TV.
In Step (j), we found that the probability of take a seat on the sofa is higher than the probability of
move to the sofa, which reflects the ability of LLaMA 7B. However, we believe that TWOSOME
will gradually learn the optimal action for this step, and experimental evidence supports this belief.


                                                                             47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (k) After turning on the television, the agent executes
                                        Walk-Sofa.

Observation prompt step (k): There are four rooms: the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, and living
room. You are in the living room. You notice a coffee table, a TV and a sofa. The sofa is close
to you. Currently, the TV is turned on, you have the chips on the coffee table and the milk in your
hand. In order to enjoy the chips and the milk while watching TV, your next step is to

                                                  Table 55: Action Prompt in Step (k)
                                                                                                                    Action Probability of TWOSOME
         Action                         Token                                Token Probability
                                                                                                                 W/O Norm Token Norm Word Norm
    walk to the kitchen        [walk, to, the, kitchen]                     [0.6, 40.01, 93.07, 6.71]               2.38          8.60         9.98
  walk to the bathroom       [walk, to, the, bath, room]                [0.6, 40.03, 93.07, 0.06, 99.69]            0.02          5.27         3.12
   walk to the bedroom        [walk, to, the, bed, room]                [0.6, 40.03, 93.07, 0.11, 96.73]            0.04          5.80         3.52
 move to the coffee table   [move, to, the, coffee, table]             [3.77, 21.04, 90.28, 6.26, 99.11]            7.09         16.62        19.27
     move to the TV              [move, to, the, TV]                      [3.74, 21.02, 90.39, 11.53]              13.08         13.16        15.27
  take a seat on the sofa   [take, a, seat, on, the, so, fa]   [7.06, 18.35, 53.63, 76.32, 97.3, 93.12, 99.97]     76.79         36.30        37.08
 stand up from the sofa     [stand, up, from, the, so, fa]         [0.16, 72.24, 6.41, 59.92, 85.86, 99.98]         0.60         14.24        11.76


                                                                             48
