Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TRUCTURED I NVERSE -F REE N ATURAL G RADIENT :
M EMORY-E FFICIENT & N UMERICALLY-S TABLE KFAC
FOR L ARGE N EURAL N ETS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Second-order methods for deep learning—such as KFAC—can be useful for neural
         network training. However, they are often memory-inefficient and numerically
         unstable for low-precision training since their preconditioning Kronecker factors
         are dense, and require high-precision matrix inversion or decomposition. Thus,
         such methods are not widely used for training large neural networks such as
         transformer-based models. We address these two issues by (i) formulating an
         inverse-free update of KFAC and (ii) imposing structures in each of the Kronecker
         factors, resulting in a method we term structured inverse-free natural gradient
         descent (SINGD). On large transformer- and convolution-based models, we show
         that, in contrast to KFAC, SINGD is memory efficient and numerically robust.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The continuing success of deep learning (DL) is—to a large extent—powered by scaling up computa-
tional power (Thompson et al., 2020) to increase the number of neural network (NN) parameters that
can be trained. Contemporary natural language processing (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023) and computer vision (Dehghani et al., 2023) models often consist of many bil-
lions of parameters, and will likely grow further in the future. To compensate for increasingly higher
computational demands of training more parameters, many training pipelines use lower precision
data types (Micikevicius et al., 2018) and memory-efficient first-order optimizers like SGD (Robbins
& Monro, 1951) or Adam(W) (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019).
Second-order methods, like natural gradient descent (NGD, Amari, 1998), leverage curvature infor-
mation which has many applications in deep learning: It is useful for improving training dynam-
ics (Martens & Grosse, 2015; Osawa et al., 2023), pruning (Wang et al., 2019), understanding the
influence of training examples (Bae et al., 2022), and uncertainty estimation (Zhang et al., 2018;
Immer et al., 2021; Daxberger et al., 2021). One major obstacle why those methods are rarely used in
deep learning is their higher memory consumption and iteration cost.
The perhaps most common concept to scale second-order methods for DL is Kronecker-factored
approximate curvature (KFAC, Heskes, 2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015) which approximates the
Fisher’s block diagonals via Kronecker products. While the KFAC optimizer, built on top of this
curvature approximation, and its variants such as George et al. (2018) show promising results for
medium-sized NNs (e.g. Osawa et al., 2023), their usefulness for large NN training is often limited
by (i) memory consumption, and (ii) the use of low-precision floating-point (FP) training that renders
matrix decompositions or inversions required to pre-condition the gradient numerically unstable.
Recently, Lin et al. (2023) proposed an inverse-free Kronecker-factored natural gradient descent
(INGD) algorithm that replaces matrix inversion with subtraction in a matrix logarithm space. The
algorithm’s update is purely based on matrix multiplications and therefore numerically stable in single-
precision (FP-32); however, it is unclear whether this extends to half-precision (FP-16). Furthermore,
INGD has not been derived from the popular natural gradient approaches for DL. Hence, it is unclear
if and how the method is connected to the predominant KFAC optimizer. Also, INGD does not
improve over KFAC’s memory complexity since its Kronecker factors are dense matrices of the same
size. And lastly, INGD has only been tested on convolution-based models and it is unclear whether it
is useful for training modern transformer-based architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 float32                                 bfloat16                                                        Costs
                                                                                                                      6
                75                                                  75


                                                                                                      Peak mem (GB)
                                                                                                                                    32
Test acc. (%)


                                                    Test acc. (%)
                                                                                                                      5                       32

                                                                                                                          32
                50                                                  50
                                                                                                                      4                                 32
                                                                                   KFAC                                                  16
                                                                                   INGD                                        16                  16

                                                                                   IKFAC*                             3                                      16
                25                                                  25             SINGD-Diag*
                                                                                                                      2
                                 50         100                              50              100                                     Methods
                                  Epoch                                      Epoch

Figure 1: CIFAR-100 experiments on VGG net. Left/Center: Our proposed methods (IKFAC
and SINGD) are stable in single and half precision—unlike KFAC—since they do not require
matrix inversions/decompositions. IKFAC effectively performs KFAC updates and achieves similar
performance in single precision. For this task, replacing the dense Kronecker factors (INGD = SINGD-
Dense) with diagonal ones (SINGD-Diag) does not harm performance while reducing computations.
Right: Memory consumption of all methods. Removing Riemannian momentum (IKFAC) or using
structured Kronecker factors (SINGD-Diag) reduces INGD’s memory consumption both in FP-32
and FP-16. In FP-16, SINGD-Diag achieves AdamW’s memory consumption (dashed line)1 .


Here, we extend INGD to lower its computational cost and theoretically resolve its connection to
other approximate NGD methods for DL (see Figure 2 for an overview): First, we show that a special
case of INGD recovers the KFAC method. This allows us to effectively perform KFAC updates in
an inverse-free fashion. We call this modification of INGD inverse-free KFAC (IKFAC). Second, we
exploit an algebraic structure in the matrix logarithm space and propose structure-preserving updates
to maintain sparse structures on Kronecker factors. This significantly reduces the memory cost and
leads to a novel, scalable second-order optimization algorithm we call structured inverse-free natural
gradient descent (SINGD) which contains INGD and IKFAC as special cases. We evaluate SINGD
on convolution- and transformer-based models and show that it can (i) be competitive with SGD and
AdamW while using as little memory as the latter thanks to structured Kronecker factors and (ii)
yield better performance than KFAC while being stable in half-precision. In summary:
(a) We bridge the gap between INGD (Lin et al., 2023) and the original KFAC (Martens & Grosse,
    2015), which requires matrix inversions that become unstable in low precision. Thereby, we
    effectively make KFAC inverse-free and amenable to low-precision training (Figure 1, left/center).
(b) We impose structures in the Kronecker factors of the INGD update, allowing them to be sparse to
    lower the memory consumption (Figure 1, right). We analyze the impact of a range of structures
    on downstream task performance and find that sparse structures that considerably lower the
    memory consumption (even lower than AdamW) can lead to competitive performance.
(c) We show that our method, SINGD, works well on a range of modern architectures. Unlike
    optimizers which are useful in narrower scopes (SGD is best for convolution-based models,
    AdamW is best for transformers), our method can reliably train both architectures.

2                   P RELIMINARIES
We first introduce the necessary ingredients to establish a connection between INGD and KFAC,
as they are derived from different perspectives. We start by describing Newton’s method as both
methods can be seen as approximate Newton methods using NGD. Newton’s method is a classical
second-order method to solve unconstrained optimization problems. NN training often corresponds
to an unconstrained minimization problem. E.g., consider training a NN for image classification.
Given a set of N examples {yi , xi }N
                                    i=1 with labels yi and images xi , the optimization problem is
                                                                              N
                                                                              X
                                              min ℓ(µ; y, X) := min                     c(yi , f (µ; xi )),                                                   (1)
                                               µ                         µ
                                                                                  i=1
where y := (y1 , . . . , yN ) and X := (x1 , . . . , xN ), ŷi := f (µ; xi ) is a NN that outputs a predicted
label ŷi for an image xi . Parameters µ denote learnable weights of the NN, and c(yi , ŷi ) is a
                1
                    The memory footprint of our current implementation can be reduced even further with in-place operations.


                                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differentiable loss function to measure the difference between a true label yi and a predicted label ŷi .
To tackle Equation (1), Newton’s method follows the update
                                          µ ← µ − S−1 (∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X)) ,                                           (2)
where S := ∇2µ ℓ(µ; y, x) is the Hessian of the loss.

2.1   KFAC: A PPROXIMATE NGD FOR MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION

It is often computationally intractable to compute the Hessian of a NN model as required by Newton’s
method. For natural gradient descent (Amari, 1998), a Fisher information matrix (FIM) is used
instead of the Hessian matrix by reformulating  problem (1) as maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
of a likelihood function p(y|µ, X) = i p(yi |µ, xi ), where p(yi |µ, xi ) := exp(−c(yi , f (µ, xi ))).
                                         Q
In this case, the minimization problem is equivalent to the MLE problem:
                  maxµ p(y|µ, X) ⇐⇒ minµ − log p(y|µ, X) = minµ ℓ(µ; y, X).                                       (3)
The MLE problem formulation allows us to exploit additional statistical structures such
as the FIM. The FIM for the MLE problem is defined as shown below (Kunstner et al.,
2019), where we assume a label y is sampled from the distribution p(y|µ, xi ) given an image xi :
             PN                                                          PN
                                   ∇µ log p(y|µ, xi )∇⊤                   i=1 Ey∼p(y|µ,xi ) −∇µ log p(y|µ, xi ) . (4)
                                                                                              2

  F (µ) :=    i=1 Ey∼p(y|µ,xi )                       µ log p(y|µ, xi ) =

For ubiquitous loss functions like the mean-squared error and cross-entropy, and more generally,
many members of the exponential family with natural parameterization, the FIM coincides with the
generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN) matrix (Wang, 2010; Martens, 2014), a common approximation
of the Hessian in deep learning (Schraudolph, 2002; Botev et al., 2017). This relationship connects
NGD to Newton’s method. A common approximation of the FIM/GGN and Hessian is the so-called
empirical Fisher F̂ (µ), which replaces the samples y from the model’s predictive distribution in
Eq. (4) with the empirical labels yi from the data:
               PN                                                  PN
     F̂ (µ) := i=1 ∇µ log p(yi |µ, xi )∇⊤  µ log p(yi |µ, xi ) ≈ −
                                                                         2
                                                                    i=1 ∇µ log p(yi |µ, xi ) = S.

While there is no clear theoretical justification for this approximation of the Hessian (Kunstner et al.,
2019), it simplifies the implementation and reduces the cost, and has been shown to work well in
practice (Graves, 2011; Osawa et al., 2019). This approximation is also known as Fisher’s scoring
with observed FIM for nonlinear models (Osborne, 1992; Smyth, 1996; 2015). With this, we can
formulate an NGD update with the empirical FIM F̂ (µ) to approximate Newton’s method as
                                       −1
                µ ← µ − β F̂ (µ)            ∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X) ≈ µ − βS−1 ∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X).

We call this update NGD for MLE.
Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (Heskes, 2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015, KFAC) is the
probably most commonly used second-order optimizer in deep learning. The KFAC algorithm is based
on a Kronecker-factored approximation of the Fisher, which is also sometimes referred to as KFAC.
Here, we refer to the algorithm as KFAC or KFAC method and to the approximation as Kronecker
approximation. In this work, we consider the Kronecker approximation of the empirical Fisher.
The Kronecker approximation of the Fisher approximates the FIM with a block-diagonal matrix,
where each block F̃ l is a Kronecker-factored matrix and corresponds to the one layer l of the neural
network. This approximation has first been derived for linear layers, later for convolutional (Grosse
& Martens, 2016) and recurrent layers (Martens et al., 2018), and has recently been generalized to
all linear layers that use weight sharing (Eschenhagen et al., 2023), e.g. also graph neural networks
                                                                                             di ×di
and transformers. The blocks are defined as F̃l (µ) := Ul ⊗ Gl , where Ul := ul u⊤     l ∈R         and
                    do ×do                     di                                      do
             ⊤
Gl := gl gl ∈ R            . The vector ul ∈ R is the input to the lth layer and gl ∈ R is the gradient
of the loss ℓ w.r.t. the output of the lth layer. We have suppressed the dependence on the parameters
µ and the input xi and assume that there is no weight sharing for simplicity. In the KFAC method,
exponential moving averages over U and G and damping are used, see Fig. 3.
While the Kronecker approximation allows for much more efficient preconditioning of the gradient,
the dense Kronecker factors SK and SC still have to be stored and inverted at every preconditioning
iteration when using the KFAC method. While the computational overhead can usually be amortized
by only sparsely updating the preconditioner, this can lead to (i) numerical instability, especially in


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


low-precision settings, and (ii) memory issues for large models. Since low-precision training of large
models is becoming the norm in fields like natural language processing, these issues will become
more apparent in modern deep learning. There are multiple numerical concerns when using the KFAC
method or its variants such as George et al. (2018) in the low precision setting. In PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019) and Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018) implementations, all tensors have to be transformed
into 32 bit floats since there is no support for 16 bit matrix inverse or decomposition operations.
Moreover, over- or underflow can be an issue when calculating Gl and the gradient gl has to be
rescaled to improve stability. Memory constraints have previously been addressed by using a diagonal
or block-diagonal approximation to the Kronecker factors (Zhang et al., 2018; Grosse et al., 2023).
However, it is unclear if downstream performance can be maintained by using these simple structures.

2.2   INGD: A PPROXIMATE NGD FOR BAYESIAN PARAMETER ESTIMATION

Derived from Bayesian principles, the INGD method (Lin et al., 2023) directly approximates the
inverse of the Hessian. We first introduce the Bayesian learning rule (BLR, Khan & Lin, 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018; Khan et al., 2018; Osawa et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020; Khan & Rue, 2021) and an
inverse-free second-order method (Lin et al., 2021) as the INGD method builds on these works.
By the BLR, Newton’s method to solve the MLE problem in (3) can be interpreted as another
natural-gradient update to solve a variational inference problem (5) with a delta approximation (Khan
& Rue, 2021). This interpretation allows us to view a precision matrix in the variational problem
as Hessian estimation in the MLE problem. Thus, Lin et al. (2021) suggest reparameterizing the
Hessian as the precision of the Gaussian posterior in a matrix logarithm space and exploiting the
parameterization invariance of the natural-gradient update to obtain an inverse-free update scheme.
We now describe the learning rule and relate the natural gradient update to Newton’s method. By
the rule, we consider a Bayesian problem formulation, where neural network weights are considered
random variables. We denote these weights by new parameters w since random variables are no
longer learnable. We use a variational Gaussian distribution to approximate the posterior distribution
of the random variables. Later on, we will show that the natural-gradient update of the Gaussian
distribution recovers Newton’s method for the learnable parameters. The mean and the precision
matrix of the Gaussian will be treated as the learnable weights µ and the Hessian estimation S in
Newton’s step (see (2)), respectively. The variational inference problem considered in the learning
rule is defined as
               minτ −L(τ ) := Ew∼q(w;τ ) [− log p(w) − log p(y|w, X)] − Hq (τ ),                   (5)
where L(τ ) is known as the evidence lower bound (ELBO), τ = {µ, S} are the learnable parameters
of the variational distribution q(w|τ ) = N (w|µ, S) which is a Gaussian distribution with mean µ
and precision S. The likelihood p(y|w, X) = exp(−ℓ(w; y, X)) takes the same form considered
in the MLE setting while the prior p(w) ∝ exp(−R(w)) is defined by a regularizer R(w) ≥ 0. To
recover the MLE problem, we consider an uninformative prior p(w) (i.e., R(w) = 0). Finally, the
function Hq (τ ) := Ew∼q [− log q] is the entropy of distribution q(w; τ ).
Similar to the MLE case, the Bayesian problem formulation also allows us to exploit additional
statistical structures such as another FIM. The FIM used in the BLR is the FIM of the variational
Gaussian distribution defined as
                         F (τ ) := Ew∼q(w|τ ) ∇τ log q(w|τ )∇⊤

                                                             τ log q(w|τ ) ,
which has a closed-form expression and should not be confused with the FIM used for MLE (4).
Under the BLR, we perform NGD updates not only on µ but also on S. A NGD step (Khan & Rue,
2021) with the exact FIM F (τ ) and stepsize β > 0 to update τ = {µ, S} is defined as
                                                  −1
                              τ ← τ − β F (τ )        ∇τ (−L(τ )) .

This is the NGD update for BLR, vis-à-vis for MLE. We can simplify this NGD update as
 S ← (1 − β)S + βEw∼q(w;µ,S) ∇2w ℓ(w; y, X) , µ ← µ − βS−1 Ew∼q(w;µ,S) [∇w ℓ(w; y, X)].


Then, to recover Newton’s method in (2), we approximate the update rule above with
                S ← (1 − β)S + β∇2µ ℓ(µ; y, X), µ ← µ − βS−1 ∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X),


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by (i) using a delta approximation at mean µ to approximate expectations highlighted in red and (ii)
setting the stepsize β to 1.
Lin et al. (2021) suggest reparameterizing the precision matrix S in a matrix logarithm space and
performing natural-gradient updates in this space. By performing NGD in the logarithm space, we
can transform matrix inversion into matrix subtraction. We then go back directly to the space of the
matrix inverse without explicitly inverting any matrix by using a truncated matrix exponential. Thus,
the method is inverse-free and Newton-like since the natural-gradient update is parameterization
invariant and recovers Newton’s step by rephrasing the update in terms of S.
We now describe the inverse-free method. We first re-express the precision matrix S using a non-
singular square matrix A as S = A−T A−1 and perform a natural-gradient step using the exact
FIM in a tangent space (denoted by M) of At at iteration t. We then construct a new map as A :=
                    P∞ /j2M) using both the current point At and parameter M as input, where
ϕ(At , M) := At Expm(      1
Expm(N) = I + j=1 N /j! is the matrix exponential. Observe that M stays in a matrix logarithm
space. At each iteration k, we use a new matrix logarithm space associated to Ak and generate a new
origin M0 = 0 in this space to represent Ak since Ak ≡ ϕ(Ak , M0 ) = Ak Expm( 12 M0 ). The map
ϕ is a local reparameterization map as it takes not only M but also Ak as input. Thanks to this map,
the exact Fisher matrix is orthonormalized (Lin et al., 2023) at origin M0 . Thus, a natural-gradient
step becomes a (Euclidean) gradient step, which makes it easy to add Riemannian momentum into A
(Lin et al., 2023). Importantly, this map allows us to perform updates in the space of M as the matrix
logarithm space to avoid performing matrix inversions:
                        M ← M0 − βN,          µ ← µ − βAt+1 A⊤
                                                             t+1 ∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X),                        (6)

where N := A⊤
            t ∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X)At − I and At+1 := ϕ(At , M) = At Expm ( /2M).
               2                                                   1

The above update is a Newton-like update without matrix inverse. To see that, we can reexpress the
update of A in terms of S:
        St+1 = A−T   −1     −T           −1                2                 2
                t+1 At+1 = At Expm (βN) At = (1 − β)St + β∇µ ℓ(µ; y, X) + O(β ),                       (7)

using the properties of the matrix exponential function.
Our work is built on the INGD method (summarized in Fig. 4) where A = K⊗C is factorized by two
Kronecker factors. Lin et al. (2023) suggest performing NGD on tangent spaces of the factors instead.
Riemannian momentum is further introduced in the update of K and C. The authors suggest using
the Kronecker approximation discussed in Section 2.1 to approximate the Hessian ∇2µ ℓ(µ; y, X)
and truncating the matrix exponential to obtain a purely matrix-multiplication based update scheme.
However, it is unclear how the proposed update is related to the KFAC update (summarized in Fig. 3)
where another Kronecker factorization such as S = SK ⊗ SC is used. Moreover, the INGD method
remains memory inefficient for large neural networks due to the use of dense Kronecker factors. Last
but not least, the authors only consider and evaluate the update on convolution-based models using
single floating-point precision. It remains unclear whether the proposed update can be applicable in
modern settings such as training transformer-based models and using half-precision for training.


3       O UR CONTRIBUTION : S TRUCTURED INVERSE - FREE NGD
Inspired by the INGD method, we propose an inverse-free KFAC update scheme as a specific setting of
the INGD method to address the numerical instability of the KFAC method for low-precision training.
We show that this scheme effectively recovers the KFAC method. We then address the memory
inefficiency of the KFAC and the INGD method for training large NNs such as transformer-based
models by extending the INGD method.

3.1       I NVERSE - FREE KFAC U PDATES FOR I MPROVING N UMERICAL S TABILITY
We first propose a new inverse-free update scheme to mimic the behavior of the KFAC update. We
refer to this update as IKFAC or the IKFAC update. We then show that IKFAC corresponds to a
specific setting of the INGD method. Thus, our approach bridges the gap between INGD and KFAC,
and sheds light on the difference between both methods. Our approach also makes it easy to switch
from the INGD update to the KFAC update while keeping updates numerically stable.
    2
        Pseudo-code reflects the public implementation but slightly differs from the description in Lin et al. (2023).


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        KFAC             (·)−1 → Expm(·)                                                                      Structured Inverse-
                                               Inverse-free KFAC Structured Kron. factors
        (Martens &                                                                                            free KFAC
                                               (IKFAC, ours)
        Grosse, 2015)                                                                                         (SIKFAC, ours)
                             Riem. momentum &
                             adaptive damping
 Inverse-free Natural Gra-                                        Structured Kron. factors                 Structured Inverse-free
 dient Descent (INGD,                                                                                      Natural Gradient De-
 Lin et al., 2023)                                                                                         scent (SINGD, ours)

Figure 2: Overview of existing methods and their relation to our proposed methods. IKFAC behaves
like KFAC (Theorem 1), but is numerically stable in lower precision. In contrast to IKFAC, INGD has
Riemannian momenta, and adaptive damping and curvature which could lead to better performance
in practice (Section 4). INGD is equivalent to SINGD with unstructured Kronecker factors (SINGD-
Dense). Structured Kronecker factors reduce memory consumption and computational cost.

  KFAC (Martens & Grosse, 2015)                               IKFAC (ours)
  1: Each T iters, update SK , SC                                 1: Each T iters, update mK , mC , K, C
     Obtain U ⊗ G to approximate ∇2µ ℓ(µ)                            Obtain U ⊗ G to approximate ∇2µ ℓ(µ)
         SK ← (1 − β1 )SK + β1 U                                       mK ← 0mK + 2d1o (do HK + λdo K⊤ K − do Idi )
         SC ← (1 − β1 )SC + β1 G                                       mC ← 0mC + 2d1 i (di HC + λdi C⊤ C − di Ido )
                           −1
         S−1
          K ← (SK + λIdi )                                             K ← K(Idi − β1 mK )
          −1               −1
         SC ← (SC + λIdo )                                             C ← C(Ido − β1 mC )
  2:     mµ ← α2 mµ + S−1C vec
                               −1
                                  (g)S−1
                                      K + γvec
                                              −1
                                                 (µ)              2:   mµ ← α2 mµ + CCT vec−1 (g)KKT + γvec−1 (µ)
  3:     µ ← µ − β2 vec(mµ )                                      3:   µ ← µ − β2 vec(mµ )

Figure 3: Comparison between KFAC and IKFAC update for one weight matrix vec−1 (µ) ∈ Rdo ×di .
The flattened gradient is g := ∇µ ℓ(µ) ∈ Rdo di and vec−1 (g) ∈ Rdo ×di is its matrix reshape.
IKFAC uses HK := K⊤ UK and HC := C⊤ GC to incorporate the Kronecker curvature U and G.
Both methods use momentum buffers mµ for the weight-decayed update direction with momentum
α2 and weight decay γ, and a learning rate β2 for the parameter update. (Left) KFAC uses an
exponentially moving average with decay 1 − β1 to accumulate the Kronecker factors and applies a
damping term λI before inversion to handle potential singularities in SK , SC . (Right) In contrast to
KFAC, IKFAC directly approximates (SK + λI)−1 and (SC + λI)−1 by KK⊤ and CC⊤ . The pre-
conditioner update is a modification of INGD (Lin et al., 2023) and the changes—zero Riemannian
momentum, and non-adaptive damping and curvature—are highlighted in red.

  INGD (Lin et al., 2023)2                                    SINGD (ours)
   1: Each T iterations, update mK , mC , K, C                    1: Each T iterations, update L̂mK , L̂mC , L̂K , L̂C
      Obtain U ⊗ G to approximate ∇2µ ℓ(µ)                           Obtain U ⊗ G to approximate ∇2µ ℓ(µ)
         mK ← α1 mK + 2d1o (Tr(HC )HK + c2 K⊤ K − do Idi )             L̂mK ← α1 L̂mK + 2d1o Π̂K (Tr(HL̂C )HL̂K + c2 (L̂K )⊤ L̂K − do Idi )
         mC ← α1 mC + 2d1 i (Tr(HK )HC + κ2 C⊤ C − di Ido )            L̂mC ← α1 L̂mC + 2d1 i Π̂C (Tr(HL̂K )HL̂C + κ2 (L̂C )⊤ L̂C − di Ido )
         K ← K(Idi − β1 mK )                                           L̂K ← L̂K (Idi − β1 L̂mK )
         C ← C(Ido − β1 mC )                                           L̂C ← L̂C (Ido − β1 L̂mC )
   2:    mµ ← α2 mµ + CCT vec−1 (g)KKT + γvec−1 (µ)               2: mµ ← α2 mµ + L̂C (L̂C )T vec−1 (g)L̂K (L̂K )T + γvec−1 (µ)
   3:    µ ← µ − β2 vec(mµ )                                      3: µ ← µ − β2 vec(mµ )

Figure 4: Comparison of a single weight matrix’s update between INGD and our extension—SINGD—
via structured Kronecker factors. (Left) INGD features Riemannian momentum (α1 ), adaptive
curvature (Tr(HC ), Tr(HK )), adaptive damping (c2 := λTr(C⊤ C), κ2 := λTr(K⊤ K) ), and correlated
updates of K and C. The pre-conditioner matrices are updated with a learning rate β1 , and the
optimizer keeps a momentum buffer on the weight-decayed update with momentum α2 and weight
decay γ. The learning rate to update the parameters is β2 . (Right) SINGD’s update is similar but
each Kronecker factor and its momentum (•) is replaced by its structured version (L̂• , e.g. (block-
)diagonal); likewise in the computation of c2 , κ2 , HK , and HC . When updating the momenta, their
structure is preserved through a projection map Π̂• ( · ) that restores L̂• ’s structure from a dense
symmetric matrix · (e.g. taking the (block) diagonal). Importantly, we can efficiently compute the
extraction map without expanding its argument in dense form, which reduces memory and run time.
The extension of IKFAC to SIKFAC is analogous.



                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Inspired by the INGD method, we replace matrix inversion with matrix subtraction in a matrix
logarithm space and use a truncated matrix exponential map to go back to the space of the inverse
matrix without explicitly inverting any matrix. The IKFAC update is related to the KFAC −1 update
            use KK⊤ and CC⊤ to approximate the inverse Kronecker factors SK + λI
as we will −1                                                                                and
 SC + λI       in the KFAC update, respectively. We propose the following IKFAC update with
learning rate β1 for K and C using a truncated matrix exponential3

                                β1                β1
                    Knew ← K I − mK , Cnew ← C I − mC ,                                     (8)
                                2                 2
where HK := K⊤ UK, HC := C⊤ GC, mK := HK + λK⊤ K − I, mC := HC + λC⊤ C − I.
Observe that the IKFAC update in (8) is inverse-free and matrix-decomposition-free. As shown
in Appendix C, mK indeed stays in a matrix logarithm space since we use the truncated matrix
exponential Expm(− β21 mK ) ≈ (I − β1/2 mK ) in the update (see (8)). The logarithm space allows
us to impose structural constraints on K as we will discuss them in the next section.
The following theorem—proof in Appendix D—formally shows that KK⊤ used in the IKFAC update
is an approximation of (SK + λI)−1 in the KFAC update at every step even when the truncated
matrix exponential is employed. Similarly, we can show CC⊤ is an approximation of (SC + λI)−1 .
Thus, the IKFAC update effectively recovers the KFAC update up to a first-order accuracy.

Theorem 1 If the update of K is updated according to the IKFAC update scheme (see Fig. 3) with
the truncation of the matrix exponential and these two updates use the same initialization and the
same sequence of curvature   matrices U, then the product KK⊤ has a first-order
                            −1                                           −1       accuracy of the
KFAC update of SK + λI         at each iteration , i.e., KK⊤ = SK + λI      + O(β12 ).

Now, we show that the IKFAC scheme is a specific setting of the INGD method. As shown in Fig. 4,
the INGD update of K without Riemannian momentum (i.e., α1 = 0) is

                             β1
              Knew ← K Idi −     Tr(HC )HK + λTr(C⊤ C)K⊤ K − do Idi .                       (9)

                             2do

Notice that Tr(Ido ) = do , HC ∈ Rdo ×do , C ∈ Rdo ×do , and K ∈ Rd1 ×d1 . Thus, we can obtain
IKFAC from INGD (shown in Fig. 3) by simply replacing Tr(HC ) and Tr(C⊤ C) with Tr(Ido ):

                              β1
               Knew ← K Idi −     Tr(Ido )HK + λTr(Ido )K⊤ K − do Idi .                    (10)

                              2do
Note that our approach also sheds light on the difference between INGD and KFAC. In IKFAC (see
Appendix C for the details), HK and λK⊤ K are used for incorporating curvature U and damping λI
in the KFAC update, respectively. In contrast, the curvature and damping is adaptively incorporated in
INGD using (Tr(HC )/do )HK and (λTr(C⊤ C)/do )K⊤ K. Moreover, the updates of K and C are
correlated in INGD due to the trace terms. In contrast, K and C are updated independently in IKFAC
– just like SK and SC are updated independently in KFAC. These trace terms are needed to satisfy the
orthonormalization condition of the Fisher matrix (Lin et al., 2023). The trace terms together with
Riemannian momentum (i.e., α1 > 0) are missing in KFAC and IKFAC. Our experiments show that
these terms could contribute to the superior performance of INGD over KFAC and IKFAC.
3.2   S PARSE K RONECKER FACTORS FOR R EDUCING M EMORY
We extend the INGD method to reduce memory consumption and lower the iteration cost for training
large NNs such as transformer-based models. We propose using sparse Kronecker factors K and C
in INGD. In contrast, existing structured KFAC methods (Zhang et al., 2019; Grosse et al., 2023)
consider (block-)diagonal structures of factors SK and SC . These simple structures may compromise
downstream performance. Unfortunately, explicitly imposing more flexible structures on factors SK
and SC can be either computationally challenging, memory inefficient, or numerically unstable.
Sparse factors K and C can be useful as they enable us to use more flexible structures (illustrated in
Fig. 6) and achieve better downstream performance than (block-)diagonal structures. For example,
a sparse factor K (see the leftmost plot of Fig. 7) can enforce a diagonal-plus-rank-one (dense)
structure (Lin et al., 2021) in SK as we use KK⊤ in the inverse-free KFAC update to approximate
   3
     K and C could be singular if using this first-order truncation. They can be non-singular if we use a
second-order truncation of the exponential. Nevertheless, the first-order truncation works very well in practice.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



            −1
 SK + λI        in the KFAC update in Sec. 3.1. Similarly, another sparse factor K (see the rightmost
plot of Fig. 7) can introduce a diagonal-plus-rank-one (dense) structure in the inverse of SK . In
contrast, explicitly imposing such a structure on SK or its inverse could be memory inefficient.
As a general design principle, we consider special structures preserved under elementwise matrix
operations (e.g., matrix subtraction and scalar multiplication) and matrix multiplication as these
operations are needed for our updates. We exploit Lie-algebraic properties in the matrix logarithm
space to construct sparse structures4 of Kronecker factors K and C. We construct a structure5 by
using a subspace of the logarithm space. Concretely, we construct a new local reparameterization
                                                                      √
map for K at iteration t such as K := ψ(Kt , mK ) := Kt Expm(1/(2 di ) Π̂K (mK )), where map
Π̂K (mK ) projects dense input mK onto a subspace. We specify a subspace so that its sparse pattern
is preserved under matrix multiplication and the elementwise matrix operations.
It can be non-trivial to design such a sparse factor while maintaining downstream performance. For
example, many well-known sparse factors such as a tri-diagonal matrix do not satisfy our requirements
as they are not closed under matrix multiplication. In general, it can be difficult to design the
projection map so that the orthonormalization condition (Lin et al., 2023) is satisfied. One particular
subspace structure satisfying these requirements is the class of upper/lower triangular matrices6 . In
the triangular case, the subspace projection Π̂K is a weighted extraction map since projecting the
logarithm space onto a subspace is like projecting a dense square matrix onto a triangular matrix space.
The logarithm space arising from the dense case is an ordinary (Euclidean) matrix space because the
Fisher matrix with respect to K at mK = 0 is locally orthonormalized. The subspace projection is a
weighted map since it has to satisfy the orthonormalization condition in the subspace. Technically, we
                                                √
define the factor A := Kt Expm(Π̂K (mK )/(2 di )) ⊗ Ct , where Ct and Kt are treated as constants.
                             di ×di
Given a subspace ΩK ⊂ R             in the matrix logarithm space, the subspace projection map Π̂K :
Symdi ×di 7→ ΩK is specified by satisfying the local orthonormalization
                                                                       condition (Lin et al.,
                                                                                              2023) of
the Fisher matrix with respect to mK : F (mK ) m =0 := −Ew∼q ∇2mK log q(w|µ, S) m =0 =
                                                          K                                            K

I, where q(w|µ, S) is the variaitonal Gaussian with mean µ and precision S := A−T A−1 and
Symdi ×di denotes the set of symmetric square real matrices.
We consider several sparse structures and block extensions of the triangular matrix class as illustrated
in Fig. 6. For example, the subspace projection map for a diagonal structure simply extracts diagonal
entries of its input. As a non-trivial example, the subspace projection map for a lower-triangular
structure extracts lower-triangular entries of its input and multiples the entries below the main
diagonal by 2. Table 1 summarizes structures and their projection maps considered in this work. For
an efficient implementation, we only compute and store non-zero entries of Π̂K (mK ) and K without
explicitly forming dense matrices mK and K.
By using such a subspace and its projection map, we obtain a structured INGD update scheme (see
Fig. 4). We can also obtain a structured version of IKFAC. Our approach allows us to use more
expressive structures than the block-diagonal structure as illustrated in Fig. 6 and 7. These structures
lower not only memory consumption (shown in Table 3) but also the iteration cost (shown in Table 2).

4 E XPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the robustness and memory efficiency of our method, we consider image classification
tasks with transformer- and convolution-based models such as “Compact-ViT” (Hassani et al., 2021),
“Swin-ViT” (Liu et al., 2021), “GC-ViT” (Hatamizadeh et al., 2023), and “Rep-ViT” (Wang et al.,
2023) on datasets “CIFAR-100” and “ImageWoof-10” . Note that “Rep-ViT” is a CNN model
inspired by transformers while “Compact-ViT” is a data-efficient transformer using convolutional
tokenization.
To be memory efficient, we consider SINGD with two sparse structures, “block-diagonal” and
“hierarchical” , and set the sparsity parameter k (defined in Appendix. E) of each structure to be 30 so
that both structures use similar memory. We also consider IKFAC, INGD, KFAC, and AdamW as our
baselines. Recall that our method becomes INGD if we use a dense structure. We use mixed-precision
training with BFloat16 and cosine learning rate schedules for our experiments. All methods except
KFAC directly support training with BFloat16. For KFAC, we have to first transform a matrix into
   4
     These (Lie-group) structures are preserved even under matrix inversion and matrix exponential.
   5
     Each matrix (Lie-group) structure is induced by a subspace of Lie-algebra of the general linear group.
   6
     This class forms a matrix associative (sub)algebra.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Subspace of the logarithm space (Lie algebra)                                    Lie (sub-group) structure in K             Subspace projection map Π̂(m)
                         a1,1    0     ...     0                                                                                                      m1,1      0      ...    0
                                                                                                                                                                              
                        a2,1 a2,2             0                                                                                                   2m2,1    m2,2            0 
                        .
                        ..      ..    ..      ..                                                      Lower-triangular (Tril.)                    .
                                                                                                                                                    ..         ..     ..     .. 
                                  .       .     .                                                                                                               .        .    . 
                        adi ,1      adi ,2            ...       adi ,di                                                                                2mdi ,1      2mdi ,2           ...     mdi ,di

                        A11         0                ···         0                                                                                  M11           0            ···          0
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                        0         A22               ···         0                                                                                 0           M22           ···          0 
                        .
                        ..         ..               ..          ..                                    (Block) Diagonal (k is the block size)      .
                                                                                                                                                    ..           ..           ..           .. 
                                     .                  .         .                                                                                               .              .          . 
                          0             0            ···        Aqq                                                                                     0           0          ···        Mqq

                        A11       A12                A13                                                                                               M11         2M12     2M13
                       "                                 #                                                                                         "                                               #
                         0        A22                 0 , A22 is diag., A11 ∈ Rd2 ×d2 , A33 ∈ Rd3 ×d3   Hierarchical (k := d2 + d3 )                    0        Diag(M22 )  0
                         0        A32                A33                                                                                                0          2M32     M33

                        A11       A12                                                                                                                  M11         2M12
                                       , D22 is diag., A11 ∈ Rk×k                                       Rank-k lower-triangular
                         0        D22                                                                                                                   0        Diag(M22 )

                                                        ···
                                                                          
                        a0       a1         a2                    a(di −1)                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                    b0       2b1        2b2      ···        2b(di −1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                        ..           ..                                                                                                         ..             ..
                                                           .          . 
                       
                       0        a0         a1                                                                                                                                      .            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                   0        b0         2b1                           
                                            ..          ..
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                        ..       ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                               .           .                                            Upper-triangular Toeplitz (Triu-Toepl.)
                                                                          
                       0         0                                 a2                                                                                                    .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                  0         0                               2b2 
                        ..      ..         ..          ..
                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                   .        ..     ..           ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                       .           .            .         .                                                                                        ..
                                                                           
                                                                    a1                                                                                         .      .            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                              2b1 
                                            ..
                                                                          
                         0       ···             .          0       a0                                                                                 0     ···    ···           0            b0
                                                                                                                                                                    Pdi −j
                                                                                                                                                   bj := di1−j            k=1     mk,k+j


Table 1: Subspaces of the logarithm space and their projection maps Π̂(m), where m is a symmetry
matrix. The hierarchical structure is constructed by replacing the  diagonal matrix D22 in the rank-k
lower-triangular structure with another rank-k triangular matrix AA A0 for a better approximation.

                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                                          23      33


                      RepViT-ImageWoof10                                        CompactViT-CIFAR100                  SwinViT-ImageWoof10                                       GCViT-ImageWoof10
                100
                                    AdamW
                                    KFAC
                 80                 INGD
Test err. (%)


                                    IKFAC*
                                    SINGD-BDiag*
                 60                 SINGD-Hier*


                 40

                 20

                              100                      200                300       100        200         300                100         200              300                            100             200   300
                                   Epoch                                               Epoch                                       Epoch                                                      Epoch

Figure 5: Test error curves for mixed-precision training in modern NN models on datasets
“ImageWoof-10” and “CIFAR-100”. Our method (SINGD) performs as well as INGD and Adamw
while being memory efficient. SINGD and IKFAC perform stably while KFAC performs unstably.

Float32 and then transform the inverse of the matrix into BFloat16 when using matrix inversion.
We fix the momentum weight to be 0.9 and tune other hyper-parameters of each optimizer using
random search. The list of hyper-parameters used in the random search can be found in Table 4 in
Appendix B. We use the test error to measure the performance of each method.
From Fig. 5, we can observe that SINGD with the hierarchical structure performs as well as AdamW
and outperforms IKFAC. Both SINGD and IKFAC work well for mixed-precision training while
KFAC performs unstably due to numerical issues. We also observe that the hierarchical structure
performs as well as the dense structure (INGD) and outperforms the block-diagonal structure. Thus,
we can reduce the memory consumption of INGD and make SINGD as competitive as AdamW.
5               C ONCLUSIONS
We propose an inverse-free, memory-efficient natural gradient descent method—SINGD—which
addresses the numerical instability and memory inefficiency of contemporary second-order methods
like KFAC (Martens & Grosse, 2015). The algorithm is an extension of the inverse-free natural
gradient (INGD) method from Lin et al. (2023), whose update relies only on matrix multiplications.
We theoretically establish the algorithm’s relation to KFAC by showing that a modification of INGD
effectively performs KFAC-like updates. Then, we improve its memory efficiency through sparse
Kronecker factors. Our experiments show that our method supports low-precision training and
performs as well as AdamW for modern architecture such as transformer-based models. Our work
expands the scope of second-order methods to training transformer-based NNs and training in low
precision, making them more widely applicable than before. Our implementation of SINGD will be
open-sourced after publication.


                                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shun-Ichi Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning. Neural computation, 10(2):251–276,
  1998.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? In NeurIPS, 2022.
Aleksandar Botev, Hippolyt Ritter, and David Barber. Practical Gauss-Newton optimisation for deep
  learning. In ICML, 2017.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Erik Daxberger, Agustinus Kristiadi, Alexander Immer, Runa Eschenhagen, Matthias Bauer, and
  Philipp Hennig. Laplace redux—effortless Bayesian deep learning. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Scaling
 vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In ICML, 2023.
Runa Eschenhagen, Alexander Immer, Richard E. Turner, Frank Schneider, and Philipp Hennig.
  Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature for modern neural network architectures. In NeurIPS,
  2023.
Thomas George, César Laurent, Xavier Bouthillier, Nicolas Ballas, and Pascal Vincent. Fast
  approximate natural gradient descent in a kronecker factored eigenbasis. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Alex Graves. Practical variational inference for neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2011.
Roger Grosse and James Martens. A kronecker-factored approximate fisher matrix for convolution
  layers. In ICML, 2016.
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization
  with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023.
Ali Hassani, Steven Walton, Nikhil Shah, Abulikemu Abuduweili, Jiachen Li, and Humphrey Shi.
  Escaping the big data paradigm with compact transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05704,
  2021.
Ali Hatamizadeh, Hongxu Yin, Greg Heinrich, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. Global context
  vision transformers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12633–12646. PMLR,
  2023.
Tom Heskes. On “natural” learning and pruning in multilayered perceptrons. Neural Computation,
  12(4), 2000.
Alexander Immer, Matthias Bauer, Vincent Fortuin, Gunnar Rätsch, and Khan Mohammad Emtiyaz.
  Scalable marginal likelihood estimation for model selection in deep learning. In ICML, 2021.
Mohammad Rasool Izadi, Yihao Fang, Robert Stevenson, and Lizhen Lin. Optimization of graph
 neural networks with natural gradient descent. In 2020 IEEE international conference on big data
 (big data), pp. 171–179. IEEE, 2020.
Mohammad Khan and Wu Lin. Conjugate-computation variational inference: Converting variational
 inference in non-conjugate models to inferences in conjugate models. In Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 878–887, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan and Håvard Rue.                The bayesian learning rule.    arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2107.04562, 2021.
Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, Didrik Nielsen, Voot Tangkaratt, Wu Lin, Yarin Gal, and Akash Srivastava.
 Fast and scalable Bayesian deep learning by weight-perturbation in Adam. In ICML, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Frederik Kunstner, Lukas Balles, and Philipp Hennig. Limitations of the empirical Fisher approxima-
  tion for natural gradient descent. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Wu Lin, Mark Schmidt, and Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan. Handling the positive-definite constraint in
 the bayesian learning rule. In ICML, 2020.
Wu Lin, Frank Nielsen, Khan Mohammad Emtiyaz, and Mark Schmidt. Tractable structured natural-
 gradient descent using local parameterizations. In ICML, 2021.
Wu Lin, Valentin Duruisseaux, Melvin Leok, Frank Nielsen, Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, and
 Mark Schmidt. Simplifying momentum-based positive-definite submanifold optimization with
 applications to deep learning. 2023.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2019.
Zhiying Lu, Hongtao Xie, Chuanbin Liu, and Yongdong Zhang. Bridging the gap between vision
  transformers and convolutional neural networks on small datasets. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:14663–14677, 2022.
James Martens. New insights and perspectives on the natural gradient method. JMLR, 21(146), 2014.
James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with Kronecker-factored approximate
  curvature. In ICML, 2015.
James Martens, Jimmy Ba, and Matt Johnson. Kronecker-factored curvature approximations for
  recurrent neural networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory Diamos, Erich Elsen, David Garcia,
  Boris Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, and Hao Wu. Mixed
  precision training. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Kazuki Osawa, Siddharth Swaroop, Mohammad Emtiyaz E Khan, Anirudh Jain, Runa Eschenhagen,
  Richard E Turner, and Rio Yokota. Practical deep learning with Bayesian principles. In NeurIPS,
  2019.
Kazuki Osawa, Shigang Li, and Torsten Hoefler. PipeFisher: Efficient training of large language
  models using pipelining and Fisher information matrices. In MLSys, 2023.
Michael R Osborne. Fisher’s method of scoring. International Statistical Review/Revue Internationale
 de Statistique, pp. 99–117, 1992.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A Stochastic Approximation Method. The Annals of Mathemati-
  cal Statistics, 1951.
Nicol N Schraudolph. Fast curvature matrix-vector products for second-order gradient descent.
  Neural computation, 14(7), 2002.
Gordon K Smyth. Partitioned algorithms for maximum likelihood and other non-linear estimation.
 Statistics and Computing, 6:201–216, 1996.
Gordon K Smyth. Optimization and nonlinear equations. Statistics reference online, 1:1–9, 2015.
Neil C Thompson, Kristjan Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F Manso. The computational
  limits of deep learning. 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Asher Trockman and J Zico Kolter. Patches are all you need? Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, 2017.
Ao Wang, Hui Chen, Zijia Lin, Hengjun Pu, and Guiguang Ding. Repvit: Revisiting mobile cnn from
  vit perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09283, 2023.
Chaoqi Wang, Roger Grosse, Sanja Fidler, and Guodong Zhang. Eigendamage: Structured pruning
  in the kronecker-factored eigenbasis. In ICML, 2019.
Yong Wang. Fisher scoring: An interpolation family and its Monte Carlo implementations. Comput.
  Stat. Data Anal., 54(7), 2010.
Guodong Zhang, Shengyang Sun, David Duvenaud, and Roger Grosse. Noisy natural gradient as
 variational inference. In ICML, 2018.
Guodong Zhang, Lala Li, Zachary Nado, James Martens, Sushant Sachdeva, George E. Dahl,
  Christopher J. Shallue, and Roger B. Grosse. Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch
  sizes? Insights from a noisy quadratic model. In NeurIPS, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A        SPACE AND TIME COMPLEXITY

                                    Method                     △µ (descent direction)     Update SK or K           Update SC or C         ∇µ ℓ (BackProp)
                                    KFAC                          O(d2i do + d2o di )    O( T1 (md2i + d3i ))     O( T1 (md2o + d3o ))      O(mdi do )
    Iteration Cost             SINGD (Dense)                      O(d2i do + d2o di )    O( T1 (md2i + d3i ))     O( T1 (md2o + d3o ))      O(mdi do )
                      SINGD (Block-Diag. with block size k)         O(kdi do )            O( T1 (kmdi ))            O( T1 (kmdo ))          O(mdi do )
                              SINGD (Toeplitz)                   O(di do log(do di ))    O( T1 (mdi log di ))     O( T1 (mdo log do ))      O(mdi do )
                          SINGD (Rank-1 Triangular)                   O(di do )            O( T1 (mdi ))             O( T1 (mdo ))          O(mdi do )
                      SINGD (Hierarchical with parameter k)         O(kdi do )            O( T1 (kmdi ))            O( T1 (kmdo ))          O(mdi do )
                                   AdamW                              O(di do )                  NA                       NA                O(mdi do )

       Table 2: Iteration cost for a non-weight-sharing layer, where m is the size of a mini-batch.

                                                          Method                        ∇µ ℓ ⊙ ∇ µ ℓ            SK or K         SC or C
                                                       KFAC                                 NA                  O(d2i )         O(d2o )
                     Memory Usage                 SINGD (Dense)                             NA                  O(d2i )         O(d2o )
                                         SINGD (Block-Diag. with block size k)              NA                  O(kdi )         O(kdo )
                                                 SINGD (Toeplitz)                           NA                  O(di )          O(do )
                                             SINGD (Rank-1 Triangular)                      NA                  O(di )          O(do )
                                         SINGD (Hierarchical with parameter k)              NA                  O(kdi )         O(kdo )
                                                      AdamW                               O(di do )              NA              NA

                                                       Table 3: Additional Storage


B       D ETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENTS

         Hyperparameter                                Meaning                          KFAC/IKFAC/SINGD                             AdamW in Fig. 4
         β2 (AdamW: γ)                            Standard stepsize                                   Tuned                                 Tuned
        α2 (AdamW: β1 )                   Standard momentum weight                                     0.9                                    0.9
          γ (AdamW: λ)                           (L2) weight decay                                    Tuned                                 Tuned
          λ (AdmaW: ϵ)                                 Damping                                        Tuned                                 Tuned
     β1 (AdamW: 1 − β2 )                   Stepsize for preconditioner                                Tuned                                 Tuned
                     α1                      Riemannian Momentum                         (SINGD only) Tuned                                   NA


                          Table 4: Hyperparameters of all methods used for the random search


C        C ONNECTION BETWEEN IKFAC AND KFAC
                                                              ⊤                                 −1
To relate to the KFAC method, we now show that Knew Knew is an approximation of Snew     K +λI
at a new step of our scheme. For simplicity, we first assume KK⊤ exactly equals to (Scur
                                                                                             −1
                                                                                     K + λI)    at
                                                                          ⊤
the current step. Later, we will relax this assumption and prove that KK is an approximation of
            −1
(SK + λI) at every step as stated in Theorem 1. For notation simplicity, we denote S̄K := SK +λI.
The update of SK with damping λI can be reexpressed as an update of S̄K :
                                                              new                       cur
                                   (Snew
                                     K + λI) = S̄K ← (1 − β1 )S̄K + β1 (U + λI) .

            cur
Since ŜK = K−T K−1 by our assumption, we can express update of SK in terms of K as follows.
  new            cur

S̄K ← (1 − β1 )S̄K + β1 (U + λI) = K−T I + β1 K⊤ UK + λK⊤ K − I K−1 = K−T (I + β1 mK ) K−1
 new
S̄K in the KFAC update can be approximated as below, where we consider I + β1 mK as an
approximate of the matrix exponential Expm(β1 mK ) ≈ I+β1 mK and notice that mK is symmetric.
                                                              β      ⊤    β
  new

                                                                1           1
S̄K = K−T (I + β1 mK ) K−1 ≈ K−T Expm (β1 mK ) K−1 = K−T Expm     mK Expm     mK K−1 .
                                                              2           2

                                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                        ⊤             new  −1
Informally, we can see that Knew Knew approximates S̄K        by using the matrix exponential.
We can see that mK stays in a matrix logarithm space.
                       β         β    ⊤        β1     β1  T
    new  −1
                                                                          ⊤
              ≈ KExpm − mK Expm − mK K⊤ ≈ K I − mK I − mK K⊤ = Knew Knew
                         1         1
 S̄K
                       2         2             2      2
                                                                                           −1
Theorem 1 formally shows that KK⊤ used in our update is an approximation of SK + λI            in
the KFAC update for every step even when the truncation of the matrix exponential is employed.

D      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
We first consider the following lemmas in order to prove Theorem 1.
Recall that we denote S̄K := SK + λI. For notation simplicity, we will drop the subscript K in this
section and use S̄t to denote S̄K at iteration t. Notice that S̄t is non-singular at each iteration t so
that we can inverse it in the original KFAC update (see Fig. 3).

Lemma 1 Consider the following update in the original KFAC update at iteration t.

                          S̄t := (1 − β1 )S̄t−1 + β1 Ût−1 + λI
where St is the factor SK used in the original KFAC update, β1 is known as the weight of the moving
average, and Ût−1 is a curvature matrix.
                                                         −T        −1
The initial factor S̄0 can be decomposed as S̄0 = K̂0 K̂0 since S̄0 as a preconditioning factor is
symmetric positive definite.
                   T            T
Define N̂i := K̂0 Ûi K̂0 + λK̂0 K̂0 − I.
The Kronecker factor can be reexpressed as
                                                   t−1
                                                               !
                                    −T             X                   −1
                            S̄t = K̂0     I + β1         N̂i       K̂0 + O(β12 )
                                                   i=0

Lemma 2 Consider the following update in our inverse-free KFAC at iteration t.

                                 β1   ⊤                      ⊤
             Kt := Kt−1 I −          Kt−1 Ut−1 Kt−1 + λKt−1 Kt−1 − I
                                 2
where K⊤
       t−1 Ut−1 Kt−1 is used in our update and Ut−1 is a curvature matrix.

Define Ni := K⊤           ⊤
              i Ui Ki + λKi Ki − I.

Our update of K can be reexpressed as
                                                     t−1
                                                                   !
                                               β1 X
                               Kt = K0      I−       Ni                + O(β12 )
                                               2 i=0

Moreover, the product KK⊤ can be reexpressed as
                                                     t−1
                                                                !
                                                     X
                           Kt K⊤
                               t = K0       I − β1         Ni       K⊤      2
                                                                     0 + O(β1 )
                                                     i=0

Lemma 3 is useful to establish a relationship between the KFAC update and our inverse-free update.

Lemma 3 If we use the same sequence of curvature matrices in both the original KFAC update and
our update such as Ûi = Ui for each iteration i and K̂0 = K0 are used on the initialization, we
have the following expression.
                                          Ni = N̂i + O(β1 )


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, we have the following result for C.
                                                                                               −1
Theorem 2 The product CC⊤ has a first-order accuracy of the KFAC update of SC + λI                at
each iteration if the update of C is updated according to Figure 3 with the truncation of the matrix
exponential and these two updates use the same initialization and the same sequence of curvature
matrices G.
                                                      −1
                                  CC⊤ = SC + λI          + O(β12 )

D.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

We prove the lemma by induction We first show the base case when t = 1. By definition, we have
                                                                                            (11)

                    S̄1 = (1 − β1 )S̄0 + β1 Û0 + λI
                                      −T   −1
                                                                                            (12)

                        = (1 − β1 )K̂0 K̂0 + β1 Û0 + λI
                            −T
                               h          T               T
                                                                    i −1
                        = K̂0 I + β1 K̂0 Û0 K̂0 + λK̂0 K̂0 − I K̂0                         (13)
                                        |            {z            }
                                                      ˆ
                                                   =N0
                            −T
                               h           i −1
                        = K̂0 I + β1 N̂0 K̂0                                                (14)

Thus, the claim holds when t = 1.
Suppose, the claim holds when t = n. By the claim, we have
                                              n−1
                                                     !
                                  −T          X          −1
                          S̄n = K̂0   I + β1      N̂i K̂0 + O(β12 )                              (15)
                                                      i=0

Now, we consider the case when t = n + 1. Notice that
                                                n−1
                                                                             !
                               −T               X                                  −1
              (1 − β1 )S̄n = K̂0       I + β1         N̂i − β1 I + O(β12 )       K̂0 + O(β12 )
                                                i=0
                                                n−1
                                                                !
                               −T               X                   −1
                           = K̂0       I + β1         N̂i − β1 I K̂0 + O(β12 )
                                                i=0

By the definition of Ŝn+1 , we have
                                                                                                 (16)

      S̄n+1 = (1 − β1 )S̄n + β1 Ûn + λI
                                                                                  
                               n−1
                −T            X                  T                 T      −1
           = K̂0     I + β1     N̂i −β1 I + β1 K̂0 Ûn K̂0 + β1 λK̂0 K̂0  K̂ + O(β12 )         (17)
                                    |                {z                } 0
                             i=0
                                                        ˆ
                                                   =β1 Nn
                              n
                                    !
                −T           X         −1
           = K̂0      I + β1     N̂i K̂0 + O(β12 )                                               (18)
                               i=0

which is exactly the claim when t = n + 1.
Thus, by induction, the claim holds.

D.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

We prove the lemma by induction We first show the base case when t = 1. By definition, we have
                                      β1   ⊤
                      K1 = K0 I −          K0 U0 K0 + λK⊤   0 K0 − I                        (19)
                                       2 |             {z            }
                                                     =N0



                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, the claim holds when t = 1.
Suppose, the claim holds when t = n. By the claim, we have

                                                       n−1
                                                                 !
                                                  β1 X
                                  Kn = K0      I−       Ni            + O(β12 )                 (20)
                                                  2 i=0

Now, we consider the case when t = n + 1. Notice that
                                 β1   ⊤
                   Kn+1 = Kn I −     Kn Un Kn + λK⊤
                                                  n Kn − I                                      (21)
                                 2 |          {z           }
                                                               =Nn
                                            n−1
                                                       !
                                         β1 X           β1

                          = K0      I−          Ni   I − Nn + O(β12 )                           (22)
                                          2 i=0         2
                              |          {z        }
                                    =Kn −O(β12 )
                                          n−1
                                                              !
                                       β1 X       β1
                          = K0      I−        Ni − Nn + O(β1 ) + O(β12 )
                                                           2
                                                                                                (23)
                                       2 i=0      2
                                           n
                                                !
                                       β1 X
                          = K0      I−        Ni + O(β12 )                                      (24)
                                       2 i=0

which is exactly the claim when t = n + 1.
Thus, by induction, the claim holds.
Notice that Ni by definition is symmetric. It is easy to see that

                                         t−1
                                                   !                 t−1
                                                                           !⊤
                                      β1 X                 β1 X
                Kt K⊤
                    t = K0         I−       Ni          I−       Ni               K⊤      2
                                                                                   0 + O(β1 )   (25)
                                      2 i=0                2 i=0
                                           t−1
                                                  !        t−1
                                                                 !
                                       β1 X             β1 X
                         = K0      I−          Ni   I−         Ni K⊤      2
                                                                   0 + O(β1 )                   (26)
                                        2 i=0           2 i=0
                                          t−1
                                                !
                                          X
                         = K0      I − β1     Ni K⊤         2
                                                    0 + O(β1 )                                  (27)
                                         i=0


Thus, the claim also holds.


D.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

We first show the base case when t = 1. By the assumption, we have K0 = K̂0 . Similarly, we have
U0 = Û0 by the assumption.
By definition, we have

                                    N0 = K⊤           ⊤
                                          0 U0 K0 + λK0 K0 − I                                  (28)
                                           ⊤              ⊤
                                       = K̂0 Û0 K̂0 + λK̂0 K̂0 − I                             (29)
                                       = N̂0                                                    (30)

Thus, the claim holds when t = 0.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Dense         Diagonal           Block-diag.      Tril-Toepl.           Triu-Toepl.   Hierarchical

      K


    KK⊤


           −1
    KK⊤


Figure 6: Illustration of structured matrices (Kronecker factors) supported by SINGD, their self-outer
product (approximate inverse Hessian factor), and its inverse (approximate Hessian factor).

When t > 0, we can use Lemma 2 to obtain the claim. Notice that
 Nn+1 = K⊤                  ⊤
         n+1 Un+1 Kn+1 + λKn+1 Kn+1 − I                                                                           (31)
                n
                      !⊤                                                     n
                                                                                        !
             β1 X                                                      β1    X
                         K⊤                                                                 − I + O(β12 ) ( Lemma 2)

      = I−         Ni     0 Un+1 + λI K0                        I−           Ni
             2 i=0                                                     2 i=0
                                                                                                                  (32)
        = K⊤0     Un+1 + λI)K0 + O(β1 ) + O(β12 )                                                                 (33)
            ⊤
                                                                                                                  (34)

        = K̂0     Ûn+1 + λI K̂0 + O(β1 )
        = N̂n + O(β1 )                                                                                            (35)

D.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

It is sufficient to show that the following claim holds at iteration t since S̄t is non-singular.
                                                Kt K⊤              2
                                                    t S̄t = I + O(β1 )

where we use S̄t to denote S̄K at iteration t.
By assumptions, we know that Lemmas 1, 2, 3 hold. Moreover, we have K0 = K̂0 . Thus, we have
                          t−1
                                !
                          X
       ⊤
  Kt Kt S̄t = K0 I − β1       Ni K⊤             2
                                    0 S̄t + O(β1 ) (by Lemma 2)                          (36)
                                 i=0
                                 t−1
                                            !                        t−1
                                                                                 !
                                 X                   −T              X                 −1
                = K0    I − β1         Ni       K⊤
                                                 0 K̂0      I + β1         N̂i       K̂0 + O(β12 ) (by Lemma 1)
                                 i=0                                 i=0
                                                                                                                  (37)
                                 t−1
                                                       !             t−1
                                                                                 !
                                 X                                   X                −1
                = K̂0   I − β1         N̂i + O(β12 )        I + β1         N̂i       K̂0 + O(β12 ) (by Lemma 3)
                                 i=0                                 i=0
                                                                                                                  (38)
                         −1
                = K̂0 IK̂0 + O(β12 )                                                                              (39)
                = I + O(β12 )                                                                                     (40)

E     S UMMARY OF S PARSE S TRUCTURES
Fig. 6 and 7 demonstrate several sparse patterns in K and how they can be used for approximating
the dense Kronecker factor SK .



                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Sparse Triu.      Sparse Tril.    Sparse Triu.     Sparse Tril.

                                    K


                            IKFAC               −1
                  KK⊤        ≈          SK + λI


                             −1     IKFAC
                      KK⊤            ≈      SK + λI


          Figure 7: Imposing a dense structure on KK⊤ or its inverse using rank-one triangular matrices

                      RepViT-ImageWoof10          CompactViT-CIFAR100      SwinViT-ImageWoof10          GCViT-ImageWoof10
                 35
                                  AdamW
                                  INGD
                 30               SINGD-Hier*
 Test err. (%)


                 25

                 20

                 15

                 10
                         100        200     300       100   200    300         100      200   300          100   200     300
                             Epoch                      Epoch                     Epoch                      Epoch

Figure 8: Test error curves for mixed-precision training in the transformer-based models with
BFloat16 on datasets “CIFAR-100” and “ImageWoof-10” . Our method (SINGD) performs as well
as INGD while being memory efficient. SINGD and INGD can outperform AdamW in many cases.

F                 N EW R ESULTS
We improve the performance of our method and INGD by updating the preconditioners more
frequently in the early phase. Fig. 8 shows that our method can outperform AdamW in the models
considered in Sec. 4.
We further consider convolution-based models as shown in Fig. 9 to demonstrate advantages of
our method over AdamW. The convolution-based models are “GNN” (Izadi et al., 2020), “VGG”,
“ConvMixer” (Trockman & Kolter, 2023), and “HDVT” (Lu et al., 2022). We use a random search
to find the best hyper-parameters of each of the methods. The GNN model is a graph convolution
network (Kipf & Welling, 2016). We consider KFAC as a strong baseline for the GNN model. We
train the GNN model with FP32 so that KFAC performs stably in this case. We also consider the
diagonal structure denoted by “SINGD-Diag” since the structure may be good enough to obtain
competitive performance for some models. Our approach allows users to specify a range of sparse
structures of K and C in each layer.


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     HDVT-CIFAR100 (BFP16)   VGG-CIFAR100 (BFP16) ConvMixer-CIFAR100 (BFP16)       GNN-Cora (FP32)

                                                                                                         AdamW
                40                                                                                       KFAC
                                                                                                         INGD
Test err. (%)


                                                                                                         SINGD-Diag*
                                                                                                         SINGD-Hier*
                30

                                                 AdamW                  AdamW
                                                 INGD                   INGD
                20
                         AdamW                   SINGD-Diag*            SINGD-Diag*
                         INGD                    SINGD-Hier*            SINGD-Hier*
                         SINGD-Hier*             SGD                    SGD
                10
                     0    100    200   300         50          100         50         100      0       200     400
                            Epoch                   Epoch                   Epoch                      Epoch

Figure 9: Test error curves for mixed-precision training in CNN and GNN models on datasets
“CIFAR-100” and “Cora”. Our method (SINGD) performs as well as INGD while being memory
efficient. SINGD and INGD can outperform Adamw in all the models.


                                                                 19
