Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C AN C OPYRIGHT BE R EDUCED TO P RIVACY ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         There is a growing concern that generative AI models may generate outputs that
         closely resemble the copyrighted input content used for their training. This worry
         has intensified as the quality and complexity of generative models have immensely
         improved, and the availability of extensive datasets containing copyrighted mate-
         rial has expanded. Researchers are actively exploring strategies to mitigate the
         risk of producing infringing samples, and a recent line of work suggests employ-
         ing techniques such as differential privacy and other forms of algorithmic stability
         to safeguard copyrighted content. In this work, we examine whether algorithmic
         stability techniques such as differential privacy are suitable to ensure the respon-
         sible use of generative models without inadvertently violating copyright laws. We
         argue that there are fundamental differences between privacy and copyright that
         should not be overlooked. In particular, we highlight that although algorithmic
         stability may be perceived as a practical tool to detect copying, it does not neces-
         sarily equate to copyright protection. Therefore, if it is adopted as a standard for
         copyright infringement, it may undermine the intended purposes of copyright law


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in Machine Learning have sparked a wave of new possibilities and applica-
tions that could potentially transform various aspects of our daily lives and revolutionize numerous
professions through automation. However, training such algorithms heavily relies on extensive con-
tent, either annotated or generated by individuals who might be effected by these algorithms. Con-
sequently, determining when and how content can be used within this framework without infringing
upon individuals’ legal rights have become a pressing challenge. One area where this issue arises
prominently is in the operation of generative models, which takes as input human-produced content,
which is often copyrighted, and are expected to generate ”similar” content. For instance, consider a
machine that observes images and is tasked with producing new images that resemble the input. In
this context, the fundamental question arises:

 When does the content generated by a machine (output content) infringe copyright in the training
                                      set (input content).

                               This question is not purely theoretical, as various aspects of this
                               problem have already become subjects of legal disputes in recent
                               years. In 2022 a class action was filed against Microsoft, GitHub,
                               and OpenAI, claiming that their code-generating systems, Codex
                               and Copilot, infringed copyright in the licensed code that the sys-
                               tem was allegedly trained on Dvs.G (2022). Similarly, in another
                               class action, against Stable Diffusion, Midjourney, and DeviantArt,
                               plaintiffs argue that by training their system on web-scraped im-
                               ages, the defendant infringe the rights of millions of artists AVs.S
                               (2023). Allegedly, the images produced by these systems, in re-
           Figure 1            sponse to prompts provided by the systems’ users, are derived
                               solely from the training images, which belong to plaintiffs, and,
as such, are regarded as unauthorized derivative works of the plaintiffs’ images and constitute a
copyright infringement.
A preliminary question is whether it is lawful to make use of copyrighted content in the course of
training Lemley & Casey (2020); Grimmelmann (2015); Legislation & Law) (2022). There are com-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pelling arguments to suggest that such intermediary copying might be considered fair use Lemley
& Casey (2020). For example, Google’s Book Search Project—entailing the mass digitization of
copyrighted books from university library collections to create a searchable database of millions of
books—was held by US courts to be fair use Google (2015). Then, there is a claim that generative
models reproduce protected copyright expressions from the input content on which the model was
trained. However, to claim that the output of a generative model infringes her copyright, a plaintiff
must prove not only that the model had access to her copyrighted work, but also that the alleged
copy is substantially similar to her original work Svs.M (1977); Bvs.S (1992)
But, trying to identify what constitutes “substantial similarity”, as well as alleged copies remains
a challenge. Recent studies have proposed measurable metrics to quantify copyright infringement
Vyas et al. (2023); Bousquet et al. (2020); Scheffler et al. (2022); Carlini et al. (2023). One approach,
Vyas et al. (2023); Bousquet et al. (2020) asserts that copyright is not infringed if it is reasonable for
the machine to output the content even when it had no access to the protected content. The argument
can be illustrated as follows: Suppose that Alice outputs content A and Bob claims it plagiarizes
content B. Alice may argue that she never saw content B, and would reason that this means she
did not infringe Bob’s copyright. However, since Alice must observe some content, a second line
of defense could be that “had she never saw B” she would still be likely to produce A. The above
argument was exemplified by Bousquet et al. (2020) that interprets differential-privacy in the above
manner. Subsequently, Vyas et al. (2023) presented a certain generalization, in the form of a near
free access (NAF) notion that can potentially allow a more versatile notion of copyright protection.
As far as differential privacy, certain traits of copyright law make it challenging to reduce the prob-
lem to a question of privacy. To begin with, an important element of copyright law in the United
States is that it has a utilitarian rationale, seeking to promote the creation and deployment of creative
works CONST ((); Mvs.S (1954). It is important, then, that any interpretation of copyright, or for
that matter any quantifiable measure for copyright, will be aligned with these objectives. In particu-
lar, while the law delineates a set of exclusive rights to the creators of original expressions, it must
ensure sufficient creative space for current and future creators Samuelson (2016). As such, certain
issues already distinguish copyright law from privacy defined by criteria such as algorithmic stabil-
ity. Copyright is limited in time, and once protection has expired the work enters the public domain
and is free for all to use without authorization Litman (1990). This issue, though, can be modeled by
a distinction between private and public data (or protected and non-protected data). However, more
importantly, to achieve its goal, copyright law excludes certain subject matter from protection (e.g.
ideas, methods of operation, facts), since they are regarded as raw materials for cultural expression.
In contrast, requirements such as privacy protect content and not expression, which in turn can be
misaligned with the original objectives of copyright law.
Another distinction from privacy is that copyright law encourages the use of copyrighted materials
by exempting certain types of transformative uses, such as quotations, parodies, and some other
fair uses such as learning and research Netanel (2011). The fair use doctrine serves as a check on
copyright, to ensure it does not stifle the very creativity copyright law seeks to foster. Fair use is
also considered one of the safety valves which allows copyright protection to coexist with freedom
of expression Netanel (2008).
In this study we initiate a discussion about the challenges involved in providing a rigorous definition
that captures the concept of copyright. We commence with a technical discussion, comparing dif-
ferent proposed notions of copyright (in particular, differential privacy and NAF) and examine their
close connection to algorithmic stability. Subsequently, we argue that any approach following this
line of reasoning encounters significant obstacles in modeling copyright as understood within the
legal context. In more detail, we argue that algorithmic stability strategies fail to account for some
key features of copyright law that intend to preserve copyright delicate balance. We identify sev-
eral major gaps between algorithmic stability strategies and copyright doctrine, demonstrating why
applying such strategies may fail to account for essential copyright concepts. Therefore, we argue,
that if algorithmic stability techniques are adopted as a standard for copyright infringement, they
may undermine the intended objectives of copyright law. We further propose a different approach to
using quantified measures in copyright disputes, to better serve and reconcile copyright trade-offs.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.1   R ELATED W ORK

A growing number of researchers in recent years explore how to address legal problems by applying
theories and methods of computer science. This literature seeks to narrow the gap between the vague
and abstract concepts used by law and mathematical models, and to offer more rigor, coherent and
scalable definitions for issues such as privacy Dwork & Feldman (2018), or fairness and discrimi-
nation Dwork et al. (2012); Kairouz et al. (2021) In the context of generative models Carlini et al.
(2023); Haim et al. (2022) ] explore whether generative diffusion models memorize protected works
that appeared in the models’ training set. This can be considered as a preliminary question to the
problem of copyright. However, as discussed, memorization of the input content does not necessar-
ily equate to copyright infringement, and we must therefore consider other measurable metrics and
quantified measures for copyright key limiting concepts.
There is also active and thought-provoking discussion on how ML technologies are reshaping our
understanding of copyright within the realm of law. Asay (2020) explores the question of whether
AI system outputs should be subject to copyright. Our focus, though, is on the legitimacy of us-
ing copyrighted material by AI. Additionally, as discussed, Grimmelmann (2015); Lemley & Casey
(2020) explore the implications of copyright law for literary machines that extract content and man-
age databases of information.
The works of Bousquet et al. (2020); Vyas et al. (2023) which rely on privacy/privacy-like notions,
is the main focus of our work. An alternative approach taken by Scheffler et al. (2022) proposes
a framework to test substantial similarity by comparing Kolmogorov-Levin complexity with and
without access to the original copyright work. Beyond algorithmic challenges, to apply a substantial
similarity test. However, one has to provide a distinction between protected expressions and non-
protected ideas, which may in some cases be the crucial challenge that we might want to solve.
Another approach Franceschelli & Musolesi (2022) suggests to use generative learning techniques
to assess creativity. Henderson et al. (2023) seek to develop strategies to be applied to generative
models to ensure they satisfy the same fair use standard as in human discretion. The application of
this solution may not be possible, though, in cases where little to no open source or fair use data is
readily available.

2     A LGORITHMIC STABILITY AS A SURROGATE FOR COPYRIGHT
In this section, our focus is to introduce and discuss two notions of algorithmic stability: near-access-
freeness (NAF) and differential privacy (DP); these two notions were specifically investigated in the
realm of training methods aimed at safeguarding copyrighted data.
Both NAF and DP adhere to a shared form of stability: they ensure that the resulting model, denoted
as q, satisfies a safety condition with respect to each copyrighted data instance, denoted as c. This
safety condition guarantees the existence of a “safe model”, denoted by qc , which does not infringe
the copyright of data c, and importantly, q exhibits sufficient similarity to qc . Consequently, both
NAF and DP guarantee that p itself does not violate the copyright of the respective data instance c.
Formally, we consider a standard setup of an unknown distribution D, and a generative algorithm A.
The algorithm A, gets as an input a training set of i.i.d samples S = {z1 , . . . , zm } ∈ Z m ∼ Dm ,
and outputs a model pA  S = A(S), which is a distribution supported on Z. For simplicity, we will
assume here that Z is a discrete finite set, but of arbitrary size. Vyas et al. (2023) consider a more
general variant in which the output posterior is dependent on a “prompt” x, and A outputs a mapping
p(AS ) (·|x) that may be regarded as a mapping from prompts to posteriors. For our purposes there
is no loss in generality in assuming that p is “promptless”, and our results easily extend to the
promptful case, by thinking of each prompt as inducing a different algorithm when we hard-code
the prompt into the algortihm.

Differential Privacy A is said to be (α, β)-differentially private Dwork et al. (2006) if for every
pair of input datasets S, S ′ that differ on a single datapoint, we have that for every event E:
         P(A(S) ∈ E) ≤ eα P(A(S ′ ) ∈ E) + β and P(A(S ′ ) ∈ E) ≤ eα P(A(S) ∈ E) + β             (1)

The concept of privacy, viewed as a measure of copyright, can be explained as follows: Let’s con-
sider an event, denoted as E, which indicates that the generative model produced by A violates the


                                                   3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 copyright of a protected content item c. The underlying assumption is that if the model has not been
 trained on c, the occurrence of event E is highly improbable. Thus, we can compare the likelihood
 of the event E when c is present in the sample S with the likelihood of E when c is not included
 in a neighboring sample S ′ (which is otherwise identical to S). If A satisfies the condition stated
 in equation Eq. (1), then the likelihood of event E remains extremely low, even if c happened to be
 present once in its training set.

 Near Access Freeness There are several shortcomings of the notion of differential privacy that
 have been identified. Some of these are reiterated in Section 3. Vyas et al. (2023) proposed the
 notion of Near-Access Freeness (NAF) that relaxes differential privacy in several aspects. Formally,
 NAF (or more accurately NAF w.r.t safe function safe and ∆max is defined as follows: First, we
 assume a mapping safe that assigns to each protected content c a model qc which is considered safe
 in the sense that it does not breach the copyright of c. The function safe, for example, can assign c
 to a model that was trained on a sample that does not contain c. Several safe functions have been
 suggested in Vyas et al. (2023).
 A model p is considered α-NAF if the following inequality holds simultaneously for every protected
 content c and every z:
                                             p(z) ≤ eα qc (z).                                  (2)
 The intuition behind NAF is very similar to the one behind DP, however there are key differences
 that can, in principle, help it circumvent the stringency of DP.

1. The first difference between NAF and DP is that the NAF framework allows more flexibility by
   picking the ’safe’ function. Whereas DP is restricted to a safe model corresponding to training the
   learning algorithm on a neighboring sample excluding the content c.
2. A second difference is the fact that NAF is one sided (see Eq. (2)), in contrast with DP which is
   symmetric (see Eq. (1)). Note that one-sidedness is indeed more aligned with the requirement of
   copyright which is non-symmetric.
3. NAF makes the distinction between content-safety and model-safety Vyas et al. (2023). In more
   detail, the NAF notion requires that the output model is stable. This is in contrast with privacy that
   requires stability of the posterior distribution over the output models. In this sense the notion of
   NAF is more akin to prediction differential privacy Dwork & Feldman (2018) then to differential
   privacy.
4. Finally, NAF poses constraints on the model outputted by the learning algorithm (each constraint
   corresponds to a prespecified safe model). This is in contrast with privacy which does not restrict
   the output model, but requires stability of the posterior distributions over output models. This
   distinction may seem minor but it can lead to peculiarities. For example, an algorithm that is
   completely oblivious to its training set and that always outputs original content can still violate
   the requirements of NAF. To see this, imagine that our learning rule outputs a model q that always
   generates the same content z which is completely original and not similar to any protected content
   c. However, depending on the safe models qc it can be the case that the model q is not similar to
   any of them.

 The above differences, potentially, allow NAF to circumvent some of the hurdles for using DP as a
 notion for copyright. For example, the one-sidedness seems sufficient for copyright and may allow
 models that are discarded via DP. Also, the distinction between model-safety and content-safety can,
 for example, allow models that may memorize completely the training set as long as a content they
 output does not provide a proof for such memorization. Next, the fact that NAF is defined by a set
 of constraints, and not a property of the learning algorithm, allows one to treat breaches of Eq. (2)
 as soft “flagging” and not necessarily as hard constraints. This advantage is further discussed in
 Section 4. Finally, perhaps most distinguishable, is the possibility to use general safety functions that
 can capture copyright breaches more flexibly. We next discuss the implications of these refinements.
 We begin with the question of model safety vs. content safety in NAF and in DP.

 Model safety vs. Content safety Our first result is a parallel to Theorem 3.1 in Vyas et al. (2023)
 in the context of DP stability. Theorem 3.1 in Vyas et al. (2023) shows how to efficiently transform
 a given learning rule A to a learning rule B which is NAF-stable, provided that A tends to output
 similar generative models when given inputs that are identically distributed. We state and prove a


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


similar result by replacing NAF stability with DP stability, which demonstrates that the notion of
DP can be relaxed , analogously to NAF, to require only content safety under proper assumptions:

  P that the total variation distance between any two distributions is defined as: ∥q1 − q2 ∥ =
Recall
1
2   |q1 (x) − q2 (x)| = supE (q1 (E) − q2 (E)) ,
Proposition 1. Let A be an algorithm mapping samples S to models qSA such that
                                         A      A

                                    E ∥qS1 − qS2 ∥ ≤ α,
                                      S1 ,S2
where S1 , S2 ∼ Dm are two independent samples. Then,  there exist an (ϵ, δ) DP algorithm B that
                                                             m
receives a sample SB ∼ Dmpriv such that if mpriv = Õ        ηϵ log 1/δ   and SA ∼ Dm then:
                                                         2α
                                    ∥ E[qSBB ] − qSAA ∥ ≤

                               E                              + O(η).
                           SA ,SB                      1+α
Where the expectation within, is taken over the randomness of B.
The premise in the above theorem is identical to that in Theorem 3.1 in Vyas et al. (2023) and
captures the property that A provides similar outputs on identically distributed inputs. The obtained
algorithm B is DP-stable and at the same time it has a similar functionality like A in sense that its
output model q B generates content z which in expectation is distributed like contents generated by
qA .

Safety functions We now turn to a discussion on the potential behind the use of different safety
functions. The crucial point (which we discuss in great detail in Section 3 below) is that a satisfactory
“copyright definition” must allow algorithms to be highly influenced, even by their input content
which is protected. This reveals a stark contrast with algorithmic stability: it is easy to see that DP
does not allow such influence. Indeed, the whole philosophy behind privacy is that a model is “safe”
if it did not observe the private example (and in particular was not influenced by it).
This raises the question of whether the greater flexibility of the NAF model can provide better
aligned notions of safety. In fact, if it is allowed to be influenced by protected data, one might even
want to consider safe models that have intentionally observed a certain content and derived out of it
the derivatives that are not protected.
The next result, though, shows that there is a no free lunch phenomenon. For every protected con-
tent c, we can either only consider safe models that observed c and are influenced by it, or only safe
models that never observed it and were not influenced by it. In other words, if a protected content c
influenced its safe model qc then it must influence all safe models qc′ for all protected contents c′ .
We further elaborate on the implication of this result in Section 4.
Below, q1 and q2 should be thought of as safe models, and p as the model outputted by the NAF
learning algorithm. (So, in particular p should satisfy Eq. (2) w.r.t q1 and q2 .) This result comple-
ments Theorem 3.1 in Vyas et al. (2023) which shows that NAF can be satisfied in the sharded-safety
setting when the two safe models are close in total-variation. The proof is left to Appendix A.1.
Proposition 2. Let q1 and q2 be two distributions such that ∥q1 − q2 ∥ ≥ α, then for any distribution
p we have that for some z:
                                            1
                               p(z) ≥            min{q1 (z), q2 (z)},
                                        2(1 − α)

3   T HE GAP BETWEEN ALGORITHMIC STABILITY AND COPYRIGHT
So far, we have provided a technical comparison between existing notions in the CS literature aimed
at provable copyright protection. While the technical notion of privacy may seem closely related, as
observed through NAF, there are differences and there is room for more refined definitions that may
capture these essential differences. While algorithmic stability approaches hold promise in helping
courts assess copyright infringement cases (an issue we further discuss in Section 4), as we will show
next, they cannot serve as a definitive test for copyright infringement. In order to see that, we next
discuss the issue of copyright from a legal perspective. From this perspective, formal algorithmic
stability approaches are both overly inclusive and overly exclusive. Consequently, we will organize
this section based on these challenges.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   OVER - INCLUSIVENESS

Here we focus on a concern that algorithmic stability approaches may filter out lawful output content
that does not infringe copyright in the input content. Because non-infringing output content is lawful,
employing algorithmic stability approaches as filters to generative models may needlessly limit their
production capabilities, and, thereby, undermine the ultimate objectives of copyright law. Copyright
law intends to foster the creation of original works of authorship by securing incentives to authors
and, at the same time, ensuring the freedom of current and future authors to use and build upon
existing works. The law derives from the U.S. Constitutional authority: “To promote the Progress of
Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right
to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” CONST (()
However, the goal of promoting progress is often at odds with granting unlimited control over copy-
righted materials. This is why copyright law sets fundamental limits on the rights granted to au-
thors. Promoting progress is inconsistent with unrestricted right to prevent every unauthorized use ,
because creators and creative processes are embedded in cultural contexts. The creative process of-
ten requires ongoing interactions with preexisting materials, whether through learning and research,
engagement with prior art to generating new interpretation, or the use of a shared cultural language
and applying existing styles to make works of authorship more comprehensible. Consequently, the
utilization of copyrighted materials becomes a crucial input in any creative process Cohen (2012);
Elkin-Koren (1996).
For this reason, unlike the mandate of the algorithmic stability approaches, copyright law does not
require that an output content will not draw at all on an input content to be lawful and non-infringing.
On the contrary. There are many cases where copyright law explicitly allows for an output content
to heavily draw on the input content without raising infringement concerns. In such cases, allowing
an input content to impact an output content is not only something that copyright law permits, it is
something that copyright law encourages. Doing so, as Jessica Litman put it: “is not parasitism; it
is the essence of authorship.” Litman (1990)
Copyright law allows an output content to substantially draw on an input content in three main
cases, which we next explore: (1) When the input content is in the public domain, (2) When the
input content is copyrighted but incorporates aspects that are excluded from copyright protection,
and (3) When the use of the protected aspects of the input content are lawful.

When an input content is in the public domain An input content may be unprotected because
its copyright term has lapsed. Copyrights are limited in duration (though relatively a long duration,
which in most countries will last life of the author plus seventy years). Once the copyright term
expires, an input content enters the public domain and could freely be used and impact an output
content without risking copyright infringement Litman (1990). Public domain materials may also
consist of anything that is not at all copyrightable, such as natural resources. For instance, if two
photographers are taking pictures of the same person, some similarity between those pictures is
likely due to the way this person looks, which is in the public domain. Other elements such as an
original composition, or the choices made regarding lighting conditions and the exposure settings
used in capturing the photograph, might be considered copyrighted expression. If the generative
model only makes use of the former in the output content, it may not constitute an infringement.

When an input content incorporates unprotected aspects Input contents with a valid copyright
term, enjoys “full” legal protection, but it too is limited in scope. As provided by the copyright
statute, “[i]n no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any
idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless
of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.” U.S.C (2006).
By this principle, an output content may substantially draw on an input content without infringing
copyright in the latter, as long as such taking is limited to the input’s content unprotected elements.

• Procedures, processes, systems and methods of operation Copyright protection does not ex-
  tend to “useful” or “functional” aspects of copyrighted works such as procedures, systems, and
  methods of operation. These aspects of an input content are freely accessible for an output content
  to draw upon. . For example, in the seminal case of Baker vs. Selden, the Supreme Court allowed
  Baker to create a book covering an improved book-keeping system while drawing heavily on the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  charts, examples, and descriptions used in Selden’s book without infringing Selden’s copyright
  Bvs.S (1879). As the court explained, these aspects that Baker took from Selden’s work are func-
  tional methods of operations and as such are not within the domain of copyright law. Similarly,
  in Lotus v. Borland, the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit allowed Borland to
  copy Lotus’s menu command hierarchy for its spreadsheet program, Lotus 1-2-3. The court ruled
  that Lotus menu command hierarchy was not copyrightable because they form methods of oper-
  ation L.vs.B (1996) - Consequently, if a generative model simply extracts procedures, processes,
  systems and methods from the training set it may not infringe copyright.
• Ideas Copyright protection is limited to concrete “expressions” and does not cover abstract
  “ideas.” Thus, in Nicholas v. Universal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
  allowed Universal to incorporate many aspects of Anne Nichols’ play Abie’s Irish Rose, in their
  film The Cohens and Kellys vs. U (1930). The court explained that the narratives and characters
  that Universal used (“a quarrel between a Jewish and an Irish father, the marriage of their chil-
  dren, the birth of grandchildren and a reconciliation”), were “too generalized an abstraction from
  what she wrote. . . [and, as such]. . . only a part of her [unprotected] ‘ideas.’” vs. U (1930)
  When a generative model simply extract ideas from copyrighted materials, rather than replicating
  expressive content from their training data, it does not trigger copyright infringement.
• Facts Copyright protection also does not extend to facts. For example, in Nash v. C.B.S., the
  court ruled that C.B.S. could draw heavily from Jay Robert Nash’s books without infringing his
  copyright N.vs.C (1990). As the court explained, the hypotheses that Nash rose speculating the
  capture of the gangster John Dillinger and the evidence he gathered (such as the physical differ-
  ences between Dillinger and the corpse, the planted fingerprints, and photographs of Dillinger and
  other gangsters in the 1930s) were all unprotected facts that Nash could not legally appropriate.
  Consequently, generative models which simply memorize facts do not infringe copyright law.

When the use of the protected aspects of the input content was lawful Even when the protected
elements of an input content (“expressions” rather than the “ideas”) are impacting an output content,
such impact may be legally permissible. There are two main categories of lawful uses: de minimis
copying and fair use.

• De minimis copying Copyright law allows de minimis copying of protected expression, namely
  the coping of an insignificant amount that has no substantial impact on the rights of the copyright
  owner or their economic value. In a similar way, “[w]ords and short phrases, such as names,
  titles, and slogans, are uncopyrightable.”Office (2021). However, de minimis coping of protected
  expression may be unlawful if it captures the heart of the work Hvs.R (1985). For example,
  phrases like “E.T. Phone Home.” Uvs.K (1982)
• Fair Use Copyright law also allows copying of protected expression if it qualifies as fair use.
  The U.S. fair use doctrine, as codified in § 107 of the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, is yet another
  legal standard to carve out an exception for an otherwise infringing use after weighing a set of four
  statutory factors. The four statutory factors are: (1) the purpose and character of the use, including
  whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes; (2) the nature
  of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
  copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value
  of the copyrighted work U.S.C (2006).

Importantly, the fair use claimant need not satisfy each factor in order for the use to qualify as fair
use Cvs.A (1994). Nor are the four factors meant to set out some kind of mathematical equation
whereby, if at least three factors favor or disfavor fair use, that determines the result Netanel (2011).
Rather, the factors serve as guidelines for holistic, case-by-case decision. In that vein, in its preamble
paragraph, § 107 provides a list of several examples of the types of uses that can qualify as fair use.
The examples, which include “criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple
copies for classroom use), scholarship, [and] research,”U.S.C (2006) are often thought to be favored
uses for qualifying for fair use. Importantly, however, the list of favored uses is not dispositive.
Rather, fair use’s open-ended framework imposes no limits on the types of uses that courts may
determine are “fair” Cvs.A (1994).
When the factors strongly favour a finding of fair use, even output contents that are heavily im-
pacted by copyrighted input contents may be excused from copyright infringement. For example, in


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, although the rap music group 2 Live Crew copied significant portions of
lyrics and sound from Roy Orbison’s familiar rock ballad “Oh, Pretty Woman” Cvs.A (1994). The
Supreme Court denied liability in this case, based on the premise that the 2 Live Crew’s derivative
work was considered a “parody” of Orbison’s original work, and, therefore, constituted fair use.
Similarly, in The Authors Guild v. Google, the court defended Googles’ mass digitization of mil-
lions of copyrighted books to create a searchable online database as fair use, because it considered
Google’s venture to be socially desirable Google (2015) as explained by Sag (2018), concluding that
the copying of expressive works for non-expressive purposes should not be counted as a copyright
infringement.

3.2   OVERLY E XCLUSIVENESS

Algorithmic stability approaches are under-exhaustive because they might fail to filter out unlawful
output content that infringes copyright in the input content. As explained, algorithmic stability
approaches find infringement only when the output content heavily draws on an input content. The
law of copyright infringement, however, is not so narrow. Copyright law only requires that the
output content will heavily draw on the protected expression that originated from an input content to
find infringement. Such expression need not come from the input content itself; it may come from
other sources including copies, derivatives or snippets of the original content Lee et al. (2023).
To illustrate this point, consider the fact pattern in the U.S. Supreme Court case Warhol vs. Gold-
smith Wvs.G. In that case, the portrait photographer Lynn Goldsmith accused Andy Warhol of in-
fringing copyrights in a photograph she took of the American singer Prince. Goldsmith authorized
Warhol to use her photograph as an “artistic reference” for creating a single derivative illustration
(see Fig. 1, bottom right most picture). Still, she did not approve nor imagine that Warhol had,
in fact, made 16 different derivatives from the original photograph. Warhol’s collection of Prince
portraits, also known as the Prince series , is depicted in Fig. 1, right side.
For our purposes, assume the Prince Series’ portraits served as input for a generative machine. If
the machine’s output content draws heavily on Goldsmith’s protected expression that is baked into
the Prince Series’ portraits, then the output content may infringe Goldsmith’s copyright in original
photograph (Fig. 1 , left side), ), even if the machine did not have access to Goldsmith’s original
photograph. Moreover, this risk will not be eliminated even if the Supreme Court were deciding that
the Prince Series’ portraits themselves are non-infringing because they constitute fair use.
Putting it simply, copying from a derivative work—whether authorized by the copyright owner or
not— may infringe copyright in the original work on which the derivative work is based. This
situation is prevalent in copyright practice, especially in music. In modern music copyright cases,
plaintiffs usually show access to the original copyrighted work (musical composition) by showing
access to a derivative work of that original work (sound recording). Plaintiffs are not required to
demonstrate that the defendants also had access to the original sheet music nor that they could
actually read musical notes.
Lastly, output content can also infringe copyright in input content by accessing parts or snippets
of the input content even without accessing the input content in its entirety. This concern was
raised recently in The Authors Guild v. Google, a case dealing with the legality of the Google Book
Search Library Partner project Google (2015). As part of this project, Google scanned and entered
many copyrighted books into their searchable database but only provided “snippet views” of the
scanned pages in search results to their users. The plaintiff in the case argued that Google facilitated
copyright infringement by allowing users to aggregate different snippets and reconstruct infringing
copies of their original works. The court ended up dismissing this claim, but only because Google
took affirmative steps to prevent such reconstruction by limiting the number of available snippets
and by blacklisting certain pages.

4     D ISCUSSION
Algorithmic stability approaches, when used to establish a proof of copyright infringement are either
too strict or too lenient from a legal perspective. Due to this misfit, applying algorithmic stability
approaches as filters for generative models is likely to distort the delicate balance that copyright law
aims to achieve between economic incentives and access to creative works.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The purpose of this article is to illuminate this misfit. This is not to say that algorithmic approaches in
general and algorithmic stability approaches in particular have no value to the legal profession. Quite
the opposite. Computer science methodologies bring a significant benefit to the judicial table: the
capability to process large volumes of information and assist policymakers in making more informed
decisions. Many areas in law involve applying murky “standards” as oppose to rigid “rules.” Kaplow
(1992). As discussed, copyright law makes extensive use of legal standards, such as idea/expression
distinction, or fair use principles, to restrict the scope of protection accorded to copyrighted works.
Consequently, copyright infringement cannot be boiled down to a binary computational test.
The true value of computer science methodologies to the legal profession is not necessarily to convert
murky standards into rigid rules (e.g., by constructing a definitive binary test for copyright infringe-
ment), but, instead, to make legal standards less murky. A rich body of scholarship explores the ills
of vaguely-defined legal standards, especially in the context of intellectual property Parchomovsky
& Stein (2009); Benkler (1999); Samuelson (1996); Gibson (2006); Menell & Meurer (2013) Al-
gorithmic stability approaches, if applied with caution, may introduce new quantifiable methods for
applying legal standards in a clearer and more predictable manner. Such methods could help mea-
sure vague legal concepts such as “fairness” “privacy,” and, in the copyright context—“originality”,
and at the same time facilitate the ongoing development of legal and social norms Hacohen & Elkin-
Koren (2024). At the same time, to ensure these methods are beneficial, it is important to acknowl-
edge the limitations of applying algorithmic stability approaches to copyright.

Stability is not safe The NAF framework, that allows a rich class of safety functions, has the
potential to circumvent some of the challenges presented, but may still be limited and we now wish
to discuss this in further details.
To utilize the NAF framework, the first basic question one needs to address is Given a protected
content c how should we choose the safe model safe(c)? It seems natural to include models that are
not heavily influenced by c since otherwise this might allow copyright breaching. However, such
choice of safe(c) leads to the discussed limitations encountered by algorithmic-stability approaches
such as DP. It is true that some aspects, such as content safety vs. model safety, can be better aligned
through the definition of NAF but also, as Proposition 1 shows, through variants of DP. Overall,
there is room, then, to further investigate the different possible models for copyright, within such an
approach, but we should take into account the limitations presented in Section 3.
Perhaps a more exciting application of NAF, then, is to consider notions of safety that allow some
influence by c. e.g. to enable generating parodies, fair-use, de minimis copying, etc. We consider
then safety functions that now do have access to c, and exploit this access to validate that only
allowed influence happens. Here we face a different challenge. Suppose that qc is such a safe model
for content c. Suppose, also, that qc′ is another safe model for content c′ . If qc′ and qc are far away,
then Proposition 1 shows that there is no hope to output a NAF model. But even if qc and qc′ are
not far away, but suppose that qc′ ignores content c, then for any content z that is influenced by c we
may assume that:
                                            qc (z) ≫ qc′ (z).
But, if p is a NAF model, we must also have due to Eq. (2) with respect to c′ and z:
                                             qc (z) ≫ p(z).
In other words, the NAF model censors permissible content z even though it is safe. This happens
because z is an improbable event in model qc′ . Not because z breaches copyright of c′ but because
it is influenced by c, and content that is influenced by c is discarded by safe models that had no
access to c. It follows, then, that all safe models must treat protected content in a similar manner,
and qc′ must also be influenced by c if we expect the NAF model to make any use of it. Hence, it
is unclear if a more refined notion of safe may help circumvent the hurdles of applying the privacy
approach for establishing a copyright infringement. This suggests, though, to perhaps consider a
relaxed variant of NAF in which a content is discarded by a safe model only when certain links
between the protected content and the generated content are established.
It seems, then, that an algorithmic approach that assist jurists in understanding such links between
existing works of authorship, study their hidden interconnection, and quantify their originality can
hold great promise. From this perspective, originality is evaluated by the semantic distance between
a measured expressive work and similar materials found in the corpus of pre-existing expressions.
Research in this area is just beginning but holds a great promise for the copyright system.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Omer Angel and Yinon Spinka. Pairwise optimal coupling of multiple random variables. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1903.00632, 2019.
Clark D Asay. Independent creation in a world of ai. FIU L. Rev., 14:201, 2020.
AVs.S. Andersen et al v. Stability AI Ltd. et al, Docket No. 3:23-cv-00201 (N.D. Cal. Jan 13, 2023).
  2023.
Yochai Benkler. Free as the air to common use: First amendment constraints on enclosure of the
  public domain. NyuL Rev., 74:354, 1999.
Olivier Bousquet, Roi Livni, and Shay Moran. Synthetic data generators–sequential and private.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7114–7124, 2020.
Mark Bun, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Simultaneous private learning of multiple concepts. In
 Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pp.
 369–380, 2016.
Bvs.S. Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99. 1879.
Bvs.S. Brown Bag Software v. Symantec Corp., 960 F.2d 1465, 1472 (9th Cir. 1992)). 1992.
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13188, 2023.
Julie E Cohen. Configuring the networked self: Law, code, and the play of everyday practice. Yale
  University Press, 2012.
U.S CONST. U.S. CONST. art. I, 8, cl. 8. ().
Cvs.A. Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 578. 1994.
Dvs.G. DOE 1 et al v. GitHub, Inc. et al class action. 2022.
Cynthia Dwork and Vitaly Feldman. Privacy-preserving prediction. In Conference On Learning
  Theory, pp. 1693–1702. PMLR, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Niva Elkin-Koren. Cyberlaw and social change: A democratic approach to copyright law in cy-
  berspace. Cardozo Arts & Ent. LJ, 14:215, 1996.
Giorgio Franceschelli and Mirco Musolesi. Deepcreativity: measuring creativity with deep learning
  techniques. Intelligenza Artificiale, 16(2):151–163, 2022.
James Gibson. Risk aversion and rights accretion in intellectual property law. Yale LJ, 116:882,
  2006.
Avs. Google. Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202, 207–08, 225 (2d Cir. 2015)). 2015.
James Grimmelmann. Copyright for literate robots. Iowa L. Rev., 101:657, 2015.
Uri Y Hacohen and Niva Elkin-Koren. Copyright regenerated: Harnessing genai to measure origi-
  nality and copyright scope. Hardvard Journal of Law & Technology, 2024.
Niv Haim, Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, Ohad Shamir, and Michal Irani. Reconstructing training data
  from trained neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07758, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter Henderson, Xuechen Li, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Mark A Lemley, and Percy
  Liang. Foundation models and fair use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15715, 2023.
Hvs.R. Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U.S. 539. 1985.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Louis Kaplow. Rules versus standards: An economic analysis. Duke Law Journal, 42(3):557–629,
  1992.
Aleksandra Korolova, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Nina Mishra, and Alexandros Ntoulas. Releasing
  search queries and clicks privately. In Proceedings of the 18th international conference on World
  wide web, pp. 171–180, 2009.
Katherine Lee, A Feder Cooper, and James Grimmelmann. Talkin”bout ai generation: Copyright
  and the generative-ai supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08133, 2023.
Legislation and Legal Counsel (Civil Law). OPINION: USES OF COPYRIGHTED MATERIALS
  FOR MACHINE LEARNING. State of Israel Ministry of Justice, 2022.
Mark A Lemley and Bryan Casey. Fair learning. Tex. L. Rev., 99:743, 2020.
Jessica Litman. The public domain. Emory Lj, 39:965, 1990.
L.vs.B. Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int’l, Inc., 49 F.3d 807, 815 (1st Cir. 1995); Lotus Dev. Corp.
  v. Borland Int’l, Inc., 516 U.S. 233 (1996) . 1996.
Peter S Menell and Michael J Meurer. Notice failure and notice externalities. Journal of Legal
  Analysis, 5(1):1–59, 2013.
Mvs.S. Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 219] . 1954.
Neil Weinstock Netanel. Copyright’s paradox. Oxford University Press, 2008.
Neil Weinstock Netanel. Making sense of fair use. Lewis & Clark L. Rev., 15:715, 2011.
N.vs.C. Nash v. CBS, Inc., 899 F.2d 1537 (7th, cir., 1990). 1990.
U.S. Copyright Office. Works Not Protected by Copyright. 2021.
Gideon Parchomovsky and Alex Stein. Originality. Va. L. Rev., 95:1505, 2009.
Matthew Sag. The new legal landscape for text mining and machine learning. J. Copyright Soc’y
 USA, 66:291, 2018.
Pamela Samuelson. The copyright grab. Wired Magazine, 4, 1996.
Pamela Samuelson. Reconceptualizing copyright’s merger doctrine. J. Copyright Soc’y USA, 63:
  417, 2016.
Sarah Scheffler, Eran Tromer, and Mayank Varia. Formalizing human ingenuity: A quantitative
  framework for coyright law’s substantial similarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01230, 2022.
Svs.M. Sid & Marty Krofft TV Prod., Inc. v. McDonald’s Corp., 562 F.2d 1157, 1164 (9th Cir.
  1977). 1977.
U.S.C. 17 U.S.C. § 102(b). 2006.
Uvs.K. Universal City Studios v. Kamar Industries, Inc., 217 U.S.P.Q. (BNA) 1165 (S.D. Tex 1982).
  1982.
N vs. U. Nichols v. Universal Pictures Corporation, 45 F.2d 119, (2st Cir., 1930) . 1930.
Nikhil Vyas, Sham Kakade, and Boaz Barak. Provable copyright protection for generative models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10870, 2023.
Wvs.G. Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith (Docket 21–869)]. .


                                                11
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A        P ROOFS
 A.1       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

 Suppose that
                                                   ∥q1 − q2 ∥ ≥ α.
 In particular there exists an event E such that:

                                           q2 (E) ≤ q1 (E) − α ≤ 1 − α.

 Let p be some distribution. We assume that p(E) ≥ 1/2 (otherwise, replace E with its complement
 and q1 and q2 replace roles). Thus, we have that:

                                              1         1
                                                ≥
                                           p(E) ≥            q2 (E).
                                              2     2(1 − α)
 In particular, for some z ∈ E, the result follows.

 A.2       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

 The proof relies on a coupling Lemma, taken from Angel & Spinka (2019). Recall that, given
 a collection of distribution measures Q, a coupling can be thought of as a collection of random
 variables X = (Xq )q∈Q , whose marginal distributions are given by q. I.e. P(Xq = x) = q(x):
 Lemma 1 (A special case of Thm 2 in Angel & Spinka (2019)). Let Q be the collection of all
 posteriors over a finite domain X 1 . There exists a coupling such that for every q, q ′ ∈ Q:

                                                                   2∥q − q ′ ∥
                                          P(Xq ̸= Xq′ ) ≤                       .
                                                                 1 + ∥q − q ′ ∥

 The second Lemma we rely on is a private heavy hitter mechanism, described as follows:
 Lemma 2 (Korolova et al. (2009); Bun et al. (2016)). Let Z be a finite data domain. For some

                                               log 1/ηβδ
                                    k≥Ω                    ,
                                                   ηϵ
 there exists an (ϵ, δ)-DP algorithm hist, such that with probability (1 − β) on an inputs S =
 {z1 , . . . , zk } outputs a mapping a ∈ [0, 1]Z , such that, for every z ∈ Z,
                                               |a(z) − freqS (z)| ≤ η.
 In particular, if freqS (z) > 0, then a(z) > 0.

 Where we denote by freqS (z) = |i:z|S|
                                     i =z|
                                           .
 We next move on to prove the claim. Let X be the coupling from Lemma 1. Our private algorithm
 works as follows:

1. First, we take β = η, and set
                                                             log 1/η 2 δ

                                                 k=Ω                           .
                                                                 ηϵ
   To be as in Lemma 2.
2. Divide S, the input sample, to k, disjoint datasets S1 , . . . , Sk of size m. Each data set, via A,
   defines a model qSAi .
3. Next, we define the random sample
                                       SX = {XqSA , XqSA , . . . , XqSA } ∈ Z K .
                                                     1       2             k
     1
         which are all absolutely continuous w.r.t the uniform distribution


                                                           12
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4. Apply the mechanism in Lemma 2 and output a ∈ [0, 1]Z such that, w.p. 1 − η, for all z ∈ Z:
                                   |a(z) − freqSX (z)| ≤ η.
5. Let p be any arbitrary distribution such that for every z ∈ Z:
                                             |a(z) − p(z)| ≤ η                                         (3)
   (if no such distribution exists p is any distribution). and output
                                                    qSB = p.
 Notice that each sample zj affects only a single sub-sample Si and in turn only a single random
 variable XqSA . The histogram function a is then (ϵ, δ)-DP w.r.t to its input S. The output p, by
              i
 processing is also private. We obtain, then, that the above algorithm is (ϵ, δ)-private.
 We next set out to prove that p = qSB is close in TV distance to qSAA in expectation. For ease of
 notation let us denote Xi = XqSA . Notice that, with probability (1 − η), for every z:
                                      i

                                           |a(z) − freqSX (z)| ≤ η,
 in particular, there is a p that satisfies the requirement in Item 5 (i.e. freqSX defines such a distribu-
 tion) and Eq. (3) is satisfied. We then have that for every z:

                            1X                                    1X
                   p(z) −      1[Xi = z] ≤ |p(z) − a(z)| + a(z) −    1[Xi = z]
                            k                                     k
                                         ≤ 2η.                                                         (4)

 We now move on to bound the total variation between the model E[qSB ] and qSA , where expectation
 is taken over the randomness of B.
 To show this, we will use the reverse inequality of the coupling Lemma, in particular if (X̂B , X̂A )
 is a coupling of qSB and qSAA (where S and SA are now fixed), then:

                                      ∥ E[qSB ] − qSAA ∥ ≤ P(X̂B ̸= X̂A ).                             (5)

 Our coupling will work as follows, first we output p = qSB and sample X̂B ∼ p, and we let X̂A =
 XqSA . This defines a coupling (X̂B , X̂A ). Applying Eq. (4), with z = X̂A , exploiting the fact that
 Eq. (4) holds with probability at least 1 − η:

                                                       k
                                                    1X
                                 P(X̂B ̸= X̂A ) ≤         P(Xi ̸= XqSA ) + η
                                                    k i=1
                                                ≤ 2η + η.
 And we have that:
                                    k                           k
                                 1X                          1 X 2∥qSAi − qSA ∥
             P(X̂B ̸= X̂A ) ≤          P(Xi ̸= XqSA ) + 3η ≤                         + 3η.
                                 k i=1                       k i=1 1 + ∥qSAi − qSA ∥
 And,
                                             k
                                                "                   #
                                          1 X 2∥qSAi − qSA ∥
         E      ∥ E[qSB ] − qSA ∥ ≤  E                                + 3η
        SA ,S                      SA ,S k
                                            i=1
                                                  1 + ∥qSAi − qSA ∥
                                             "                  #
                                                2∥qSA1 − qS2 ∥
                                 ≤     E             A
                                                                  + 3η
                                   S1 ,S2 ∼S 1 + ∥qS − qS2 ∥
                                                       1
                                   "                       #
                                       2 E[∥qSA1 − qS2 ∥]                                       2x
                                 ≤                           + 3η              concavitiy of
                                     1 + E[∥qSA1 − qS2 ]∥                                      1+x

                                       2α                                                       2x
                                 ≤             + 3η                            monotinicity
                                     1+α                                                       1+x


                                                      13
