Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T RANSFORMERS PERFORM IN - CONTEXT LEARNING
THROUGH NEURAL NETWORKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Transformer based neural sequence models exhibit remarkable ability to do in-
         context learning. Given some training examples, a pre-trained model can make
         accurate predictions on a novel input. This paper studies why transformers can
         learn different types of function classes in context. We first show by construction
         that transformers implement approximate gradient descent on parameters of neural
         networks and provide an upper bound for number of heads, hidden dimension, and
         number of layers of the transformer. We also show that transformers can learn deep
         and narrow neural networks, which has better approximation capabilities compared
         to shallow and wide neural networks, using less resource. Our results move beyond
         linearity in terms of in-context learning instances and provide an understanding of
         why transformers can learn many types of function classes through the bridge of
         neural networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In-context learning (ICL) is a phenomenon first observed in NLP problems where large language
models like GPT-4 can make accurate predictions based on few prompts without any update on
model parameters. People’s understanding on in-context learning is still limited, how and why can
neural sequence models learn in-context remain a black box. Previous work mainly focus on two
perspectives of in-context learning. One perspective explores what function classes can transformers
learn in-context(Garg et al., 2022), another explains why transformers can implement learning
algorithms (Akyürek et al., 2022).
The paper tries to explain why transformer-based predictors can learn different function classes
in-context. We interpret in-context learning of a function as learning implicit neural networks that
approximate the function. Currently there are mainly two understandings of in-context learning, one
is based on gradient descent(Von Oswald et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022), and the
other views it as Bayesian Inference(Xie et al., 2021). We adapt the former perspective to investigate
the hypothesis that when trained properly, transformers can perform approximate gradient descent on
parameters of neural networks without any parameter update or fine tuning, and these neural networks
are approximators of different functions.
In Section 3, we prove by construction that a family of transformers, with a wide range of activation
functions (not necessarily restricted to the commonly used ReLU), can implement a step of approxi-
mate gradient descent on the parameters of the neural networks. We start by investigating on 2-layer
neural networks and then generalize it to the n-layer neural networks setting. Upper bound for the
number of heads, hidden dimension as well as number of layers needed of the transformer is provided,
among which the number of layers is presented in a recursive fashion for the n-layer neural networks
setting.
In Section 4, we view neural networks as bridges for transformers to learn function classes in-context,
and provide an analysis on the resources it cost for a transformer to approximate the same function
classes through neural networks of different depths and widths. We showcase that for transformers
to learn indicator functions in-context, 2-layer neural networks are not sufficient as bridges since
it will cause the number of heads of the transformer to be unacceptably large (for certain function
classes), while deeper and narrower neural networks which achieve the same approximation accuracy
cost less resource (number of parameter matrices) of the transformer. We also present a condition on


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


when deep networks does better than shallow ones in terms of approximating smooth functions and
requiring smaller transformer size.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

In-context learning In-context learning has been studied both empirically and theoretically. Garg
et al. (2022) empirically show that transformers can learn linear functions, two-layer ReLu neural
networks and decision trees in-context. Min et al. (2022) study what aspects of demonstrations impact
the performance of in-context learning. As for the theoretical part, Xie et al. (2021) explains ICL
as implicit Bayesian inference, while Akyürek et al. (2022), Von Oswald et al. (2023) and Dai et al.
(2022) all understand in-context learning as transformers performing gradient descent. These works
all only focus on linear models or their variants without providing an error bound for gradient descent
steps. A more recent work (Bai et al., 2023) also investigates gradient descent on more general
functions, like 2-layer neural networks and demonstrates the model selection ability of transformers.
We extend the their result on 2-layer neural networks to an n-layer neural networks setting and also
provide a tighter bound on the number of heads required of the transformer.
Neural networks and approximation theorems People are interested in the the approximation
abilities of neural networks. Many results have shown the universal approximation property of
neural networks in approximating different function classes (Hornik et al., 1989; Hornik, 1991;
Barron, 1993). While these universal approximation theorems focus on neural networks with certain
depths, more recent work starts to explore the expressing power of deep neural networks due to their
development and success. Yarotsky (2017); Liang and Srikant (2016) both show the approximation
abilities of deep neural networks. Safran and Shamir (2017) shows the width-depth tradeoffs of neural
networks by proving the inapproximability with 2-layer neural networks an the approximability of
3-layer neural networks in terms of approximating indicator functions.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   T RANSFORMERS

A Transformer layer contains two sub-layers, the attention layer and the feed forward layer, which in
essence is an MLP layer. We denote the input sequence to the transformer as H = [h1 , · · · , hN ] ∈
RD×N .
Definition 1. (Attention layer) An attention layer with M heads is denoted as Attnθ (·) where
θ = {Vm , Qm , Km }m∈[M ] . The output of this layer on the input matrix H is:
                                              M
                                          1 X
                     Attnθ (H) = H +           (Vm H) × σ(Qm H)⊤ (Km H))
                                          N m=1
where σ is an activation function (not necessarily restricted to the ReLU function). For each column:
                                               M   N
                                           1 XX
                    [Attnθ (H)]i = hi +          σ (⟨Qm hi , Km hj ⟩) · Vm hj .
                                           N m=1
                                                   j=1

Definition 2. (MLP layer) An MLP layer with hidden dimension D′ is denoted as MLPθ (·) where
                       ′             ′
θ = (W1 , W2 ) ∈ RD ×D × RD×D . The output of this layer on input H is
                                 MLPθ (H) = H + W2 σ(W1 H)
where σ is an activation function. For each column:
                                [MLPθ (H)]i = hi + W2 σ(W1 hi ).

We doesn’t require the transformer activation function to be restricted to a specific type, and next we
give a definition on the class of activation functions we focus on.
Definition 3. (General decay condition) We call an activationP     function σ satisfies the general decay
                    m,∞                                              n
condition if σ ∈ Wloc    (R) is non-zero and there exists a ν ∈ { i=1 βi σ(ωi ·x+bi ) : ωi , bi , βi ∈ R}
which satisfies
                                       |ν (k) (t)| ≤ Cp (1 + |t|)−p
for 0 ≤ k ≤ m and some p > 1.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We briefly note that here W m,∞ denotes the Sobolev space, and most common activation functions
do satisfy the general decay condition (Siegel and Xu, 2020).

2.2   N EURAL N ETWORKS

We formulate the mathematical representation of an n-layer neural network as below:
Definition 4. (n-layer neural networks) We denote the output of an n-layer neural network on the
input x ∈ Rd as
                      predn (w, x) = W(n) (r(W(n−1) (r(· · · r(W(1) x)))))
where r is an activation function and w = (W(1) , · · · , W(n) ), W(i) ∈ RKi ×Ki−1 for i = 1, · · · , n
with Kn = 1, K0 = d. We denote the k-th row vector of the matrices W(i) (i ∈ [n − 1]) as vi,k , and
the k-th element in the vector W(n) as uk .

In the n-layer neural network setting above, we omit the bias terms and let the output be a number
instead of a vector for simplicity. Also, the activation function r act on each element of the vector.

2.3   I N - CONTEXT LEARNING

Here we introduce our in-context learning (ICL) setting. The training examples (prompts) are sampled
from a distribution P, denoted as D = (xi , yi )i∈[N ] , and a novel input xN +1 is sampled from Px . So
each instance is of the form (D, xN +1 ). Here xi ∈ Rd .
More specifically, we denote the input to the transformer as
                                x1 , x2 , · · · , xN , xN +1
                           "                                 #
                      H=        y1 , y2 , · · · , yN ,    0    ∈ RD×(N +1)
                                p1 , p2 , · · · , pN , pN +1

where pi are vectors in hidden space of the form


                                               0D−d−3
                                             "          #
                                       pi =       1
                                            1{i < N + 1}

A transformer takes the prompt input H and makes a prediction on the label corresponding to xN +1 .
The prediction ŷN +1 is stored in the output matrix H̃ in the position next to yN .

3     G RADIENT D ESCENT ON MULTI - LAYER NEURAL NETWORK

We begin our analysis on 2-layer neural networks, and then generalize it to the n-layer networks
setting. To perform gradient descent on the neural networks, we consider the following optimization
problem on the loss function:

                                                    N
                                                1 X
                             min LN (w) =             l(pred(xi ; w), yi )
                             w∈W               2N i=1

Now we present necessary assumptions begin our analysis.
Following Barron (1993), We define Bs to be the space of functions f : Rd → R with bounded
Barron norm:                          Z
                             ∥f ∥Bs =     (1 + |ω|)s |fˆ(ω)|dω.
                                             Rd
Assumption 1. Both the activation function r in neural networks and the loss function l has finite
Barron norm.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As discussed in Barron (1993), Bs is closed to multiplication, linear combination and translation.
Also, sigmoidal functions, functions with derivatives of sufficiently high order and Boolean functions
are all in Bs , so this should include most common activation functions and loss functions in practice.
We also point out that in Bai et al. (2023) they used the assumption that r, l are both C 4 smooth,
which is a stricter assumption since C 4 functions do have bounded Barron norm.
During the process of gradient descent, it is likely that the neural networks parameter w goes out of
its domain W, so we need the following assumption to project w onto W.
Assumption 2. W as the domain of w is compact and there exists some MLP layer parameter such
that the MLP layer projects w to W.

3.1    G RADIENT D ESCENT ON 2- LAYER NEURAL NETWORKS

A 2-layer neural network can be written as

                                       pred2 (w, x) = W(2) (r(W(1) x))
We want to show that transformers can implement gradient descent on 2-layer neural networks
in-context without any parameter update.
We note that
                                            N
                                        1 X
                      ∇w LN (w) =             ∂1 l(pred(xi ; w), yi ) · ∇w pred(xi ; w),
                                        N i=1
where ∂1 l is the partial derivative of l with respect to the first component. Furthermore,
                                                     u1 · r′ (⟨v1 , xi ⟩) · xi
                                                                              
                                                          r(⟨v1 , xi ⟩)       
                              ∇w pred(xi ; w) = 
                                                   
                                                                .
                                                                 ..
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                   u · r′ (⟨v , x ⟩) · x 
                                                         K           K   i      i
                                                       r(⟨vk , xi ⟩)
We show below that a 2-layer transformer can compute one step of approximate gradient descent,
following the intuition of Siegel and Xu (2020): The first self attention sub-layer computes and stores
approximate pred(xi ; w) in hidden space, and the MLP sub-layer computes and stores ∂1 l, while the
second attention sub-layer computes and stores w − η∇LN (w), and the last MLP sub-layer maps
this result of one step gradient descent to the domain of w.
Theorem 1 (ICGD on 2-layer NNs). Under Assumption 1 and Assumption 2, there exists a family
of 2-layer transformers (with activation functions satisfying the general decay condition) such that
for any input data (D, xN +1 ) and any w, a transformer performs approximate gradient descent on
the neural networks parameter w:
                       wη+ = ProjW (w − η∇LN (w) + ϵ(w)), ∥ϵ(w)∥ ≤ ηϵ.
Furthermore, the upper bound for number of heads and hidden dimension for the transformer is:
                               max M (l) ≤ O(ϵ−2 ),          max D(l) ≤ O(ϵ−2 )
                               l∈[2]                         l∈[2]
Remark 1. We note here that in the theorem when we say a transformer performs approximate
gradient descent on the neural networks parameter, we mean that the transformer maps each column
of the input matrix H: hi = [xi ; yi′ ; w; 0; 1; ti ] to the output vector h′i = [xi ; yi′ ; wη+ ; 0; 1; ti ], where
only the parameter w is updated according to gradient descent and the other parts remain unchanged.

3.2    G RADIENT D ESCENT ON n- LAYER NEURAL NETWORKS

As in Definition 4, n-layer neural networks can be formulated as

                          predn (w, x) = W(n) (r(W(n−1) (r(· · · r(W(1) x)))))
We theoretically prove that transformers can implement gradient descent on n-layer neural networks
in context and provide an upper bound for number of heads, hidden dimension of transformers as
well as give a recurrence relation on the number of transformer layers.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Neural Networks as bridges for transformers to learn function classes in-context. Though
transformers can learn both deep and shallow neural networks in-context, learning them requires
different transformer sizes.


Theorem 2 (ICGD on n-layer NNs). Under Assumption 1 and Assumption 2, there exists a family
of an -layer transformers (with activation functions satisfying the general decay condition) such that
for any input data (D, xN +1 ) and any w, a transformer performs approximate gradient descent on
the n-layer neural networks parameter w:
                     wη+ = ProjW (w − η∇LN (w) + ϵ(w)),           ∥ϵ(w)∥ ≤ ηϵ.
where an satisfies O(an ) = O(n) + O(an−1 ). Furthermore, the upper bound for number of heads
and hidden dimension for the transformer is :
                      max M (l) ≤ O(nK 2 ϵ−2 ),       max D(l) ≤ O(nK 2 ϵ−2 )
                      l∈[an ]                         l∈[an ]

where K denotes the maximum width of the neural networks: K = max{K0 , K1 , · · · , Kn }.
Remark 2. We note that an , the number of transformer layers required in the above theorem is of
order O(n2 ), which is a decent growth rate considering the fast growth of neural networks neurons.

Trade-off of width and depth of neural networks We note here that people are interested in the
approximation capabilities of neural networks, thus it’s worthwhile discussing how the trade-off
between width and depth of neural networks can affect the approximation error of the gradient
descent step. If we control the error in the approximate gradient descent to be ϵ, then in order for
the transformer to learn two different neural networks with the same magnitude of number of heads,
we require nK 2 to be a constant. Thus controlling the width of the network is more efficient than
controlling the depth of the neural networks in terms of maintaing the same approximation error.

4     N EURAL NETWORKS AS BRIDGES FOR TRANSFORMER TO LEARN FUNCTION
      CLASSES IN - CONTEXT

Since neural networks are universal approximators, and transformers can learn neural networks in
context, a natural question is whether transformers can learn function classes that neural networks can
approximate. Our theorem bridges the gap between transformers and neural networks, and previous
work on approximation theorems of neural networks has bridged the gap between neural networks
and function classes, so it is natural to consider the whole path of transformers learning function
classes in-context as shown in Fig. 1. But how much resources does it cost for a transformer (number
of layers of the transformer and number of heads for each attention layer, or equivalently number of
parameter matrices) to approximate a neural network (as an approximator)? We consider two types
of function classes: the indicator functions of L2 balls and smooth functions.

4.1   I NDICATOR FUNCTIONS OF L2 BALLS

Safran and Shamir (2017) proves the inapproximability of 2-layer neural networks and the approx-
imability of 3-layer neural networks. We present them as lemmas below.
Lemma 1. The following holds for some positive univeral constants c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 , and any network
employing an activation functioin satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2 in Eldan and Shamir (2016):
For any d > c1 , and any non-singular matrix A ∈ Rd×d , b ∈ Rd and r ∈ (0, ∞), there exists a


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


continuous probability distribution γ on Rd , such that for any function g computed by a 2-layer
network of width at most c2 exp(c4 d), and for the function f (x) = 1(∥Ax + b∥ ≤ r), we have
                                Z
                                                                  c2
                                     (f (x) − g(x))2 · γ(x)dx ≥ 4 .
                                 R d                              d
Lemma 2. Given δ > 0, for any activation function σ satisfying Assumption 1 in Eldan and Shamir
(2016) and any continuous probability distribution µ on Rd , there exists a constant cσ dependent
                                                                                             p only
on σ, and a function g expressible by a 3-layer network of width at most max{8cσ d2 /σ, cσ 1/2δ},
such that the following holds:
                              Z
                                  (g(x) − 1(∥x∥2 ≤ 1))2 µ(x)dx ≤ δ,
                               Rd
where cσ is a constant depending solely on σ.
These two lemmas reveal that the indicator of the L2 ball can be better approximated by a 3-layer
neural network with width O(d2 ) than a 2-layer neural network requiring width at least exponential
in the input dimension. Now using these lemmas we obtain the following theorem on transformer
resource it takes to learn these two networks.
Theorem 3. Let f (x) = 1(∥Ax + b∥ ≤ r) be the indicator of unit ball. Consider two neural
networks NNA and NNB that approximates the function f with error ϵ ∈ (0, 1), where NNA is
a 2-layer, width O(exp(ϵ−1/4 )) and NNB is a 3-layer, width O(ϵ−1 ). It takes two transformers
TFA , TFB to learn these two neural networks. TFA needs O(exp(2ϵ−1/4 )) parameter matrices and
TFB needs O(ϵ−1 ) parameter matrices.

Proof. Recall Theorem 2 and we know that the number of transformer layers required is O(nK 2 )
(Here we the gradient error ϵ is absorbed in the O notation since it is a fixed constant independent of
the networks approximation error). So the transformer size is determined by number of layers times
number of heads, which is O(n2 K 2 ). Now bring in the width of NNA and NNB immediately yields
the results, concluding the proof.

The theorem points out the exponential explosion in transformer size if a 2-layer neural network
is learned to approximate the indicator. However, a 3-layer neural network requires much smaller
transformer size. This showcases the neccessity of bringing deeper neural networks into consideration.

4.2   S MOOTH FUNCTIONS

We use the approximation results of deep neural networks achieved by Yarotsky (2017).
Lemma 3. For any d, n and ϵ ∈ (0, 1), there is a ReLU network architecture that
       • is capable of expressing any function from Fd,n with error ϵ;

       • has the depth at most c(ln(1/ϵ) + 1) and at most cϵ−d/n (ln(1/ϵ) + 1) computation units,
         with some constant c = c(d, n).
Lemma 4. Let f ∈ C 2 ([0, 1]d ) be a nonlinear function. Then, for any fixed L, a depth-L ReLU
network approximating with error ϵ ∈ (0, 1) must have at least cϵ−1/(2(L−1)) computation units,
with some constant c = c(f, L) > 0.
While Lemma 3 gives the upper bound for a relatively deep neural network, Lemma 4 show the slow
approximation of smooth functions by shallow networks.
Below we state a formal theorem for the resource of a transformer it takes to learn two neural network:
one is deep and narrow, another is shallow and wide.
Theorem 4. For any d and n > 2, let f ∈ W n,∞ ([0, 1]d ). Consider two neural networks NNA and
NNB that approximates the function f with error ϵ ∈ (0, 1). NNA has depth O(ln(1/ϵ) + 1) and
width O(ϵ−d/n ) as in Lemma 3, and NNB has depth L and width O(ϵ−1/(2(L−1)) ) as in Lemma 4.
We also have two transformers, TFA and TFB , pre-trained to learn these neural networks. If we
fix the accuracy of gradient descent in Theorem 2, then TFA needs O((ln(1/ϵ)3 ϵ−2d/n )) parameter
matrices and TFB needs O(ϵ−1/(L−1) ) parameter matrices. In particular, if 2(L − 1)d < n, then it
costs a transformer less resource to train neural network A than B.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This theorem can be proved in exactly the same way as Theorem 3 thus we ommit the proof.
Intuitively, the smoother the function is and the lower dimension the input x is, the better deep neural
networks perform in terms of approximation and transformer resource cost.

5    C ONCLUSION
We provide results on transformers learning n-layer neural networks through gradient descent and
view in-context learning of a function as the process of learning neural networks which approximate
this function. We also emphasize that our results gives a theoretical bound on the size of the
transformer required to implement in-context learning.
Our work shed some light on deeper understanding of in-context learning. In fact, our results suggest
that transformers can in-context learn any function classes that can be approximated by neural
networks this way. We also present the resource required for a transformer to learn indicator functions
and smooth functions (in particular C n functions), showing 2-layer neural networks aren’t sufficient
for in-context learning due to the explosion of transformer size. Also, the smoother the function is
and the lower dimension the input is the better deep neural networks perform in terms of transformer
resource cost. We believe our work brings a new perspective to the understanding of in-context
learning and opens up new directions for empirical exploration of in-context learning.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algorithm is
  in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661, 2022.

Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians: Provable in-context
  learning with in-context algorithm selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04637, 2023.

Andrew R Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Information theory, 39(3):930–945, 1993.

Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-context? language
  models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.

Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference on learning
  theory, pages 907–940. PMLR, 2016.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn in-context? a
  case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:30583–30598,
  2022.
Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural networks, 4(2):251–257,
  1991.

Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal
  approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.

Shiyu Liang and Rayadurgam Srikant. Why deep neural networks for function approximation? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1610.04161, 2016.

Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettle-
  moyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.

Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Depth-width tradeoffs in approximating natural functions with neural networks.
   In International conference on machine learning, pages 2979–2987. PMLR, 2017.

Jonathan W Siegel and Jinchao Xu. Approximation rates for neural networks with general activation functions.
  Neural Networks, 128:313–321, 2020.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev, Andrey
  Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context learning as
  implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.

Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural Networks, 94:103–114,
 2017.


                                                     8
