Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TACKLING N ON -S TATIONARITY IN R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING VIA C AUSAL -O RIGIN R EPRESENTATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In real-world scenarios, the application of reinforcement learning is significantly
         challenged by complex non-stationarity. Most existing methods attempt to model
         changes in the environment explicitly, often requiring impractical prior knowl-
         edge. In this paper, we propose a new perspective, positing that non-stationarity
         can propagate and accumulate through complex causal relationships during state
         transitions, thereby compounding its sophistication and affecting policy learning.
         We believe that this challenge can be more effectively addressed by tracing the
         causal origin of non-stationarity. To this end, we introduce the Causal-Origin
         REPresentation (COREP) algorithm. COREP primarily employs a guided updat-
         ing mechanism to learn a stable graph representation for states termed as causal-
         origin representation. By leveraging this representation, the learned policy ex-
         hibits impressive resilience to non-stationarity. We supplement our approach with
         a theoretical analysis grounded in the causal interpretation for non-stationary rein-
         forcement learning, advocating for the validity of the causal-origin representation.
         Experimental results further demonstrate the superior performance of COREP
         over existing methods in tackling non-stationarity.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Rapid progress in reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018) in
recent years has led to impressive performance improvements across various applications (Silver
et al., 2018; Mirhoseini et al., 2020). However, a common assumption in many RL algorithms is the
stationarity of the environment, which can limit their applicability in real-world scenarios character-
ized by varying dynamics (Padakandla et al., 2020; Padakandla, 2021). While recent meta-RL (Finn
et al., 2017) methods have shown some promise in addressing non-stationarity through adaptation
(Poiani et al., 2021), their performance often degrades when facing more complex changes in the
dynamics (Sodhani et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022). Several recent works, such as FN-VAE (Feng
et al., 2022) and LILAC (Xie et al., 2020), have made strides towards improving RL algorithms in
non-stationary environments by explicitly modeling the change factors of the environment. Never-
theless, they may not comprehensively capture the complexity of real-world non-stationarity.
In this paper, we propose a novel setting for efficiently tackling non-stationarity in RL from a new
perspective inspired by the causality literature (Zhang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020). We argue
that minor changes in dynamics can cause significant shifts in observations due to their propagation
through intricate causal relationships among state elements. We believe that this challenge can
be more effectively addressed by tracing the causal origin of non-stationarity. However, directly
constructing an accurate causal graph of observations in non-stationary environments is challenging
due to the instability of dynamics (Strobl, 2019). To overcome this challenge, we propose the
COREP (Causal-Origin REPresentation) algorithm. COREP primarily utilizes a guided updating
mechanism to learn a stable graph representation for states termed as causal-origin representation.
We first propose a novel formulation of non-stationarity in RL as a complex mixture of stationary
environments. We take the masks defined in transition functions as causal relationships and assume
that they are invariant within each environment. However, without access to any type of prior in-
formation about the environment, it is quite challenging to identify the causal relationship of each
environment. Therefore, we consider an environment-shared representation defined by the union
of maximal ancestral graphs (MAG) from each environment, and utilize it to design a stable RL


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approach. In line with the concept of using the union of MAGs as the causal interpretation for
non-stationary RL, we introduce a dual graph structure, termed core-graph and general-graph. The
core-graph is designed for learning a stable graph representation, guided by a TD (Temporal Dif-
ference) error based updating mechanism. As the core-graph primarily concentrates on learning the
most vital parts of the graph representation, some edges might be discarded in the process. Thus,
a continuously updating general-graph is designed to compensate for this potential information loss
and to improve the algorithm’s adaptability. Ultimately, we integrate the core-graph and general-
graph to construct the causal-origin representation, providing a comprehensive understanding of the
environment’s dynamics and significantly mitigating the impact of non-stationarity.
Specifically, our method starts by transforming observed states into node matrices. We then generate
weighted adjacency matrices from the nodes to serve as inputs for two Graph Attention Networks
(GAT) (Veličković et al., 2017), i.e., core-GAT and general-GAT, representing the core-graph and
general-graph, respectively. As a variant of Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008;
Zhou et al., 2020), GAT can efficiently manage directed acyclic graphs (DAG) by prioritizing neigh-
boring nodes via masked attention. This capability aligns perfectly with our goal of tracing the
origins of non-stationarity through causal relationships. Then we determine whether to update the
core-GAT by checking if the recent TD errors lie within the confidence interval of the replay buffer.
The choice of using TD error as the metric for detection is based on the fact that significant changes
in TD error imply notable alterations in the causal graph of observations, since TD error serves as
a performance indicator for the learned policy in the current environment. This dual-GAT structure
is then incorporated into a Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to further
enhance the learning efficiency. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We provide a causal interpretation for non-stationary RL and propose a novel setting that
         focuses on the causal relationships within states.
       • Based on the proposed formulation and setting, we design a modular algorithm that can be
         readily integrated into existing RL algorithms.
       • We provide a theoretical analysis that offers both inspiration and theoretical support for our
         algorithm. Experimental results further demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.


2   P RELIMINARIES

Problem Formulation. Reinforcement learning problems are typically modeled as Markov De-
cision Processes (MDPs), defined as a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ), where S is the state space, A is the
action space, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] represents the transition probability, R : S × A → R is
the reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. We may also use the form of transition
function f : S × A → S when the environment is deterministic. The goal of an agent in RL is to
find a policy π : S → A thatPmaximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward, defined as the
                              ∞
value function V π (s) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt |s0 = s], where rt is the reward at time step t.
In non-stationary environments, the dynamics of the environment change over time. Our goal is to
learn a policy π that can adapt to the non-stationary environment and still achieve high performance.
For simplicity of notations, we provide theoretical analysis with the form of deterministic transition
function f , while the results still hold for the probabilistic setting.
Causal Structure Discovery. Causal structure discovery usually aims at inferring causation from
data, modeled with a directed acyclic graph (DAG) D = (V, E), where the set of nodes V includes
the variables of interest, and the set of directed edges E contains direct causal effects between these
variables (Pearl et al., 2000). The causal graph is a practical tool that relates the conditional inde-
pendence relations in the generating distribution to separation statements in the DAG (d-separation)
through the Markov property (Lauritzen, 1996). If unobserved confounders exist, maximal ances-
tral graphs (MAGs) M = (V, D, B) are often used to represent observed variables by generalizing
DAGs with bidirected edges which depicts the presence of latent confounders (Richardson & Spirtes,
2002). The sets D, B stand for directed and bidirected edges, respectively.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). GNNs are a class of neural networks designed for graph-
structured data. Given a graph G = (V, E), GNNs aim to learn a vector representation for each
node v ∈ V or the entire graph G, leveraging the information of both graph structure and node


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


features. GNNs generally follow the message passing framework (Balcilar et al., 2021). Layers in
                                                         (l)
GNN can be formulated as H (l) = σ                (l−1)
                                                        Ws , where H (l) is the node representation
                                        P
                                           s Ls H
outputed by the l-th layer, Ls is the s-th convolution support which defines how the node features
                     (l)
are propagated, Ws is learnable parameters for the s-th convolution support in the l-th layer, and
σ(·) is the activation function. Graph Attention Network (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2017) is a special
type of GNN following the message passing framework. Instead of handcrafting, the self-attention
mechanism is used to compute the support convolutions in each GAT layer, where the adjacency
matrix plays the role as a mask matrix for computing the attention.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1   K EY I DEA

In our COREP algorithm, the primary goal is to address the issue of non-stationarity in RL by
learning the underlying graph structure of the environment termed as causal-origin representation,
which is desired to be causal and stable. This is achieved by designing a dual GAT structure, i.e.,
a core-GAT and a general-GAT. The core-GAT is designed to learn the most essential parts of the
environment’s graph, and its learning is controlled by a guided updating mechanism. The general-
GAT, on the other hand, is continuously updated to compensate for any information that the core-
GAT might overlook. Together, they form a comprehensive understanding of the environment.
The causal-origin representation involves transforming states into node features and generating the
weighted adjacency matrix. A self-attention mechanism is then applied to these nodes to compute
the graph representation. To improve learning efficiency, the causal-origin representation is incorpo-
rated into the VAE framework. To guide the updating of the core-GAT, a TD error-based detection
mechanism is employed. Furthermore, regularization terms are introduced to enhance the identifia-
bility and guarantee the structure of the causal-origin representation.

3.2   C AUSAL I NTERPRETATION FOR N ON -S TATIONARY RL

In this part, we will propose a causal interpretation for non-stationarity in RL, which provides us
with inspiration and theoretical support for the algorithm design. We assume that the underlying
dynamics can be described in terms of functions fi , gj , k:
                   s′i = fi (cs s
                              i   ⊙ s, ca s
                                        i   ⊙ a, εsi ) , ∀i = 1, · · · , ds ,
                   h′j = gj ch h  ⊙ h, cjs h ⊙ s, ca h     ⊙ a, εhj , ∀j = 1, . . . , dh ,

                               j                     j                                                  (3.1)
                    r = k cs r ⊙ s, ch r ⊙ h, ca r ⊙ a, εr ,


where s denotes the state with dimension ds , h denotes the hidden state with dimension dh , r repre-
sents the reward, s′i is the i-th element of next state s′ , h′j is the j-th element of next hidden state h′ ,
and ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. Random noises εsi , εhj , εr in Equation 3.1 are independent,
and the distribution of each noise is identical. We consider the non-stationarity as the change of bi-
nary masks c· · . The masks represent the structural dependence in the following way. For example,
in fi , the j-the element of cs s
                               i    ∈ {0, 1}ds equals 1 if and only if sj directly affects si . Other masks
are defined in the same way. We rewrite the masks in matrix forms, letting C · s := [ci· s ]di=1          s
                                                                                                             ,
  · h         · h dh                  · ·
C        := [cj ]j=1 . The masks C are allowed to be time-varying. Some previous work assumed
that the masks are invariant across time, and encoded the changes over environments into some
change factors (Huang et al., 2022). However, we do not rely on any assumptions of such change
factors. Instead, we propose a novel causal interpretation based on an environment-shared union
graph representation to capture the transition information in the non-stationary environment.
With the definition of the underlying dynamics, we can depict non-stationarity as being influenced
by certain causal relationships. In other words, to represent these causalities, s is transformed into
a new representation h. Consequently, the original transition function fi is transformed into gj ,
which is exactly the underlying dynamics that account for the causative factors of non-stationarity, as
illustrated in Figure A.1. Under this setting, a non-stationary environment can be regarded as a non-
stationary mixture of various stationary environments. Then the non-stationarity of the environment
can be interpreted as the variations over time in this mixture distribution. We assume that there are


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Environment
                                           recent TD:                               Feature Network

                                                                                         generate
             COREP                              Graph Module                             adjacency
            Framework
                                                   Encoder
                                                                                        graph change
                                                                                          detection
                                                 Latent:

                                                   Sampling:                     core   freeze       general
                                                                                 GAT    unfreeze      GAT
        Policy Optimization
                                                   Decoder


Figure 3.1. Overview of the COREP framework. (1) The left part illustrates that the COREP
framework can be seamlessly incorporated into any RL algorithm. It takes the state as input and
outputs the causal-origin representation for policy optimization. (2) The middle part shows the VAE
structure employed by the COREP framework, which is utilized to enhance the learning efficiency.
(3) The right part highlights the key components of COREP. The dual GAT structure is designed in
line with the concept of causal-origin representation to retain the essential parts of the graph. The
TD error detection can guide the core-GAT to learn the environment-shared union graph based on
our theory. The general-GAT is continuously updated to compensate for the loss of information.


K distinct stationary environments, where K is an unknown number. If a sample is from the k-th
                                              · ·                                               · ·        · ·
environment, then there exists mask C(k)           , k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, such that the current Ccurrent = C(k) ,
i.e., the masks are invariant for each environment. The relationships among variables determined
by masks can also be characterized by DAGs D(k) = (V, E(k) ) over the same set of nodes V =
{s, h, a, s′ , h′ , a′ , r, e}, where e ∈ {1, . . . , K} is a node denoting the label of the environment with
in-degree 0. The set of directed edges E(k) contains an edge from one node to another node if and
only if the corresponding mask c· ·    (k) = 1, and it also contains additional edges from e to (s, h) whose
marginal distributions vary across environments. In this setting, non-stationarity can be reflected by
the changes in the underlying graph structure. To better understand the causal interpretation, we
provide a specific toy example in Appendix C to illustrate such a setting.

3.3   U NION G RAPH OF THE C AUSAL S TRUCTURE

In the context of causal interpretation, it is challenging to learn the structure of the causal graph
independently when the environment label is unavailable, as the variable e can be considered a latent
confounder that leads to spurious correlations. In the presence of unobservable nodes, maximal
ancestral graph (MAG) is a useful tool to generalize DAGs (Richardson & Spirtes, 2002). For each
DAG D(k) , we can construct a corresponding MAG M(k) (Sadeghi, 2013), see Algorithm A.1. The
MAGs make use of bidirected edges (↔) to characterize the change of marginal distribution of s, h
over different environments. To model structural relationships in non-stationary RL with a unified
approach, we further encode the relations among all actions, states, hidden states, and rewards with
an environment-shared union graph M∪ , which is defined as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Environment-shared union graph). The environment-shared representation union
graph M∪ := (V, D, B) has the set of nodes V , and the set of directed edges
                        D = {u → v : u, v ∈ V, ∃k such that u → v in M(k) },
and the set of bidirected edges
                        B = {u ↔ v : u, v ∈ V, ∃k such that u ↔ v in M(k) }.

The above defined union graph M∪ contains no cycle because Equation equation 3.1 implies that
there exists a common topological ordering for D(1) , . . . , D(K) , see Appendix A for details. Without


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


knowing the label of environment k, we cannot generally identify the structure of M(k) for each k
from the observed data. However, we show that M∪ is still a MAG, hence any non-adjacent pair of
nodes is d-separated given some subset of nodes.
Proposition 3.1. Suppose that the generative process follows Equation equation 3.1, then there
exists a partial order π on V such that for all i ∈ {1, . . . , K}, it holds that (a) u is an ancestor of v
⇒ u <π v in M(k) ; and (b) u ↔ v ⇒ u ̸≶π v in M(k) . As a consequence, the environment-shared
representation union graph M∪ is a MAG.
We provide the full proofs and a detailed explanation of conditions in Appendix A. Proposition 3.1
provides theoretical support for recovering the structure of environment-shared union graph M∪ .
In the following sections, we will describe how the COREP algorithm learns a policy that is stable
under non-stationarity by utilizing the environment-shared representation union graph M∪ .

3.4   D UAL G RAPH ATTENTION N ETWORK S TRUCTURE

In accordance with Proposition 3.1, we aim to learn the causal-origin representation encapsulating
the environment-shared union graph M∪ . For this purpose, we propose the structure of dual Graph
Attention Networks (GAT), i.e., core-GAT and general-GAT. The core-GAT is designed for learning
the stable graph representation. We consequently control the update of core-GAT by employing
TD error as a detector of significant changes in the environment’s underlying graph structure. It is
important to note that COREP uses the TD-error detection merely as an indicator of substantial en-
vironmental changes to decide whether or not to update the core-GAT, so we do not need a complex
detection mechanism like other methods (Da Silva et al., 2006; Sutton et al., 2007) that are required
to explicitly recognize the specific changes in the environment.
Since the core-GAT primarily focuses on learning the most essential part of the graph representation,
some edges may be overlooked or lost in the process. To compensate for this potential loss of
information and to enhance the algorithm’s adaptation capabilities, we introduce the continuously
updating general-GAT. In the end, we integrate the core-GAT and general-GAT to construct the
causal-origin representation, thereby providing a comprehensive understanding of the environment’s
dynamics and significantly mitigating the impact of non-stationarity on decision-making in RL.
Specifically, we first transform states into node features using an MLP network fMLP : Rds →
RN ·df , then reshape the output into node feature matrix X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } ∈ RN ×df , where
N is the number of nodes, and df is the number of features in each node xi . We then compute
the weighted adjacency matrix which represents the probabilities of  edges by using Softmax on the
similarity matrix of nodes: AX = Softmax XX T ⊙ (1N − IN ) , where 1N ∈ RN ×N represents
the matrix with all elements equal to 1, IN ∈ RN ×N represents the identity matrix, and ⊙ denotes
the Hadamard product. Multiplying (1N −IN ) is to remove the self-loop similarity when computing
the weighted adjacency matrix. A learnable weight matrix W ∈ Rdf ×dg is then applied to the
nodes for transforming X into graph features XW ∈ RN ×dg where dg denotes the dimension
of the graph feature. We can then perform the self-attention mechanism on the nodes, i.e., αij =
attention(xi W , xj W |AX ). The conditioned AX allows us to perform the masked attention, i.e.,
we only compute αij for node j ∈ Ni (AX ) where Ni (AX ) is the neighbor set of node i computed
by the weighted adjacency matrix AX . We can consider deeper-depth neighbors of each node by
combining multiple attention(·) into a multi-layer network. For the n-th graph attention layer, the
coefficients computed by the self-attention mechanism can be specifically expressed as:

                                                                       T
                               δNi (AX ) (j) · exp σ ln [xi W ⊕ xj W ]
                        αij = P                                              ,                    (3.2)
                                                                       T
                                  k∈Ni (AX ) exp σ ln [xi W ⊕ xk W ]

where ⊕ is the concatenation operation, σ is the activation function, ln ∈ R2dg is the learnable
weight vector for the n-th graph attention layer, and δNi (AX ) (j) is the indicator function, i.e.,
δNi (AX ) (j) = 1 if j ∈ Ni (AX ) otherwise 0. We employ the multi-head attention (Vaswani
et al., 2017) to stabilize the learning process. Specifically, we perform M separate self-attention
mechanisms as Equation (3.2) in each layer. Subsequently, the resulting features are concatenated
to form the graph node:
                                      M      X
                                                        (m)

                               gi = ⊕ σ               αij xj W (m) .                          (3.3)
                                     m=1
                                              j∈Ni (AX )


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The core-GAT and general-GAT output Gcore and Ggeneral , respectively, which are concatenated to
form the final causal-origin representation. Specifically, we denote the entire process of obtaining
                                                                                                   .
the causal-origin representation from s as a function G : Rds → RN ×2M dg , such that G(s) =
                                          T                             T
Gcore ⊕ Ggeneral = {g1 , g2 , . . . , gN }core ⊕ {g1 , g2 , . . . , gN }general .
We then feed the output G(s) into a Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
inference process to derive the latent representation h. More details about this process can be found
in Appendix B. It is noteworthy that the use of VAE serves solely as a tool to enhance learning
efficiency, therefore it is not a strictly necessary component of our COREP algorithm. The latent h
is then provided to the policy π(a|s, h) for policy optimization. COREP does not restrict the choice
of policy optimization algorithms. In our implementation, we choose the classic PPO algorithm
(Schulman et al., 2017) for policy optimization.

3.5   G UIDED U PDATING FOR C ORE -GAT

As the theoretical analysis in Section 3.2, our goal is to learn the causal-origin representation en-
capsulating the environment-shared union graph M∪ . To achieve this, we design a TD error-based
detection mechanism to guide the updating of core-GAT. Specifically, we store the computed TD
                                   the TD buffer Bδ . We compute the mean of recent TD errors as
errors of policy optimization into
        P
δα =      |Bδ |−α|Bδ |<k<|Bδ | δk /α|Bδ |, where α controls the proportion of recent TD errors for de-
tection, and |Bδ | indicates the number of elements in Bδ . We then check whether δα lies within the
confidence interval (µδ − ησδ , µδ + ησδ ), where µδ , σδ are the mean and standard deviation of the
TD buffer, and η represents the confidence level. If the recent TD error δα lies within this interval,
we freeze the weights of the core-GAT and halt its updates; otherwise, we unfreeze its weights and
proceed with updating the core-GAT.
As we discussed previously, since the core-GAT primarily focuses on learning the most essential
part of the graph representation, some edges might be discarded in the process. To compensate
for the loss of information, we add a continuously updating general-GAT and guide the learning of
core-GAT by introducing a regularization that penalizes the difference between the output adjacency
matrices of the core-GAT and general-GAT:
                                    Lguide = ∥Acore − Ageneral ∥2 .                              (3.4)

To enhance the identifiability, we introduce the regularization for the MAG structure and sparsity:
                        LMAG = ∥Acore − AT                      T
                                         core ∥2 + ∥Ageneral − Ageneral ∥2 ,
                                                                                                 (3.5)
                                 Lsparsity = ∥Acore ∥1 + ∥Ageneral ∥1 ,
where LMAG is used for penalizing the asymmetry of the adjacency matrices to meet the design of
the MAG which utilizes bidirected edges to characterize the change of marginal distribution of s, h
over different environments. Subsequently, we compute the total loss function by combining the
objective of policy optimization Lpolicy with the aforementioned loss functions:
                    Ltotal = Lpolicy + λ1 Lguide + λ2 (LMAG + Lsparsity + LVAE ),                (3.6)
where LVAE is calculated according to Equation B.1. Considering that only Lguide has a significant
difference in magnitude compared to other loss terms, we set a separate coefficient for it, while
uniformly setting a common coefficient for the other loss terms. This ensures that COREP does
not have difficulties in hyperparameter tuning. By computing and backpropagating the gradient
of Ltotal to update the entire COREP framework, along with policy optimization in an end-to-end
manner, we can prevent these distinct loss functions from resulting in abnormal causal structures.
This ultimately ensures that the learned policy can effectively tackle non-stationarity. The overall
framework is shown in Figure 3.1 and the detailed steps can be seen in Algorithm E.1.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we primarily aim to address the following questions: 1) Is COREP effective in
addressing non-stationarity? 2) What is the contribution of each component in COREP? 3) Does
COREP perform consistently under different degrees and settings of non-stationarity?

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baselines. To answer the above questions, we compare COREP with the following baselines: FN-
VAE (Feng et al., 2022), VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019), and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). FN-VAE
is the SOTA method for tackling non-stationarity, VariBAD is one of the SOTA algorithms in meta-
RL that also has certain capabilities in handling non-stationarity, and PPO is a classical algorithm
known for its strong stability. Furthermore, to examine the performance degradation caused by
non-stationarity, we include an Oracle that has full access to non-stationarity information.
Experimental settings. We conducted experiments on various modified environments from the
DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). The DeepMind Control Suite is a widely-used bench-
mark for RL algorithms, and we modify it to introduce non-stationarity, enabling a comprehensive
evaluation of our method. Due to the page limitation, we only present the performance results for
8 of them (Cartpole Swingup, Reacher Hard, Cup Catch, Cheetah Run, Swimmer Swimmer6, Fin-
ger Spin, Fish Upright, and Quadruped Walk) in our main manuscript. Full results and details of
environments are provided in Appendix D. In our experimental settings, similar to FN-VAE, we
introduce periodic noise to the dynamics to represent non-stationarity. To support our claim that
COREP can handle more complex non-stationarity, we design a more intricate setting, i.e., we ran-
domly sample the coefficients for both within-episode and across-episode non-stationarity at every
time step. Specifically, our modification can be expressed as:
                      s′ = f (s, a) + f (s, a) · αd ct1 cos(ct2 · t) + ci3 sin(ci4 · i)

                                                                                              (4.1)

Here, αd controls the overall degree of non-stationarity, and ctk , cik ∼ N (0.5, 0.5) represent the
changing coefficients of within-episode and across-episode non-stationarity, respectively. This de-
sign generates various combinations of non-stationarity for each time step and episode, posing more
significant challenges to our algorithm and the baselines.
Performance. As illustrated in Figure 4.1, the experimental results demonstrate that COREP out-
performs all baselines in various environments, highlighting its consistent performance in the face of
non-stationarity. Moreover, COREP exhibits significant performance improvements in more com-
plex environments such as Swimmer Swimmer6, Fish Upright, and Quadruped Walk, accompanied
by smaller variances, indicating its resilience against non-stationarity. Although VariBAD, as a meta
RL method, can somewhat resist non-stationarity due to its ability of adaption, its large variances
indicate insufficient stability. While the FN-VAE method, which directly models change factors,
has shown performance similar to our COREP algorithm in certain simple environments, its per-
formance in more complex environments proves that it cannot consistently handle complex non-
stationarity. The narrower gap between COREP and Oracle further suggests that COREP effectively
reduces the performance degradation caused by non-stationarity.
Ablation study. We conduct ablation studies to analyze the contribution of each component in
COREP. To ensure consistency in our conclusion, the experiments are conducted under various
non-stationarity settings, which include ‘within-episode & across-episode’, ‘within-episode’, and
‘across-episode’ non-stationarities. These settings are respectively denoted as (W+A)-EP, W-EP,
and A-EP. As depicted in Figure 4.2a, eliminating the overall COREP structure and the TD er-
ror detection mechanism (corresponding to Lguide ) from COREP both results in significant perfor-
mance degradation, thereby substantiating the effectiveness of these two key designs in tackling
non-stationarity. Moreover, the inclusion of VAE improves the learning efficiency. As expected, the
regularization terms LMAG and Lsparse also play important roles in enhancing the framework’s ability
to address non-stationarity.
Although removing these regularization terms can to some extent demonstrate the necessity of the
highly coupled dual GAT structure in COREP, in order to further prove this point rigorously, we
additionally investigate the performance when using only a single-GAT structure. Please refer to
Appendix D.6 for specific results. Figure D.5 indicates that simply using a single GAT leads to
significant performance degradation. In addition, we also investigate the sensitivity of COREP to
the parameters in Equation 3.6. The detailed results are shown in Appendix D.7, which indicate that
COREP is not very sensitive to these parameters, proving our claim that COREP does not require
complex parameter tuning.
Different degrees of non-stationarity. As demonstrated by the consistent performance across dif-
ferent types of non-stationarities in Figure 4.2a, we also analyze the impact of varying degrees of
non-stationarity in the environment, as depicted in Figure 4.2b. The results suggest that the perfor-
mance of the compared baselines is more affected by the degree of non-stationarity. Conversely,


                                                  7
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Cartpole Swingup                                Reacher Hard                                        Cup Catch                                            Cheetah Run
                                                            1000                                             1000                                                  800
               800                                                                                                                                                 700
                                                             800                                              800
                                                                                                                                                                   600
               600                                                                                                                                                 500
                                                             600                                              600
Return
                                                                                                                                                                   400
               400                                           400                                              400                                                  300
               200                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                             200                                              200
                                                                                                                                                                   100
                    0                                          0                                                 0                                                   0
                        0    0.5        1       1.5     2          0         1          2        3       4           0     1          2       3         4     5             0     1       2      3         4     5
                                 Step (×106)                                     Step (×106)                                     Step (×106)                                            Step (×106)
                            Swimmer Swimmer6                                     Finger Spin                                     Fish Upright                                     Quadruped Walk
                                                            1000                                             1000                                                 1000
               800
                                                             800                                              800                                                  800
               600
                                                             600                                              600                                                  600
Return


               400                                           400                                              400                                                  400
               200                                           200                                              200                                                  200

                    0                                          0                                                 0                                                      0
                        0    1     2        3     4     5          0     1         2         3       4   5           0     1      2       3       4     5     6             0     2       4      6         8    10
                                 Step (×106)                                     Step (×106)                                     Step (×106)                                            Step (×106)
                                    COREP                   VariBAD                         FN-VAE                   PPO                  PPO (convergence)                                Oracle

    Figure 4.1. Learning curves of COREP and baselines in different environments. Solid curves
    indicate the mean of all trials with 5 different seeds. Shaded regions correspond to standard deviation
    among trials. The dashed lines represent the asymptotic performance of PPO and Oracle.
                                 Cheetah Run                           Swimmer Swimmer6                                    Cheetah Run                                          Swimmer Swimmer6
                1.000                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                                  1.0
normalized return


                0.975                                       0.95                                          1.00
                0.950                                       0.90                                                                                                  0.9
                0.925                                       0.85
                                                                                                          0.95
                0.900                                       0.80                                          0.90                                                    0.8
                0.875                                       0.75
                                                                                                          0.85                                                    0.7
                0.850                                       0.70
                0.825
                    (W+A)-EP           W-EP
                                                            0.65
                                                      A-EP (W+A)-EP               W-EP               A-EP 0.80                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                 0.2       0.6        1.0         1.4       1.8         0.2       0.6      1.0       1.4       1.8
                            Full                       w/o VAE                         w/o sparsity
                            w/o COREP                  w/o guide                       w/o MAG                           COREP                        VariBAD                     FN-VAE                       PPO
                                            (a) Ablation study.                                                          (b) Different degrees of non-stationarity.

    Figure 4.2. Final mean returns of 3 different trials on Cheetah Run and Swimmer Swimmer6 en-
    vironments with: (a) Different components and non-stationarity settings. Returns are normalized to
    the full version of COREP in each environment; (b) Different degrees of non-stationarity. Returns
    are normalized to the COREP algorithm with standard degree 1.0.
    COREP exhibits consistent performance when encountering different degrees of non-stationarity,
    further affirming our claim that COREP can effectively tackle more complex non-stationarity.
    Due to page limitations, only partial experimental results are presented in the main manuscript. For
    full results, analyses, specific implementation details, and environmental settings, please refer to
    Appendix D and Appendix E.

    5                   R ELATED W ORK
    Non-stationary RL. Pioneering research in non-stationary reinforcement learning primarily fo-
    cused on detecting changes that had already occurred (Da Silva et al., 2006; Sutton et al., 2007),
    rather than anticipating them. Various methods have been developed to anticipate changes in non-
    stationary deep reinforcement learning settings. For example, Prognosticator (Chandak et al., 2020)
    maximized future rewards without explicitly modeling non-stationary environments, while MBCD
    (Alegre et al., 2021) employed change-point detection to determine whether an agent should learn a
    new policy or reuse existing ones. However, change-point detection may not work well in complex
    non-stationary environments and often requires providing priors. In cases where the evolution of
    non-stationary environments can be represented as a Semi-Markov chain, Hidden Markov-MDPs or
    Hierarchical Semi-Markov Decision Processes can be employed to address non-stationarity (Choi


                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 1999; Hadoux et al., 2014). Some later work attempts to resist non-stationarity by leveraging
the generalization of meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017). For example, Adaption via Meta-learning
(Al-Shedivat et al., 2017) integrated continuous adaptation into the learning-to-learn framework to
solve the non-stationarity. TRIO (Poiani et al., 2021) track non-stationarity by inferring the evo-
lution of latent parameters, capturing the temporal change factors during the meta-testing phase.
GrBAL (Nagabandi et al., 2018) meta-trained dynamic priors, enabling efficient adaptation to local
contexts. However, these methods require the pre-definition of non-stationary tasks and subsequent
meta-training on them. In real-world scenarios, though, we cannot access information about the
non-stationarity. An alternative line of research directly learns latent representations to capture non-
stationary components, leveraging latent variable models to directly model change factors in envi-
ronments or estimating latent vectors describing the non-stationary or variable aspects of dynamics.
LILAC (Xie et al., 2020) regarded the change factor as a latent variable and explicitly modeled the
latent MDP. FN-VAE (Feng et al., 2022) modeled multiple latent variables of non-stationarities to
achieve better performance. However, in real-world scenarios, non-stationarity itself is often more
complex. Simply modeling the latent dynamics may not solve such complex scenarios well. In-
terpreting non-stationarity from a causal perspective is another novel approach. In addition, some
work learns controllers on a collection of pre-defined stationary environments (Provan et al., 2022;
Deng et al., 2022; Zhang & Li, 2019), which can get a guaranteed controller for any mixture of these
stationary environments, thereby improving performance in more complex environments. Although
our method theoretically treats non-stationary environments as mixtures of discrete stationary envi-
ronments in a similar way, we use a more elegant update mechanism in practical design to ensure
that our method is applicable to continuously changing general non-stationary environments. Some
other work like (Saengkyongam et al., 2023) attempts to find an invariant causal structure to address
non-stationarity, which shares some similar points with us. However, their method relies on offline
data and has only been verified in simple Contextual Bandits environments. In contrast, our COREP
algorithm can do online learning and tackle non-stationarity in complex environments.
Causal structure learning. Various approaches for learning causal structure from observed data
have been proposed, see (Vowels et al., 2022) for a review. These approaches mainly fall into two
broad categories: constraint-based methods and score-based methods. The constraint-based meth-
ods check the existence of edges by performing conditional independence tests between each pair of
variables, e.g. PC (Spirtes et al., 2000), IC (Pearl et al., 2000), and FCI (Spirtes et al., 1995; Zhang,
2008). In contrast, the score-based methods generally view causal structure learning as a combina-
torial optimization problem, and measure the goodness of fit of graphs over the data with a score,
then optimize such score to find an optimal graph or equivalent classes (Chickering, 2002; Koivisto
& Sood, 2004; Silander & Myllymäki, 2006; Cussens et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018). Recently,
some gradient-based methods which transform the discrete search into a continuous optimization by
relaxing the space over DAGs have been proposed. These methods allow for applying continuous
optimizations such as gradient descent to causal structure learning. For example, NOTEARS (Zheng
et al., 2018) reformulated the structure learning problem as a continuous optimization problem, and
ensured acyclicity with a weighted adjacency matrix. Dag-gnn (Yu et al., 2019) proposed a gen-
erative model parameterized by a GNN and apply a variant of the structural constraint to learn the
DAG. Some researchers (Saeed et al., 2020) considered the distribution arising from a mixture of
causal DAGs, used MAGs to represent DAGs with unobserved nodes, and showed the identifiability
of the union of component MAGs. In this work, we characterize the non-stationarity by the union
of MAGs, which enlightens us to design the COREP algorithm modelled by GNN.
6   C ONCLUSIONS , L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we present a causal interpretation for non-stationary RL and propose a novel algorithm
that focuses on the causal relationships within states. This algorithm learns a causal-origin represen-
tation to tackle more complex non-stationarity problems. Grounded in our proposed formulation, we
design a modular algorithm that can be seamlessly integrated with existing RL algorithms. The the-
oretical analysis provides both inspiration and theoretical support for our algorithm. Experimental
results from various non-stationary environments further demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm.
However, our method does have certain limitations. The current approach may encounter scalability
issues in high-dimensional state spaces, as the graph-based representation could be computationally
intensive. In future work, we aim to address this issue by incorporating causal-origin representation
learning into other types of latent variable models, including normalizing flows and probabilistic
graphical models. This could further enhance both the scalability and performance of our method.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Maruan Al-Shedivat, Trapit Bansal, Yuri Burda, Ilya Sutskever, Igor Mordatch, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1710.03641, 2017.
Lucas N Alegre, Ana LC Bazzan, and Bruno C da Silva. Minimum-delay adaptation in non-
  stationary reinforcement learning via online high-confidence change-point detection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2105.09452, 2021.
Muhammet Balcilar, Guillaume Renton, Pierre Héroux, Benoit Gaüzère, Sébastien Adam, and Paul
 Honeine. Analyzing the expressive power of graph neural networks in a spectral perspective. In
 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
 May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Yash Chandak, Georgios Theocharous, Shiv Shankar, Martha White, Sridhar Mahadevan, and Philip
  Thomas. Optimizing for the future in non-stationary mdps. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 1414–1425. PMLR, 2020.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine
  learning research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002.
Samuel Choi, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Nevin Zhang. An environment model for nonstationary reinforce-
  ment learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 12, 1999.
James Cussens, David Haws, and Milan Studenỳ. Polyhedral aspects of score equivalence in
  bayesian network structure learning. Mathematical Programming, 164:285–324, 2017.
Bruno C Da Silva, Eduardo W Basso, Ana LC Bazzan, and Paulo M Engel. Dealing with non-
  stationary environments using context detection. In Proceedings of the 23rd international confer-
  ence on Machine learning, pp. 217–224, 2006.
Xiangtian Deng, Yi Zhang, and He Qi. Towards optimal hvac control in non-stationary building
  environments combining active change detection and deep reinforcement learning. Building and
  environment, 211:108680, 2022.
Fan Feng, Biwei Huang, Kun Zhang, and Sara Magliacane. Factored adaptation for non-stationary
  reinforcement learning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Emmanuel Hadoux, Aurélie Beynier, and Paul Weng. Solving hidden-semi-markov-mode markov
  decision problems. In Scalable Uncertainty Management: 8th International Conference, SUM
  2014, Oxford, UK, September 15-17, 2014. Proceedings 8, pp. 176–189. Springer, 2014.
Biwei Huang, Kun Zhang, Yizhu Lin, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Clark Glymour. Generalized score
  functions for causal discovery. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference
  on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 1551–1560, 2018.
Biwei Huang, Kun Zhang, Jiji Zhang, Joseph Ramsey, Ruben Sanchez-Romero, Clark Glymour,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery from heterogeneous/nonstationary data. The Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):3482–3534, 2020.
Biwei Huang, Fan Feng, Chaochao Lu, Sara Magliacane, and Kun Zhang. AdaRL: What, where,
  and how to adapt in transfer reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. Reinforcement learning: A
  survey. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 4:237–285, 1996.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mikko Koivisto and Kismat Sood. Exact bayesian structure discovery in bayesian networks. The
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:549–573, 2004.
Steffen L Lauritzen. Graphical models, volume 17. Clarendon Press, 1996.
Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang,
  Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Azade Nazi, et al. A graph placement methodol-
  ogy for fast chip design. Nature, 594(7862):207–212, 2020.
Anusha Nagabandi, Ignasi Clavera, Simin Liu, Ronald S Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11347, 2018.
Sindhu Padakandla. A survey of reinforcement learning algorithms for dynamically varying envi-
  ronments. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–25, 2021.
Sindhu Padakandla, Prabuchandran KJ, and Shalabh Bhatnagar. Reinforcement learning algorithm
  for non-stationary environments. Applied Intelligence, 50:3590–3606, 2020.
Judea Pearl et al. Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
  19(2), 2000.
Riccardo Poiani, Andrea Tirinzoni, and Marcello Restelli. Meta-reinforcement learning by tracking
  task non-stationarity. In Zhi-Hua Zhou (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 2899–2905. International Joint Conferences
  on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2021. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/399. Main Track.
Gregory Provan, Marcos Quinones-Grueiro, and Yves Sohége. Towards real-time robust adaptive
  control for non-stationary environments. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 55(6):73–78, 2022.
Thomas Richardson and Peter Spirtes. Ancestral graph markov models. The Annals of Statistics, 30
  (4):962–1030, 2002.
Kayvan Sadeghi. Stable mixed graphs. Bernoulli, 19(5B):2330–2358, 2013.
Basil Saeed, Snigdha Panigrahi, and Caroline Uhler. Causal structure discovery from distributions
  arising from mixtures of dags. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8336–8345.
  PMLR, 2020.
Sorawit Saengkyongam, Nikolaj Thams, Jonas Peters, and Niklas Pfister. Invariant policy learning:
  A causal perspective. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
  The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Tomi Silander and Petri Myllymäki. A simple approach for finding the globally optimal bayesian
  network structure. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 445–452, 2006.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–
  1144, 2018.
Shagun Sodhani, Franziska Meier, Joelle Pineau, and Amy Zhang. Block contextual mdps for
  continual learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 608–623. PMLR,
  2022.
Peter Spirtes, Christopher Meek, and Thomas Richardson. Causal inference in the presence of latent
  variables and selection bias. In Proceedings of the Eleventh conference on Uncertainty in artificial
  intelligence, pp. 499–506, 1995.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT
  press, 2000.
Eric V Strobl. Improved causal discovery from longitudinal data using a mixture of dags. In The
  2019 ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Causal Discovery, pp. 100–133. PMLR, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, Anna Koop, and David Silver. On the role of tracking in stationary environments.
  In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 871–878, 2007.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Matthew J Vowels, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. D’ya like dags? a survey on
 structure learning and causal discovery. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(4):1–36, 2022.
Annie Xie, James Harrison, and Chelsea Finn. Deep reinforcement learning amidst lifelong non-
  stationarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10701, 2020.
Yue Yu, Jie Chen, Tian Gao, and Mo Yu. Dag-gnn: Dag structure learning with graph neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7154–7163. PMLR, 2019.
Jiji Zhang. On the completeness of orientation rules for causal discovery in the presence of latent
   confounders and selection bias. Artificial Intelligence, 172(16-17):1873–1896, 2008.
Kun Zhang, Mingming Gong, Petar Stojanov, Biwei Huang, Qingsong Liu, and Clark Glymour. Do-
  main adaptation as a problem of inference on graphical models. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:4965–4976, 2020.
Weicun Zhang and Jiazhi Li. Stable weighted multiple model adaptive control of continuous-time
 plant with large parameter uncertainties. IEEE Access, 7:144125–144133, 2019.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,
   Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applica-
   tions. AI open, 1:57–81, 2020.
Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08348, 2019.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    C AUSALITY BACKGROUND AND P ROOFS
We first review the definition of the Markov condition, the faithfulness assumption and some graph-
ical concepts shown in the condition of Theorem 3.1. We use paD (v), chD (v), and anD (v) to
denote the parents, children and ancestor of node v, respectively; for the detailed definitions, see
e.g. (Lauritzen, 1996).
Definition A.1 (Global Markov Condition (Pearl et al., 2000)). A distribution P over V satisfies the
global Markov condition on graph D if for any partition (X, Y, Z) such that X is d-separated from
Y given Z, then X and Y are conditionally independent given Z.
Definition A.2 (Faithfulness (Pearl et al., 2000)). There are no independencies between variables
that are not entailed by the Markov Condition.

Under the above assumptions, we can tell the conditional independences using the d-separation
criterion from a given DAG D (Pearl et al., 2000). Similarly, the MAGs are ancestral graphs where
any non-adjacent pair of nodes is d-separated (Richardson & Spirtes, 2002). The following algorithm
shows how to construct a MAG from DAG (Saeed et al., 2020):

Algorithm A.1 Construction of the maximal ancestral graph
 1: Input: DAG D = (V, E)
 2: Initialize D = ∅, B = ∅
 3: for u, v ∈ chD (y) do
 4:     add u ↔ v to B.
 5: end for
 6: for t, u, v such that (t → u) ∈ E and (u ↔ v) ∈ B do
 7:     if u ∈ anD (v) then
 8:          add t → v to D
 9:     end if
10: end for
11: for u, v such that (u ↔ v) ∈ B do
12:     if u ∈ anD (v) then
13:          remove u ↔ v from B and add u → v to D
14:     end if
15: end for

To illustrate the above algorithm, we provide two figures. Figure A.1 shows the underlying causal
DAGs for the two environments, and Figure A.2 depicts the output of Algorithm A.1 as well as the
corresponding environment-shared union graph.
In our paper, we characterize the nonstationarity as a mixture of stationary distributions. Formally,
we take the following definition.
Definition A.3 (Mixture of stationary distributions). The marginal distribution of
{s, h, a, s′ , h′ , a′ } is a mixture of stationary distributions across environments, i.e.,
                                                   K
                                                   X
                    P (s, h, a, s′ , h′ , a′ ) =         πk P (s, h, a, s′ , h′ , a′ | e = k),
                                                   k=1

where πk denotes the probability that the sample is from the k-th environment varying over time,
and P (s, h, a, s′ , h′ , a′ | e = k) is invariant over time.

Proof of Proposition 3.1. The outline of the proof are as follows. We first construct a strict partial
order π on V . Then, we induce the MAGs M(1) , . . . , M(k) from the DAGs D(1) , . . . , D(k) by
applying the rules defined in Algorithm A.1. We show the constructed partial order π is compatible,
that for all 1 ≤ k ≤ K, it holds that (a) u ∈ an(v) ⇒ u <π v in M(k) ; and (b) u ↔ v ⇒ u ̸≶π
v in M(k) . Finally we leverage the existing results in (Saeed et al., 2020) to conclude that M∪ is a
MAG.
We define a relation π on V as following: for any variable u ∈ {s, h, a} and any variable v ∈
{s′ , h′ , a′ }, we have (i) u <π v; (ii) v <π r′ . To show the above defined π is a strict partial order,


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             a          a′                        a              a′



                             s          s′                        s              s′



              e             h1          h′1              e        h1             h′1


                            h2          h′2                       h2             h′2


                                        r′                                       r′

                       (a) DAG D(1) .                           (b) DAG D(2) .

                  Figure A.1. DAG representations for two different environments.


        a             a′                      a          a′              a             a′



        s             s′                      s          s′               s            s′


       h1             h′1                     h1         h′1             h1            h′1


       h2             h′2                     h2         h′2             h2            h′2


                      r′                                 r′                            r′

            (a) MAG M(1) .                     (b) MAG M(2) .            (c) Union graph M∪

  Figure A.2. MAG representations for two different environments and the union graph of two
                                       environments.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we first notice that π is irreflexive, because u ̸<π u, v ̸<π v and r′ ̸<π r′ . The transitivity and
asymmetry also hold by definition of π. Therefore, π is a partial order on V .
The Algorithm A.1 constructs an MAG from DAG with three steps. The first step is to add bidirected
edges among the nodes in ch(e). Different values of e leads different marginal distribution of s, h,
hence ch(y) ⊆ {s, h}. Therefore, the bidirected edges are added with both nodes belonging to
{s, h}. For the second step, there is no such node t, with (t → u) ∈ E and (u ↔ v) ∈ B,
because the nodes in {s, h} have no ancestor other than itself. So the second step adds the directed
edges when u = v. The third step in our case is redundant. Equation equation 3.1 shows that
there is no instantaneous causal effects in the system, so there is no u, v such that (u ↔ v) ∈ B
while u ∈ anD (v). From all above, if the input of Algorithm A.1 is D(k) , then it outputs a MAG
M(k) = (V, D(k) , B(k) ) with the set of nodes V , the set directed edges D equals to the set of
directed edges E(k) after removing the node e, and the set of bidirected edges B(k) consists edges
among nodes in {s, h}.
Then, we check the condition (a) and (b) to show M(1) , . . . , M(k) are compatible with the above
defined π. For (a), if u is the ancestor node of v, then the structure of M(k) implies that either
u ∈ {s, h} and v ∈ {s′ , h′ } are nodes in {s′ , h′ }, or u is a node from {s′ , h′ } and v = r′ . For (b),
if u ↔ v, then u, v are nodes in {s, h}, hence u ̸≶π v in M(k) . These means that π is a common
strict partial order on V for all MAGs. In this setup, we can leverage existing results from Lemma
4.3 (Saeed et al., 2020) to show that the environment-shared union graph M∪ is also a maximal
ancestral graph.



B    I NCORPORATION WITH VARIATIONAL AUTO E NCODER
To improve the efficiency of learning the causal-origin representation, we incorporate the causal-
origin representation into the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) framework (Kingma & Welling,
2013). Specifically, we feed the output G(s) into the VAE inference process to derive the mean and
variance (µh , σh ) of the latent representation h. Subsequently, we can sample h ∼ N (µh , σh ), h ∈
Rdh . The loss function for VAE is defined as
              LVAE (s; θ, ϕ) = Eqϕ (h|G(s)) [log pθ (G(s)|h)] − KL [qϕ (h|G(s))||p(h)]
                                                                                                     (B.1)
                             ≈ MSE(s, ŝ) − KL [qϕ (h|G(s)) ||N (0, I)] ,
where pθ , qϕ represent the parameterized decoder and encoder respectively, KL(·) denotes the
Kullback-Leibler divergence, and MSE(s, ŝ) is an estimation of Eqϕ (h|G(s)) [log pθ (G(s)|h)]
which measures the mean square error between the original state and the reconstructed state with
the causal-origin representation. It is noteworthy that the VAE structure serves solely as a tool to en-
hance learning efficiency, therefore it is not a strictly necessary component of our COREP algorithm.
The latent h is then provided to the policy π(a|s, h) for policy optimization.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    T OY E XAMPLE UNDER THE C AUSAL I NTERPRETATION
To better understand the causal interpretation for non-stationary RL, let’s consider a simple toy
example. Given a stationary environment with a state space represented as (s1 , s2 ). In this example,
to maintain simplicity, we focus only on the state’s mask, omitting the action mask and noise term.
We define the original dynamics function as f (cs ⊙ s, a) = cs ⊙ s + a. For the toy environment,
we consider a basic causal model wherein s′i is only influenced by si .
Consequently, the original mask is
                                                         1   0
                                            cs =                                                  (C.1)
                                                         0   1
Given this, we can derive that
                                               s′1 = s1 + a
                                                                                                  (C.2)
                                               s′2 = s2 + a.
We denote the non-stationarity in our experiments (Eq 4.1) simplistically as s′ = f (s, a)[1 + n(t)],
where n(t) represents the introduced non-stationarity, which makes the dynamics becoming time-
varying. In this scenario, the non-stationary environment’s dynamics function becomes
                                     s′1 = s1 + a + (s1 + a)n(t)
                                                                                                  (C.3)
                                     s′2 = s2 + a + (s2 + a)n(t).
                                                                                                  .
It is obvious that the dynamics introduces a time-varying term. In this context, we can define hi =
                           ′
(si + a)n(t), leading to si = si + hi + a. This allows us to deduce the dynamics of h as
                                   h′i = (s′i + a) · n(t + 1)
                                       = (si + hi + 2a) · n(t + 1)                                (C.4)
                                       .
                                       = gi (cts ⊙ s, cth ⊙ h, a),
where cts , cth symbolize the time-varying masks caused by non-stationarity n(t).
More specifically, we derive

                                                   n(t + 1)        0
                                 cts = cth =                                                      (C.5)
                                                       0       n(t + 1)

The masks represent the causal effects between variables after non-stationary changes occur in this
example. The values represent the degree of causal effects, which can be treated as edge weights
after normalization. Based on our theory, COREP’s goal is to learn the union graph shared by these
graph structures and edge weights during the change process. That is, through a common graph
with edge weights, it includes all possible non-stationary changes. Therefore, the information of
non-stationarity in the final learned graph is reflected both in the topology of the union graph and in
the edge weights representing probabilities.
By introducing the time-varying masks and h, we can make the dynamics function remains station-
ary, transferring non-stationarity to the causal model. Thus, we have provided a walk-through under
the simple toy example.
In fact, as illustrated in Figures A.1 and A.2, there are more intricate causal relationships in complex
environments. As depicted above, h can encapsulate not only the inherent environmental infor-
mation but also the complex causal relationships with non-stationarity. Our proposed union MAG
(Proposition 3.1) and the correspondingly designed dual-GAT architecture aim to learn such intri-
cate causal models, enabling generic RL algorithms to handle non-stationarity under this causal
representation.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     F ULL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
D.1   D ETAILS ABOUT E NVIRONMENT S ETTINGS .


Figure D.1. The environment we use in our experiment. We add non-stationary noise to the obser-
vations of these environments according to Equation 4.1.

Figure D.1 shows the environments we use in the experiment. We add non-stationary noise to
the observations of these environments according to Equation 4.1. These environments vary in
terms of complexity, from low-dimensional problems like “Reacher Easy” to high-dimensional ones
like “Quadruped Walk”. All these tasks require the agent to understand and control its physical
embodiment in order to achieve the desired goals. The specific descriptions of these environments
and goals are as follows.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cartpole Swingup. The cart can move along a one-dimensional track. The pole is attached to the
cart with a joint allowing it to rotate freely. The initial state has the pole hanging down, and the goal
is to apply forces to the cart such that the pole swings up and is balanced upright. Actions typically
involve applying a horizontal force to the cart.
Reacher Easy. The agent is a two-joint robotic arm. The arm must move in a two-dimensional
plane to touch a target position. The arm’s state includes its joint angles and velocities. The action
is the torque applied to each of the joints. The target’s position is fixed in this version.
Reacher Hard. The task is the same as ”Reacher Easy,” but the target position is randomly placed
in each episode, making the task more difficult as the agent has to learn to reach various positions.
Cup Catch. The agent is a robotic arm holding a cup, and there’s a ball attached to the cup with a
string. The arm needs to move in a way to swing the ball and catch it in the cup. The arm’s state
includes the position and velocity of the arm joints and the position and velocity of the ball. The
actions are the torques applied at the arm’s joints.
Cheetah Run. The agent is a model of a cheetah-like robot with 9 DoF(Degrees of Freedom): the
agent can flex and extend its ”spine,” and each leg has two joints for flexing and extending. The
agent’s state includes the joint angles and velocities, and the actions are the torques applied to each
of the joints. The goal is to move forward as fast as possible.
Hopper Stand. The agent is a one-legged robot, and its goal is to balance upright from a resting
position. The agent’s state includes the angle and angular velocity of the torso, as well as the joint
angles and velocities. The actions are the torques applied to the joints.
Swimmer Swimmer6. The agent is a snake-like robot swimming in a two-dimensional plane. The
robot has 6 joints, and the goal is to swim forward as fast as possible. The agent’s state includes the
joint angles and velocities, and the actions are the torques applied to the joints.
Swimmer Swimmer15. This is a more complex version of the Swimmer environment, with the
agent being a 15-joint snake-like robot. Like the simpler version, the goal is to swim forward as fast
as possible.
Finger Spin. The agent is a robot with two fingers, and there’s a freely spinning object. The goal
is to keep the object spinning and balanced on the fingertips. The state includes the positions and
velocities of the fingers and the object, and the actions are the forces applied by the fingers.
Walker Walk. The agent is a bipedal robot, and the goal is to walk forward as fast as possible. The
agent’s state includes the angle and angular velocity of the torso, and the joint angles and velocities.
The actions are the torques applied to the joints.
Fish Upright. The agent is a fish-like robot swimming in a three-dimensional fluid. The goal is to
swim forward while maintaining an upright orientation. The agent’s state includes the orientation
and velocity of the fish, and the actions are the torques and forces applied to move the fish.
Quadruped Walk. The agent is a quadrupedal (four-legged) robot. Like the bipedal walker, the
goal is to walk forward as fast as possible. The agent’s state includes the angle and angular velocity
of the torso, and the joint angles and velocities. The actions are the torques applied to the joints.
To ensure consistency in our conclusion, the experiments are conducted under various non-
stationarity settings, which include ‘within-episode & across-episode’, ‘within-episode’, and
‘across-episode’ non-stationarities. These settings are respectively denoted as (W+A)-EP, W-EP,
and A-EP. Specifically, these non-stationarities can be expressed as
                      s′ = f (s, a) + f (s, a) · αd ct1 cos(ct2 · t) + ci3 sin(ci4 · i)

                                                                                          (D.1)
                              s′ = f (s, a) + f (s, a) · αd ct1 cos(ct2 · t)

                                                                                          (D.2)
                               ′
                                                              i        i

                              s = f (s, a) + f (s, a) · αd c3 sin(c4 · i)                 (D.3)

We experimented only under (W+A)-EP when looking at the performance of the algorithm, while
in a more detailed ablation study we experimented with all three different setings.


                                                   18
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 D.2               S ETTINGS OF BASELINES

 For VariBAD, we meta-train the models (5000 batch size, 2 epochs for all experiments) and show
 the learning curves of meta-testing. The tasks parameters for meta-training are uniformly sampled
 from a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1).
 For all approaches, we use the same backbone algorithm for policy optimization, i.e., PPO with the
 same hyperparameters, as shown in Table E.2.

 D.3               F ULL R ESULTS OF P ERFORMANCE

                    Cartpole Swingup                            Reacher Easy                                          Reacher Hard                                          Cup Catch
                                                 1000                                                1000                                                  1000
         800
                                                  800                                                 800                                                   800
         600
                                                  600                                                 600                                                   600
 Return


         400                                      400                                                 400                                                   400
         200                                      200                                                 200                                                   200

           0                                        0                                                   0                                                     0
               0     0.5       1       1.5   2          0       1           2            3       4          0         1            2           3       4          0     1     2    3      4   5
                         Step (×106)                                Step (×106)                                           Step (×106)                                       Step (×106)
                         Cheetah Run                            Hopper Stand                                    Swimmer Swimmer6                                      Swimmer Swimmer15
         800                                     1000
         700                                                                                          800                                                   800
                                                  800
         600
         500                                                                                          600                                                   600
                                                  600
 Return


         400
                                                  400                                                 400                                                   400
         300
         200                                                                                          200                                                   200
                                                  200
         100
           0                                        0                                                   0                                                     0
               0     1     2       3     4   5          0   1           2        3           4   5          0     1            2       3           4   5          0     1     2    3      4   5
                         Step (×106)                                Step (×106)                                           Step (×106)                                       Step (×106)
                         Finger Spin             1000           Walker Walk                                               Fish Upright                                  Quadruped Walk
     1000                                                                                            1000                                                  1000

         800                                      800                                                 800                                                   800

         600                                      600                                                 600                                                   600
Return


         400                                      400                                                 400                                                   400

         200                                      200                                                 200                                                   200

           0                                        0                                                   0                                                     0
               0     1     2       3     4   5          0   1       2       3        4       5   6          0     1        2       3       4       5   6          0    2      4    6      8   10
                         Step (×106)                                Step (×106)                                           Step (×106)                                       Step (×106)

                            COREP                VariBAD                        FN-VAE                      PPO                    PPO (convergence)                           Oracle

 Figure D.2. Learning curves of COREP and baselines in different environments. Solid curves
 indicate the mean of all trials with 5 different seeds. Shaded regions correspond to standard deviation
 among trials. The dashed lines represent the asymptotic performance of PPO and Oracle.

 Figure D.2 shows the full learning curves. We add non-stationary noise as Equation D.1 to all
 environments. According to the results, COREP consistently performs well in environments of dif-
 ferent complexities, proving the effectiveness of the algorithm. Especially in Hopper Stand, Swim-
 mer Swimmer6, Swimmer Swimmer15, Finger Spin, Fish Upright, and Quadruped Walk, COREP
 demonstrates a larger performance gap, highlighting its superiority over baselines.
 FN-VAE has the ability to approach our COREP in some simple environments (Cartpole Swingup,
 Reacher Easy, Reacher Hard, and Cup Catch), but still exhibits significant variance, reflecting its
 instability, especially in more complex environments where it performs even worse than VariBAD
 (Finger Spin, Quadruped Walk). VariBAD shows a large performance gap and variance in all envi-
 ronments, indicating poor stability to non-stationarity. PPO’s performance is consistently the worst
 across all environments due to the lack of any optimization for non-stationarity.


                                                                                                 19
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    D.4                    F ULL R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDY

                            Cartpole Swingup                Reacher Easy                     Reacher Hard                       Cup Catch
   normalized return1.00                            1.00                            1.00                            1.00
                    0.98                            0.98                            0.98                            0.98
                    0.96                                                            0.96                            0.96
                                                    0.96
                    0.94                                                            0.94                            0.94
                                                    0.94                            0.92                            0.92
                    0.92
                                                    0.92                            0.90                            0.90
                    0.90
                                                                                                                    0.88
                    0.88                            0.90                            0.88
                       (W+A)-EP       W-EP      A-EP (W+A)-EP      W-EP       A-EP (W+A)-EP        W-EP        A-EP (W+A)-EP       W-EP        A-EP
                                  Cheetah Run               Hopper Stand                   Swimmer Swimmer6                 Swimmer Swimmer15
                1.000                               1.00                            1.00                            1.00
normalized return


                0.975                               0.95                            0.95                            0.95
                0.950                               0.90                            0.90                            0.90
                0.925                               0.85                            0.85                            0.85
                0.900                                                               0.80                            0.80
                                                    0.80
                0.875                                                               0.75                            0.75
                                                    0.75
                0.850                                                               0.70                            0.70
                0.825                               0.70                            0.65
                       (W+A)-EP       W-EP      A-EP (W+A)-EP      W-EP       A-EP (W+A)-EP        W-EP        A-EP (W+A)-EP       W-EP        A-EP
                                  Finger Spin                   Walker Walk                   Fish Upright                    Quadruped Walk
                    1.00                            1.00                            1.00                            1.00
   normalized return


                    0.95                            0.98                            0.95                            0.95
                    0.90                            0.96                                                            0.90
                                                                                    0.90
                                                    0.94                                                            0.85
                    0.85
                                                    0.92                            0.85                            0.80
                    0.80
                                                    0.90                            0.80                            0.75
                    0.75
                                                    0.88                                                            0.70
                       (W+A)-EP       W-EP      A-EP (W+A)-EP      W-EP       A-EP (W+A)-EP        W-EP        A-EP (W+A)-EP       W-EP        A-EP
                                   Full         w/o COREP           w/o VAE            w/o guide             w/o sparsity          w/o MAG

    Figure D.3. Final mean returns of 3 different trials on all environments with different components
    and non-stationarity settings. Returns are normalized to the full version of COREP in each environ-
    ment.

    Figure D.3 shows the performance after removing different components in COREP. All (W+A)-EP,
    W-EP, and A-EP non-stationary noises (Equation D.1, D.2, and D.3) are separately added to the
    environments. Each point of Figure D.3 represents the normalized return, which is used to observe
    the contribution of removed components to the overall algorithm. Specifically,

                           • w/o VAE is a version without the VAE structure;
                           • w/o Lguide removes the guided update mechanism containing TD detection;
                           • w/o Lsparsity removes the corresponding loss Lsparsity in Equation 3.6;
                           • w/o LMAG removes the corresponding loss LMAG in Equation 3.6;
                           • w/o COREP represents the complete removal of all COREP components.

    According to the results, it can be seen that the removal of the overall structure of COREP shows a
    consistent performance degradation, which indicates its important role in tackling non-stationarity.
    The guided update mechanism and VAE structure also have significant impacts on the algorithm’s
    performance in non-stationary environments. Lsparsity and LMAG also provide some degree of assis-
    tance in dealing with non-stationarity.


                                                                               20
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   D.5                       F ULL R ESULTS ON N ON - STATIONARITY D EGREES

                                 Cartpole Swingup                       Reacher Easy                            Reacher Hard                              Cup Catch
                    1.02                                   1.02                                                                           1.025
                    1.00                                                                         1.00
                                                           1.00                                                                           1.000
normalized return

                    0.98                                                                         0.95                                     0.975
                    0.96                                   0.98
                                                           0.96                                                                           0.950
                    0.94                                                                         0.90                                     0.925
                    0.92                                   0.94
                    0.90                                   0.92                                  0.85                                     0.900
                    0.88                                   0.90                                                                           0.875
                    0.86                                   0.88                                  0.80                                     0.850
                           0.2    0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0    1.4   1.8          0.2     0.6    1.0   1.4    1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8
                                   Cheetah Run             1.05         Hopper Stand                          Swimmer Swimmer6                      Swimmer Swimmer15
                                                                                                  1.0                                      1.00
                    1.00                                   1.00
                                                                                                                                           0.95
normalized return


                    0.95                                   0.95                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                           0.90
                                                           0.90
                    0.90                                                                          0.8                                      0.85
                                                           0.85
                    0.85                                                                          0.7                                      0.80
                                                           0.80
                                                                                                                                           0.75
                    0.80                                   0.75                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                           0.70
                           0.2    0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0    1.4   1.8          0.2     0.6    1.0   1.4    1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8
                                   Finger Spin                           Walker Walk                             Fish Upright                           Quadruped Walk
                                                          1.025
                    1.00                                                                         1.00                                      1.00
                                                          1.000
                                                                                                                                           0.95
normalized return


                    0.95                                  0.975                                  0.95
                                                          0.950                                  0.90                                      0.90
                    0.90                                  0.925                                                                            0.85
                                                                                                 0.85
                    0.85                                  0.900                                                                            0.80
                                                          0.875                                  0.80
                    0.80                                                                                                                   0.75
                                                          0.850                                  0.75                                      0.70
                    0.75                                  0.825                                  0.70
                           0.2    0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0    1.4   1.8          0.2     0.6    1.0   1.4    1.8           0.2   0.6   1.0   1.4   1.8
                                                             COREP                  VariBAD                   FN-VAE               PPO

   Figure D.4. Final mean returns of 3 different trials on Cheetah Run and Swimmer Swimmer6
   environments with different degrees of non-stationarity. Returns are normalized to the COREP
   algorithm with standard degree 1.0.

   To analyze the impact of varying degrees of non-stationarity in the environment, we change the
   values of αd in Equation D.1. As depicted in Figure D.4, the results suggest that the performance
   of the compared baselines is more affected by the degree of non-stationarity. Conversely, COREP
   exhibits consistent performance when encountering different degrees of non-stationarity, further
   affirming our claim that COREP can effectively tackle more complex non-stationarity.


                                                                                            21
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 D.6         S TUDY ON U SING S INGLE GAT S TRUCTURE

                            Cartpole Swingup                                                    Cheetah Run
                                                                          800
     800                                                                  700
                                                                          600
     600
                                                                          500
Return


                                                                          400
     400
                                                                          300
     200                                                                  200
                                                                          100
         0                                                                  0
              0            0.5          1          1.5           2              0        1          2          3        4        5
                                Step (×106)                                                       Step (×106)
                           COREP            FN-VAE                         single-GAT                                 Oracle
                           VariBAD          PPO                            PPO (convergence)
 Figure D.5. Learning curves of COREP, single-GAT variant, and baselines in different environ-
 ments. Solid curves indicate the mean of all trials with 5 different seeds. Shaded regions correspond
 to standard deviation among trials. The dashed lines represent the asymptotic performance of PPO
 and Oracle. It can be seen that the single-GAT variant exhibits significant performance decreases
 when facing non-stationarity.


 D.7         S TUDY ON T UNNING PARAMETERS OF L OSS T ERMS

 Table D.1. Sensitivity results of parameter λguide . The results indicate that the performance is not
 sensitive to λguide , even with significant adjustments to its value, COREP still outperforms FN-VAE.

         λguide      Cartpole Swingup        Reacher Easy      Reacher Hard         Cup Catch       Cheetah Run       Hopper Stand
         0.5             732.3 ± 30.6        947.6 ± 24.6    938.4 ± 29.2         868.5 ± 24.7       634.8 ± 41.6      651.4 ± 29.3
   0.1 (original)       743.4 ± 21.2        964.6 ± 17.3     947.2 ± 23.1        877.5 ± 19.2       651.1 ± 44.3       645.5 ± 25.8
        0.05             732.8 ± 26.6        939.3 ± 16.4   949.4 ± 25.7          870.1 ± 19.8       642.7 ± 52.8     656.7 ± 32.3
        0.01             722.3 ± 28.4        945.2 ± 23.3    934.3 ± 19.5         864.6 ± 25.5       629.4 ± 57.2      641.3 ± 33.8
       0.001             717.5 ± 31.9        928.8 ± 25.8    936.9 ± 25.7         858.3 ± 18.6       622.8 ± 49.2      627.5 ± 27.5
     FN-VAE              710.3 ± 64.5        913.3 ± 38.7    928.1 ± 21.9         851.3 ± 31.6       606.5 ± 75.3      580.9 ± 47.3


 Table D.2. Sensitivity analysis of parameters λVAE , λsparsity , and λMAG . In the experiment, we
 followed the same setting as in the paper and set these three parameters to the same value for tuning
 together. The results indicate that the performance is not sensitive to λVAE , λsparsity , and λMAG , even
 with significant adjustments to its value, COREP still outperforms FN-VAE.

   λVAE /λsparsity /λMAG    Cartpole Swingup    Reacher Easy      Reacher Hard        Cup Catch         Cheetah Run    Hopper Stand
          0.01                728.7 ± 36.1       936.3 ± 23.7     931.5 ± 24.4       864.9 ± 25.8     632.2 ± 37.5      623.5 ± 32.1
          0.005              745.6 ± 34.8        955.3 ± 25.3    953.6 ± 22.1        872.5 ± 21.5     644.5 ± 36.1      638.1 ± 24.6
     0.001 (original)         743.4 ± 21.2      964.6 ± 17.3      947.2 ± 23.1      877.5 ± 19.2     651.1 ± 44.3      645.5 ± 25.8
         0.0005               718.6 ± 31.5       946.6 ± 19.6     945.5 ± 19.4       856.3 ± 18.7     621.6 ± 48.4      641.1 ± 29.6
         0.0001               721.1 ± 35.9       949.5 ± 27.8     940.6 ± 19.7       859.2 ± 26.4     618.1 ± 55.7      619.5 ± 31.7
        FN-VAE                710.3 ± 64.5       913.3 ± 38.7     928.1 ± 21.9       851.3 ± 31.6     606.5 ± 75.3      580.9 ± 47.3


                                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.8        V ISUALIZATION OF L EARNED G RAPH

To better visualize the graph learned by the COREP algorithm, we respectively show the weighted
adjacency matrix of core-GAT and general-GAT after 5M steps in the Cheetah Run environment in
Figure D.6a and Figure D.6b, and in the Walker Walk environment in Figure D.7 and Figure D.8.
The number of graph nodes is a hyperparameter determined by the complexity of the environment.
Please refer to Table E.1 for different settings in each environment.
It is important to note that the nodes in the graphs represent abstract components rather than the ac-
tual dimensions of the environment, thus direct interpretation of specific graph parts as correspond-
ing to the actual environment is not feasible. However, we can still infer an abstract graph structure.
Specifically, in these heatmaps, each value on a grid represents the weight of an edge from a node
on the y-axis to a node on the x-axis. A higher value indicates a greater causal influence.
Based on the results, it can be seen that core-GAT focuses more on a few core nodes in its learned
graph structure, while general-GAT compensates for some overlooked detailed information by core-
GAT. The results align well with our claim made in the paper.


       1      2       3      4      5      6      7      8               1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8

 1    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.98   0.01        1   0.00   0.04   0.00   0.02   0.02   0.02   0.67   0.22

 2    0.83   0.00    0.01   0.16   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00        2   0.67   0.00   0.06   0.23   0.00   0.01   0.01   0.01

 3    0.02   0.10    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.64   0.00   0.24        3   0.12   0.10   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.47   0.01   0.29

 4    0.61   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.27   0.12        4   0.35   0.01   0.03   0.00   0.00   0.02   0.43   0.15

 5    0.03   0.00    0.00   0.94   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.03        5   0.17   0.01   0.00   0.43   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.38

 6    0.03   0.93    0.04   0.01   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00        6   0.06   0.63   0.21   0.06   0.00   0.00   0.02   0.01

 7    0.06   0.67    0.02   0.00   0.01   0.00   0.00   0.24        7   0.10   0.43   0.08   0.02   0.14   0.04   0.00   0.20

 8    0.12   0.00    0.02   0.00   0.00   0.18   0.67   0.00        8   0.08   0.00   0.06   0.01   0.04   0.37   0.43   0.00

                          (a) Core GAT                                                 (b) General GAT

                    Figure D.6. Weighted adjacency matrix in Cheetah Run after 5M steps.


                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16
               1 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.22 0.76 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

               2 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.62 0.11 0.00 0.00

               3 0.00 0.58 0.00 0.30 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00

               4 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.42 0.05 0.00 0.50

               5 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.00 0.59 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

               6 0.02 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.00 0.52 0.24 0.00 0.00 0.00

               7 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.47

               8 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.76 0.00 0.00

               9 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.96 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

              10 0.00 0.00 0.36 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.51 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00

              11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.85 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.02 0.05

              12 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.48

              13 0.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.68

              14 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.36 0.47 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

              15 0.52 0.23 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

              16 0.57 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.02 0.17 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00


      Figure D.7. Weighted adjacency matrix of core-GAT in Cheetah Run after 5M steps.



                  1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16
               1 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.45 0.33 0.01 0.04 0.02 0.00

               2 0.01 0.00 0.24 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.08 0.04 0.07 0.26 0.08 0.05 0.01

               3 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.02 0.11 0.06 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.00 0.13 0.01 0.10 0.01

               4 0.03 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.08 0.05 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.04 0.01 0.00 0.20 0.36 0.01 0.11

               5 0.25 0.05 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.06 0.01 0.01 0.24 0.01 0.17 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.09

               6 0.05 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.07 0.00 0.01 0.53 0.13 0.11 0.02 0.00

               7 0.04 0.01 0.01 0.16 0.10 0.01 0.00 0.24 0.16 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.13 0.02 0.00 0.09

               8 0.01 0.00 0.06 0.20 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.18 0.14 0.03 0.04 0.16 0.01 0.04

               9 0.36 0.04 0.05 0.01 0.10 0.01 0.17 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.12

              10 0.02 0.01 0.21 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.30 0.04 0.23 0.02 0.01 0.00

              11 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.06 0.05 0.16 0.04 0.00 0.01 0.06 0.15 0.20 0.20

              12 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.07 0.03 0.00 0.16 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.01 0.08 0.35

              13 0.28 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.06 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.17 0.00 0.02 0.06 0.24

              14 0.25 0.01 0.01 0.14 0.23 0.01 0.09 0.01 0.00 0.04 0.14 0.07 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00

              15 0.14 0.23 0.00 0.01 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.02 0.15 0.25 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01

              16 0.23 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.04 0.00 0.04 0.01 0.04 0.22 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.01 0.15 0.00


     Figure D.8. Weighted adjacency matrix of general-GAT in Cheetah Run after 5M steps.



                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     I MPLEMENTATION AND T RAINING D ETAILS
E.1   P SEUDO CODE FOR COREP

In Algorithm E.1, we summarize the steps of COREP. For more specific details, please refer to the
code provided in our supplementary material.

Algorithm E.1 Causal-Origin REPresentation (COREP)
 1: Init: env; VAE parameters θ, ϕ; policy parameters: ψ; replay buffer B; TD buffer Bδ .
 2: for i = 0, 1, . . . do
 3:     Collect trajectory τi with πψ (a|s, h).
 4:     Update replay buffer B[i] ← τi .
 5:     for j = 0, 1, . . . do
 6:         Sample a batch of episodes Ej from B and TD errors {δk } from Bδ .
 7:         Transform states into X through MLPs.
 8:         Compute AX = Softmax XX T ⊙ (1N − IN ) .
                            P
 9:        Compute δα =        |Bδ |−α|Bδ |<k<|Bδ | k /α|Bδ |.
                                                   δ
10:        if δα ∈
                 / (µδ − ησδ , µδ + ησδ ) then                   ▷ Confidence detection of TD error.
11:            unfreeze weights of core-GAT.
12:        else
13:            freeze weights of core-GAT.
14:        end if
15:        Get graph representation Gcore , Ggeneral from core-GAT and general-GAT.
16:        Compute Lguide , LMAG , Lsparsity according to Equation 3.4, 3.5.
17:        Input G(s) = Gcore ⊕ Ggeneral into VAE encoder qϕ and infer µh , σh .
18:        Sample h ∼ N (µh , σh )
19:        Decode ŝ from h using decoder pθ , then compute LVAE according to Equation B.1.
20:        Do policy optimization for πψ (a|s, h), then compute Lpolicy and TD error δ.
21:        Compute Ltotal according to Equation 3.6 and use it for gradient-updating θ, ϕ, ψ.
22:        Push δ into TD buffer Bδ .
23:    end for
24: end for


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2    H YPERPARAMETERS

We list the hyperparameters for MLP, GAT, and VAE structures in Table E.1, and the hyperparame-
ters for policy optimization and training in Table E.2.

                Table E.1. Hyperparameters for the structure of MLP, GAT, and VAE.

      Hyperparameter                                              Value
       MLP activation                                                ReLU
      MLP hidden dim                                                  512
      MLP learning rate                                               1e-3
       GAT activation                                                ELU
      GAT hidden dim                  32 (Cartpole Swingup, Reacher Easy/Hard, Cup Catch, Cheetah Run)
                                                                64 (Otherwise)
      GAT node numbers                       4 (Cartpole Swingup, Reacher Easy/Hard, Cup Catch)
                                                        8 (Cheetah Run, Hopper Stand)
                                                                16 (Otherwise)
       node feature dim               16 (Cartpole Swingup, Reacher Easy/Hard, Cup Catch, Cheetah Run)
                                                                32 (Otherwise)
      GAT head numbers             2 (Quadruped Walk, Fish Upright, Walker Walk, Swimmer Swimmer6/15)
                                                                 1 (Otherwise)
 VAE encoder hidden dim                                               128
 VAE decoder hidden dim                                                64
 latent representation dim                   4 (Cartpole Swingup, Reacher Easy/Hard, Cup Catch)
                                                        8 (Cheetah Run, Hopper Stand)
                                                                16 (Otherwise)


                   Table E.2. Hyperparameters for policy optimization and training.

       Hyperparameter                                              Value
       Policy hidden dim            256 (Swimmer Swimmer6/15, Walker Walk, Fish Upright, Quadruped Walk)
                                                             128 (Otherwise)
      Policy learning rate                                        7e-4
         λ1 (for Lguide )                                          0.1
 λ2 (for LMAG /Lsparsity /LVAE )                                  1e-3
      PPO update epoch                                             16
             PPO γ                                                0.97
          PPO ε clip                                               0.1
         TD buffer size                                           2000
      Confidence level η                                          1.96


                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    C OMPUTE R ESOURCE D ETAILS
We list the hardware resources used in Table F.1, and list the training time required for a single trial
in each environment in Table F.2.
                      Table F.1. Computational resources for our experiments.

                         CPU                                    GPU                    RAM
         Intel I9-12900K@3.2GHz (24 Cores)         Nvidia RTX 3090 (24GB) × 2         256GB


             Table F.2. Computing time of each single trial in different environments.

                                  Environment           Training Time
                               Cartpole Swingup             12 hours
                                 Reacher Easy               16 hours
                                 Reacher Hard               20 hours
                                   Cup Catch                16 hours
                                 Cheetah Run                24 hours
                                 Hopper Stand               28 hours
                              Swimmer Swimmer6              28 hours
                              Swimmer Swimmer15             36 hours
                                  Finger Spin               28 hours
                                 Walker Walk                28 hours
                                  Fish Upright              30 hours
                                Quadruped Walk              42 hours



G    L ICENSES
In our code, we have used the following libraries which are covered by the corresponding licenses:

       • Numpy (BSD-3-Clause license)
       • PyTorch (BSD-3-Clause license)
       • PyTorch Geometric (MIT license)
       • DeepMind Control (Apache-2.0 license)
       • OpenAI Gym (MIT License)


                                                  27
