Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACES: G ENERATING DIVERSE PROGRAMMING
PUZZLES WITH AUTOTELIC LANGUAGE MODELS
AND SEMANTIC DESCRIPTORS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Finding and selecting new and interesting problems to solve is at the heart of cu-
         riosity, science and innovation. We here study automated problem generation in
         the context of the open-ended space of python programming puzzles. Existing
         generative models often aim at modeling a reference distribution without any ex-
         plicit diversity optimization. Other methods explicitly optimizing for diversity do
         so either in limited hand-coded representation spaces or in uninterpretable learned
         embedding spaces that may not align with human perceptions of interesting vari-
         ations. With ACES (Autotelic Code Exploration via Semantic descriptors), we
         introduce a new autotelic generation method that leverages semantic descriptors
         produced by a large language model (LLM) to directly optimize for interesting
         diversity, as well as few-shot-based generation. Each puzzle is labeled along 10
         dimensions, each capturing a programming skill required to solve it. ACES gener-
         ates and pursues novel and feasible goals to explore that abstract semantic space,
         slowly discovering a diversity of solvable programming puzzles in any given run.
         Across a set of experiments, we show that ACES discovers a richer diversity of
         puzzles than existing diversity-maximizing algorithms as measured across a range
         of diversity metrics. We further study whether and in which conditions this diver-
         sity can translate into the successful training of puzzle solving models.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Finding and selecting new and interesting problems to solve is at the heart of curiosity, science
and innovation (Chu & Schulz, 2020; Schmidhuber, 2013; Herrmann et al., 2022). We propose
to leverage machine learning, a set of tools usually targeted at solving problems, to automate the
generation of an interesting diversity of solvable problems. Automated problem generation has
a wide range of applications such as education (generating problems for students to solve), data
augmentation (generating problems and solutions for AI model training), or automated scientific
discoveries (e.g. discovering new scientific problems and their solutions).
In this work, we focus on the generation of a diversity of Python programming puzzles, an open-
ended space to explore that contains problems ranging from trivial string manipulations to open
mathematical puzzles (Schuster et al., 2021). Importantly, puzzle-solution pairs produced by the
search can be checked for correctness using a Python interpreter, providing a notion of ground truth
that natural language problems lack (e.g. creative writing). The automated generation of diverse
programming puzzles could benefit computer science education and be used as a data generation
process for the training of large language models (LLMs). Pretraining on code indeed seems to be a
major factor in LLMs’ reasoning abilities (Madaan et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2022).
Standard generative models do not explicitly optimize for diversity but are instead trained to fit
the distribution of a reference dataset (e.g. Goodfellow et al., 2014; Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020; Ho et al., 2020). Measuring and optimizing for diversity requires the definition of a behavioral
characterization (BC) of the generated artefacts on which to evaluate the measure. Early diversity-
producing methods often used hand-coded low-dimensional representation functions, which focused
and restricted the diversity search along features one could easily compute. More recent meth-
ods leverage pretrained embedding functions allowing them to work with higher-dimensional data


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                      error
                                              generated puzzle               Python interpreter            3                       reject
             Puzzle                   2
                                              def f(x: List[int]):             def f(x: List[int]):
           generator                              return len(x) == 2               return len(x) == 2
             (LLM)                            def g():                         def g():
                                                  return [1, 2]                    return [1, 2]                         success

                                              sample goal                        assert f(g())
       def f(x: List[int]):
                                          1
           return len(x) == 2                 in skill space
       def g():
           return [1, 2]        use neighbors                                                       semantic
                                 in archive to                                                                 4
       def f(x: List[int]):                                                                        descriptors
           return len(x) == 2   build prompt
                                                                                                                          Puzzle
       def g():
                                                                                                                ...
           return [1, 2]                                                   add new puzzle                                labeler
                                                                                                                          (LLM)


                                                                                           Co pr em
                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                       at s
                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                  ip ric
                                                                                                         io
                                                                                         Bi mb ble
       ......                                                                   5


                                                                                                 h bl


                                                                                              an ato
                                                                                            M pro

                                                                                                     o


                                                                                                    ul
                                                                                           t M in
                                                                                                h
      few-shot prompt


                                                                                       ap

                                                                                              at
                                                      archive of puzzles


                                                                                     Gr
Figure 1: Overview of ACES. ACES maintains an archive of discovered puzzles grouped into cells
indexed by their semantic representation (skill combination). ACES runs in several steps: 1) sam-
ple a target semantic goal and relevant examples from the archive. 2) given these, generate a
puzzle f and its solution g with the puzzle generator. 3) test the validity of that pair by running
assert(f(g()) in the interpreter. 4) if the pair is valid, obtain its semantic representation with
the puzzle labeler. 5) add the new pair to its corresponding cell in the archive.

(e.g. image, text, programs) at the expense of interpretability and control over the axes of variations
(Nair et al., 2018; Laversanne-Finot et al., 2018; Cully, 2019; Etcheverry et al., 2020).
We propose to leverage semantic descriptors: a hand-defined list of abstract features evaluated by
LLMs. Semantic descriptors allow to work with high-dimensional inputs (here programs) while
focusing the diversity search along interpretable semantic features of interest. Specifically, we rep-
resent any puzzle by the set of programming skills required to solve it among 10 possible skills
(e.g. graphs, dynamic programming, recursion). Evaluating descriptors with LLMs allows us to de-
fine more abstract features that better capture our intuitive perception of axes of variation, descriptors
that would have been hard or even impossible to code by hand. The compositionality of language
and linguistic categories futher allow us to easily define sets of orthogonal conceptual categories that
can be almost arbitrarily combined (Colas et al., 2020).
This work introduces a new diversity-producing algorithm called ACES for Autotelic Code Explo-
ration with Semantic descriptors. ACES leverages an LLM for puzzle generation, solution genera-
tion and novelty evaluation. It slowly grows an archive of discovered puzzle-solution pairs, where
each cell of the archive contains puzzles that share a given semantic representation — a 10D binary
vector obtained by the semantic descriptors. At each new cycle of the algorithm, ACES targets a cell
randomly in the archive (semantic goal) and generates a candidate puzzle and solution by prompting
the LLM-based puzzle generator with the target semantic representation and a set of examples from
the archive. The generated puzzle-solution pair is then evaluated for validity using a Python inter-
preter and, if valid, gets encoded by the puzzle labeler into a corresponding semantic representation
used to store the newly discovered puzzle in the right archive cell, see Figure 1. Our experiments
study the evolution of several diversity metrics over time and compares ACES with state-of-the-art
baselines (Lehman et al., 2022; Haluptzok et al., 2023).
To summarize, our contributions in this paper are the following:
• We define the notion of semantic descriptors to leverage LLMs for the encoding of high-
  dimensional textual data into hard-to-compute, abstract and interpretable features of interest.
• We introduce a set of such semantic descriptors to characterize the diversity of programming
  puzzles based on classical programming ontologies.
• We propose Autotelic Code Exploration with Semantic descriptors (ACES), a new diversity-
  producing method building on these semantic descriptors that leverages the few-shot learning
  abilities of LLMs to generate an interesting diversity of programming puzzles;
• We evaluate the ability of ACES and its baselines to achieve various kinds of diversities and
  provide a comprehensive analysis of the interactions between diversity and finetuned performance
  on a held out test set.


                                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Diversity-producing algorithms were originally proposed within the field of evolutionary comput-
ing. Beginning with novelty search (Lehman & Stanley, 2011b;a), this line of research expanded
with the invention of quality-diversity algorithms (QD: Mouret & Clune, 2015a; Cully & Demiris,
2018a), a set of methods striving to evolve a diverse population of locally-performant individuals via
the undirected mutation of existing solutions. A parallel line of research introduced goal-directed
exploration processes, also called autotelic learning, where exploring agents learn to represent and
sample their own goal as a way to direct the diversity search (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Forestier
et al., 2022; Colas et al., 2022). Although autotelic methods were first developed to model the
open-ended development of children in skill learning robots Moulin-Frier et al. (2014); Oudeyer
& Smith (2016), they have also proved effective in the automatic exploration of complex systems,
either simulated (Reinke et al., 2019; Etcheverry et al., 2020) or physical (Grizou et al., 2020).
In all these methods, one must define a BC space to characterize novelty. The earliest works used
predefined low-dimensional descriptors to represent generated artefacts (Lehman & Stanley, 2011b;
Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Mouret & Clune, 2015b), which constrains the search along a handful of
features one can code a descriptor for. More recent works have relied on higher-dimensional learned
or pretrained embedding functions (Nair et al., 2018; Laversanne-Finot et al., 2018; Reinke et al.,
2020), and even hierarchies of such spaces, each representing different perceptual features of the
generated artefacts (Cully & Demiris, 2018b; Etcheverry et al., 2020). Diversity-search algorithms
sometimes need to be adapted to work with such high-dimensional spaces whose discretization leads
to an exponential number of cells (Vassiliades et al., 2017). But the main issue is that they are hardly
interpretable and might not always align with the dimensions of variation humans find meaningful.
With ACES, we propose an autotelic diversity-producing algorithm that constrains the search along
a set of abstract, interpretable and hard-to-compute features of interest evaluated by LLMs.
This work follows of a recent trend on leveraging feedback or generations from LLMs to improve
older learning architectures. The original inspirations for this paper come from the QD literature,
where LLMs are now used to suggest mutations and crossover in diversity-producing evolutionary
algorithms (Lehman et al., 2022; Bradley et al., 2023b; Meyerson et al., 2023). Several approaches
also rely on LLMs to replace human feedback (AI feedback): e.g. to finetune other LLM models
(Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023), to characterize generated poems (Bradley et al., 2023a), to
revise the policy of autotelic agents (Wang et al., 2023a), to suggest goals for them (Colas et al.,
2023; Du et al., 2023) or measure their interestingness (Zhang et al., 2023). With ACES, we use
AI feedback to compute abstract and intepretable representations of programming puzzles so as
to optimize for diversity in that space. In a similar way. QDAIF (parallel work) uses 2D LLM-
generated characterisations in the context of poem generation, a space where there is not such a
clear notion of feasibility and solvability (Bradley et al., 2023a).

3     M ETHODS
We first present the programming puzzles (Section 3.1) and discuss measures of interesting diversity
(Section 3.2). Then, we introduce ACES, our new method for diversity generation (Section 3.3) and
define relevant baselines (Section 3.4). We will open-source the implementation of the algorithms
and the datasets of generated puzzles and solutions with the camera-ready version.

3.1   P ROGRAMMING PUZZLES AND THE P3 DATASET.

The Python Programming Puzzles dataset (P3) contains 1715 puzartefactszle-solution pairs where
each puzzle is defined by a short test program f designed to verify the validity of solution programs
g such that valid solutions satisfy f(g()) == True when run in an interpreter, see example
in Figure 2 (Schuster et al., 2021). P3 puzzles span problems of various difficulties that involve
different programming skills: e.g. string manipulation, classic (e.g. Tower of Hanoi) and more com-
plex programming problems (e.g. involving dynamic programming or factoring), or even open prob-
lems in computer science or mathematics. The P3 dataset is split into training and testing datasets
(N = 636 and 1079 respectively). Traditionally, a solver model is trained on puzzle-solution pairs
from the train set and evaluated on the test set. Both datasets are pre-filtered to examples shorter
than 1024 tokens to accommodate for restricted context windows.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      def f(ls: List[str]):
          """Divide the decimal representation of 8ˆ88 up into strings of
               length eight."""
          return "".join(ls)==str(8**88) and all(len(s)==8 for s in ls)
      def g():
          return [str(8**88)[i:i+8] for i in range(0,80,8)]
      assert f(g()) == True


Figure 2: Example of a simple programming puzzle and its solution from the P3 dataset (Schuster
et al., 2021). A solution function g must return a valid solution such that f(g()) == True.

3.2    M EASURING INTERESTINGNESS AND DIVERSITY

Diversity search aims to generate collections of artefacts that are both diverse and interesting, two
subjective measures that strongly depend on the observer’s point of view. Let’s define them.


Defining interesting representation spaces. One can generate interesting diversity by generating
it in a representation space where everything is interesting, meaning that all uninteresting samples
collapse to small regions. This requires the careful definition of a representation function R mapping
each artefact p (here puzzle) to a numerical representation zp = R(p) and a metric m to compute
distances between them. What should these functions be in the context of our programming puzzles?
First, we use cosine distance computed in three different continuous embedding spaces — a standard
approach for representing programs and text in general (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). Here, we
use salesforce/codet5p-110m-embedding (Wang et al., 2023c), wizardlm/wizardcoder-1b-v1.0 and
wizardlm/wizardcoder-3b-v1.0 (Luo et al., 2023) embedding models from the HuggingFace’s Hub
(Wolf et al., 2020) to obtain 256D, 2048D, and 2816D continuous embedding representation vectors.
Second, we propose to represent programming puzzles using semantic descriptors — a set of hand-
defined features selected from a standard computer science textbook to capture interesting differ-
ences in the programming puzzles (Cormen, 2009). We define 10 of these: Sorting and Searching,
Counting and Combinatorics, Tree and Graph problems, Mathematical Foundations, Bit Manipu-
lation, String Manipulation, Geometry and Grid Problems, Recursion and Dynamic Programming,
Stacks and Queues, Optimization Algorithms, see definitions in Appendix Section A.2. A puzzle
is then represented as a 10D binary semantic vector zp , where each value zpi evaluates whether the
puzzle requires skill si (1) or not (0) to be solved. It is unclear how we could write a piece of code
to label puzzles along these dimensions. Instead, we ask ChatGPT to assign these labels (version
gpt-3.5-turbo-0613). In the example of Figure 2, ChatGPT assigns labels for Sorting and Search-
ing, Counting and Combinatorics as well as String Manipulation (encoding 1100010000, see other
examples in Appendix Section A.2). We use Hamming distance in that semantic space.
The produced diversity will necessarily be shaped and constrained by the subjective choice of the
representation function R. A good representation function conflates uninteresting objects in small
areas of the representation space (e.g. all puzzles that require no skills are mapped to the 0000000000
cell of our semantic space) and “spreads out” interesting objects. In such a space, most uninteresting
puzzles look the same (low inter-puzzle distance) while interesting puzzles look different (high
inter-puzzle distance) and optimizing for diversity leads to the generation of diverse interesting
puzzles. The experimenter controls specifies semantic descriptors of interests and thus controls
the resulting diversity produced. Optimizing for diversity in pretrained embedding spaces is also
a subjective choice (different embedding representation will lead to different diversities), but it is
made implicitly: the experimenter does not really know what they are signing for.
This semantic representation function is a contribution of this paper. We hypothesize that it is
more aligned with human perception of programming puzzles than continuous embedding functions.
Our proposed algorithms are designed to maximize this form of diversity (see Section 3.3). We
hypothesize that this will achieve not only higher diversity scores in this semantic representation
space, but also higher scores in the continuous embedding representation spaces.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Measuring diversity. We measure the diversity of sets of generated puzzles in different ways. We
use counts of discovered puzzles and cells: 1) the number of discovered cells (filled with at least 1
puzzle), 2) the number of cells discovered beyond the ones covered by the train set, 3) the number of
valid puzzles that were generated, 4) the number of valid puzzles generated beyond the cells covered
by the train set. We also track measures of density or entropy: 5) the average pairwise distance
between embedding representations, 6) the entropy of the distribution of semantic representations.

An utilitarian take on measuring interesting diversity. Interesting puzzles must be solvable,
which is why we filter out invalid puzzle-solution pairs. One could also be interested in training a
puzzle solver to achieve high-performance on a specific problem distribution. In this case, we would
perceive a collection of generated puzzle-solution pairs as more interesting than others if the solver
finetuned on this set outperforms the same solver finetuned on the other sets when tested on the
target distribution (e.g. P3’s test set). Section 4.4 will look at correlations between various metrics
and the final performance of a LLaMA model (openlm-research/open llama 3b v2 on HF’s hub,
Geng & Liu, 2023) after finetuning for two epochs on the generated set of puzzle-solutions. In line
with previous research (Chen et al., 2021), we will report the Pass@k performance metric on the
testing set of P3 for k ∈ [1..10]: the percentages of puzzles for which at least one valid solution is
generated within k attempts. In addition to the diversity metrics listed above, we will look at various
metrics measuring how well the generated set of puzzle-solution pairs covers the testing distribution.

3.3   AUTOTELIC GENERATION OF INTERESTING DIVERSE PUZZLES

This section introduces ACES, a new diversity-producing algorithm that generates an interesting
diversity of programming puzzles by optimizing for the novelty of each new generation in the se-
mantic space described above, see Figure 1. ACES grows an archive of diverse puzzle-solution
pairs. It repeatedly: samples a semantic goal from the archive, generates a new puzzle-solution pair
conditioned on that goal and, if the pair is valid, labels and adds it to the archive. We use the Chat-
GPT LLM (gpt-3.5-turbo-0613, Schulman et al.). Algorithm 1, Figure 1 and Appendix Section A.2
respectively present the pseudo-code, illustration and prompts of ACES.
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of ACES
Initialize an archive A (with labeled puzzle-solution pairs from the P3 train set)
for i = 1 to N do
     Sample a goal: zg ∼ Uniform(A) (uniform sample of a semantic goal)
     Sample examples: e ∼ E(A, zg ) (nearest neighbor sampling with Hamming distance)
     Generate puzzle and solution: (p, s) ∼ LLM(promptgen (g, e)) (see Appendix A.2)
     Test puzzle-solution pair: pass = p(s())==True (using the interpreter)
     if pass then
          Label the puzzle zp ∼ LLM(promptlab , p) (see Appendix A.2)
          Add (p, s, zp ) to the archive A in cell czp


Sampling a goal and relevant examples. ACES selects a semantic goal by sampling uniformly
among the set of 210 possible semantic representations. We then greedily select three closest exam-
ples from the archive using the Hamming distance in the semantic space: two from the generated
puzzle-solution pairs and one from P3’s train set to always keep a well-formatted puzzle example.

Puzzle generator. The puzzle generator is implemented by an LLM. Conditioned on the semantic
goal and the three examples, we ask the LLM to generate a puzzle-solution pair that would be labeled
with the target semantic vector. For each cycle of the algorithm and to leverage the parallelization
of LLM calls, we repeat the process of sampling a goal, examples, puzzles and solutions 10 times
before considering the addition of these candidates to the archive. Using a Python interpreter, we
filter the set of valid puzzle-solution pairs and send them to the puzzle labeler.

Puzzle labeler. The puzzle labeler computes the semantic representation vector of each valid
puzzle-solution pair. The prompt details the task to the LLM and presents the complete list of
skills, then asks it to compute its semantic representation (see Section 3.2). The puzzle-solution pair
is finally added to its corresponding cell in the archive. Note that, although we aim for a particular
target semantic representation, whether we achieve the goal or not is not that important. What is


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


important is that the generated puzzle is valid and falls into a new cell. This is the driving principle
behind the hindsight learning (Andrychowicz et al., 2017).

What’s new? In addition of the semantic descriptors (whose novelty is discussed in Section 3.2),
ACES is the first algorithm to leverage a goal-directed LLM for the generation of diverse artefacts
via in-context learning. The LLM is here used as the generation engine and is steered towards
generating novel and interesting puzzles via its goal-directedness and example selection (in-context
learning). The algorithm ELM already used an LLM to suggest mutations of existing artefacts
(Lehman et al., 2022). But like other quality-diversity algorithms, it is not goal-directed: it samples
a previously-generated artefact from its archive, mutates it with the LLM in the hope of generating
a new artefact that would fill a new cell.

3.4   BASELINES

Static generative model (Static Gen). This baseline was proposed in Haluptzok et al. (2023): it
repeatedly prompts the LLM to generate a new puzzle-solution pair given three examples uniformly
sampled from P3’s train set.

Ablation of goal-directedness (ELM semantic). Instead of sampling a goal and asking the puz-
zle generator to reach it, we uniformly sample two puzzle-solution pairs from the archive that serve
as examples. We then sample a cell in the archive and a puzzle from that cell, and ask the language
model to output a mutation of this puzzle. The resulting algorithm is not autotelic anymore but
becomes a variant of the QD algorithm Map-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015b). In fact, this imple-
mentation is a variant of the ELM algorithm (Lehman et al., 2022) where the explored representation
space is our proposed semantic space.

Ablation of goal-directedness and semantic representations (ELM). We can further ablate
ACES by removing the use of the semantic representation space. Instead, this baseline uses the
continuous embedding space described in Section 3.2 (Salesforce/codet5p-110m-embedding, Wang
et al., 2023c). This ablation is a variant of ELM (Lehman et al., 2022) where the explored repre-
sentation space is a pretrained embedding space. To define a limited number of cells in this high-
dimensional space, we use the method proposed in CVT-Map-Elites, a variant of MapElites that
uses centroidal Voronoi tessallations (CVTs) to partition the space into a tractable number of well-
distributed cells (Vassiliades et al., 2017). The partition is conducted in two steps. We first sample
with replacement 40k puzzles from P3’s train set and perturb their embeddings with a Gaussian noise
(N (µ = 0, σ 2 = 1.2)) before normalizing them to unit-length. Then, we use the K-means algorithm
(Steinhaus, 1957; MacQueen, 1967) to identify 1024 centroids and obtain the same number of cells
as ACES in the archive. Once this archive is created, we simply run the ELM algorithm. ELM and
ELM-semantic share their mutation operator but differ in the way the archive is maintained (CVT
archive on continuous embedding features for ELM, archive of semantic cells for ELM-semantic).

Generating an interesting diversity of textual artefacts. Although the current paper focuses
puzzle generation, ACES can in principle be used to generate an interesting diversity of any type of
textual artefacts. For each new type of textual artefacts we want to generate a diversity of, we need to
provide a set of features of interest the LLM will be able to evaluate on each new generation. Natural
language provides a rich and flexible descriptive space. Compared to traditional representation
functions that rely on hand-engineered features, the abstract nature of language allows us to describe
the semantic qualities of textual artefacts in an open-ended way.


4     R ESULTS

4.1   I S LLM LABELING FAITHFUL ?

Our proposition of leveraging LLMs to semantically characterize generated programming puzzles
is only meaningful to the extent that the LLM faithfully labels the puzzles. To make sure this is
the case on the distribution of puzzles we end up generating, we compare the LLM-generated labels
to hand-defined labels on a set of 80 puzzles sampled from the generated set of the seed of ACES


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which has the highest label diversity. Details of how the puzzles were sampled for the computation
of the confusion matrix can be found in Appendix Section A.3.
Figure 3 reports the confusion matrix and the number of puzzles containing the ground truth label
for each row. The puzzle labeler demonstrates high true negative rates on most dimensions but
sometimes struggles to detect present skills (low true positive rate), e.g. for the Stacks and Queues
and the Geometry and Grid dimensions. Note that annotating puzzle with semantic labels is also hard
for humans and that the classification does not need to be perfect to drive diversity (see Section 4.2).
However, this poses a challenge when using the same labeler for evaluation purposes. We thus
choose to report diversity metrics in three different embedding spaces that were not used for training.
                              Sorting and          Counting and            Tree and            Mathematical               Bit
                               Searching           combinatorics         Graph problem          Foundations           Manipulation
                                                                                                                                       1.0
                         0   0.74
                              (25)
                                       0.26
                                        (9)
                                               0   0.87
                                                    (52)
                                                             0.13
                                                              (8)
                                                                     0   0.9
                                                                         (57)
                                                                                  0.095
                                                                                    (6)
                                                                                           0   0.91
                                                                                                (53)
                                                                                                        0.086
                                                                                                          (5)
                                                                                                                 0   0.96
                                                                                                                      (67)
                                                                                                                              0.043
                                                                                                                                (3)
            True label


                                                                                                                                       0.8

                         1   0.43
                              (20)
                                       0.57
                                        (26)
                                               1   0.65
                                                    (13)
                                                             0.35
                                                              (7)
                                                                     1    0
                                                                          (0)
                                                                                     1
                                                                                    (17)
                                                                                           1   0.68
                                                                                                (15)
                                                                                                         0.32
                                                                                                          (7)
                                                                                                                 1   0.2
                                                                                                                      (2)
                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                (8)
                                                                                                                                       0.6
                              0          1          0          1          0           1         0          1          0          1
                                String             Geometry and         Recursion and           Stacks and           Optimization
                              Manipulation         Grid Problems     Dynamic Programming          Queues              Algorithms       0.4

                         0   0.91
                              (64)
                                      0.086
                                        (6)
                                               0   0.98
                                                    (62)
                                                            0.016
                                                              (1)
                                                                     0   0.58
                                                                          (28)
                                                                                   0.42
                                                                                    (20)
                                                                                           0   0.77
                                                                                                (50)
                                                                                                         0.23
                                                                                                          (15)
                                                                                                                 0   0.86
                                                                                                                      (37)
                                                                                                                               0.14
                                                                                                                                (6)
            True label


                                                                                                                                       0.2

                         1   0.3
                              (3)
                                       0.7
                                        (7)
                                               1   0.47
                                                    (8)
                                                             0.53
                                                              (9)
                                                                     1   0.19
                                                                          (6)
                                                                                   0.81
                                                                                    (26)
                                                                                           1   0.2
                                                                                                (3)
                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                         (12)
                                                                                                                 1   0.89
                                                                                                                      (33)
                                                                                                                               0.11
                                                                                                                                (4)
                                                                                                                                       0.0
                              0          1          0          1          0           1         0          1          0          1
                             Predicted label       Predicted label       Predicted label       Predicted label       Predicted label

Figure 3: Faithfulness of semantic labeling. Confusion matrices for the multi-label classification
task performed by the puzzle labeler. For each semantic descriptor, we report the confusion matrix
where rows indicate the ground truth presence (1) or absence (0) of the skill while the column
indicates its detection (1) or non-detection (0). We thus read from top left to bottom right: true
negative, false positive, false negative, true positive rates (sample size in parenthesis).


4.2   M EASURING DIVERSITY

Diversity in semantic space. Figures 4a to 4e report the evolution of various diversity measures
as a function of the number of puzzle-solution pairs generated by the puzzle generator. Semantic al-
gorithms (ACES and ELM semantic) better explore the semantic representation space: they discover
more cells beyond the cells covered by P3’s train set (4b), more cells in general (4a) and generate
more puzzles beyond the cells covered by the train set (4d) and their cell distributions have higher
entropy (4e). ELM algorithms generate more valid puzzles in general, but the non-semantic ELM
mostly generates puzzles falling in cells covered by the train set (4c vs 4d). Our goal-directed ACES
generates puzzles whose cell distribution has higher entropy than other baselines (4e). Algorithms
that optimize for diversity in the semantic space were expected to achieve higher diversity in that
space, but does it translate to higher diversity in other representation spaces?

Diversity in embedding spaces. Figure 5a to 5c report a diversity metric (Friedman & Dieng,
2022) computed over three different embedding spaces (see Section 3.2). ELM demonstrates rela-
tively high diversity in the embedding space it uses for optimization (5a) but lower diversity on other
embedding spaces (5b, 5c). ACES achieves the highest diversity in the two WizardCoder embedding
spaces (5b, 5c) while ELM semantic reaches the highest diversity in the Code5P embedding space
(5a). These results demonstrate that optimizing for diversity in our custom semantic space also leads
to higher diversity in other representation spaces.

4.3   Q UALITATIVE INSPECTION OF SAMPLES

We here describe the most remarkable trends that we have observed by manually inspecting the
data (see Appendix A.4). One tendency of the generation process across all experiments is to shift
the definition of what a puzzle is. In the original formulation, the problem f implements a test that
verifies a certain number of conditions are met, and g implements an algorithm that produces a value
that satisfies the conditions. What the generation processes do in many cases is shift the algorithmic
load from g to f, in which case g only provides arguments for f. We hypothesise this originally


                                                                                  7
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                       200                                                                                                                                     10000
                                        ELM                                                                                                                                           ELM                                                                                                                                            ELM
                                        ELM semantic                                                                                                                                  ELM semantic                                                                                                                                   ELM semantic


                                                                                                                                  Number of cells beyond train cells
                             250        ACES                                                                                                                           175            ACES                                                                                                                                           ACES
Number of cells discovered              Static Gen                                                                                                                                    Static Gen                                                                                                               8000                  Static Gen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of valid puzzles
                                                                                                                                                                       150
                             200
                                                                                                                                                                       125                                                                                                                                     6000
                             150                                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                                       75                                                                                                                                      4000
                             100
                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000
                             50                                                                                                                                        25

                                0               15000              30000                                                 45000                                          00                    15000              30000                                                    45000                                              0              15000              30000          45000
                                               Number of puzzles generated                                                                                                                   Number of puzzles generated                                                                                                                   Number of puzzles generated

                                                                                              (a)                                                                                                      (b)                                                                                                                                           (c)
                                                                                              1750
                                                                                                         ELM
                                                       Number of puzzles beyond train cells


                                                                                              1500       ELM semantic                                                                                                                                     3.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Entropy of puzzles cell distribution
                                                                                                         ACES
                                                                                                         Static Gen                                                                                                                                       3.4
                                                                                              1250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.2
                                                                                              1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                              750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.8
                                                                                              500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.6                                               ELM
                                                                                              250                                                                                                                                                                                                           ELM semantic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.4                                               ACES
                                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                           Static Gen
                                                                                                     0            15000            30000                                                 45000                                                            2.20                   15000              30000              45000
                                                                                                                Number of puzzles generated                                                                                                                                     Number of puzzles generated

                                                                                                                        (d)                                                                                                                                                                                    (e)
   Figure 4: Diversity of generated puzzles in semantic space. We report the evolution of several
   diversity metrics computed in the semantic space as a function of the number of puzzle-solution
   pairs generated by the puzzle generator. Semantic algorithms (ACES and ELM semantic) achieve
   higher diversity in the semantic space.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ELM                                                        0.110
                                                                                                                                        puzzles (wizard-1b embedding space)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ELM semantic
(code5p-110m embedding space)


                                0.95                                                                                                                                          0.20                                                                               ACES


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (wizard-3b embedding space)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Static Gen                                                 0.105
                                                                                                                                                Avg pairwise distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Avg pairwise distance
     Avg pairwise distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in generated puzzles
      in generated puzzles


                                0.90                                                                                                                                          0.19                                                                                                                                          0.100
                                                                                                                                                     in generated


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.095
                                                                                                                                                                              0.18
                                0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.090
                                                                             ELM                                                                                              0.17                                                                                                                                                      ELM
                                0.80                                         ELM semantic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.085       ELM semantic
                                                                             ACES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ACES
                                                                             Static Gen                                                                                       0.16                                                                                                                                          0.080       Static Gen
                                    0              15000              30000             45000                                                                                     0               15000              30000                                                 45000                                                 0                15000             30000      45000
                                                  Number of puzzles generated                                                                                                                    Number of puzzles generated                                                                                                                    Number of puzzles generated

                                                                                              (a)                                                                                                       (b)                                                                                                                                          (c)
   Figure 5: Diversity of generated puzzles in embedding spaces. We report the evolution of the
   pairwise distance between puzzle-solution pair embeddings as a function of the number of generated
   puzzle-solution pairs, for three different embedding representation spaces (average across seeds).

   comes from the docstring description of puzzles in the seed examples, which are included in f
   but describe the behavior of g. Another important difference is what the puzzles look like: puzzles
   generated by the Static Gen baseline tend to be short and more math-heavy, while samples generated
   by ACES tend to be longer and more creative (see Appendix A.4 again for examples). Appendix
   Section A.5 provides additional visualizations: 2D projections of the generated puzzles embeddings
   using UMAP (Appendix Figures 11 to 14), depictions of the evolution of the archives as a function
   of time (Appendix Figure 10), as well as histograms for the distribution of skills and number of skills
   across generated puzzles for each of the algorithms (Appendix Figures 7). The UMAP projections,
   in particular, give a good sense of the difference in distribution between methods.

    4.4                                 L OOKING FOR PERFORMANCE PREDICTORS

   Our contributions lead to larger diversities of interesting programming puzzles. Could this translate
   into higher performance on an arbitrary target distribution we might be interested in? We consider
   P3’s testing set of puzzles to be our target distribution and measure the Pass@k performance of
   LLaMA 3B models finetuned on the generated sets of puzzle-solution pairs.
   Figure 6 shows Pass@k metrics for various values of k. Static Gen performs higher despite having
   the lowest diversity of all algorithms on all considered metrics. Other algorithms spend more time
   exploring the full-extent of the space of programming puzzles (see Figures 4 and 5) and thus less
   time focusing on generating puzzles close to the training distribution. Generating more puzzle-
   solution pairs and a higher diversity of them does not lead to higher performance in our setup. Note


                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that this can be perfectly fine. Our algorithms did not optimize for final performance on an arbitrary
target distribution (here P3’s test set) but optimize for pure diversity.
This said, we might be interested in figuring out             0.40
                                                                     ELM
                                                                     ELM semantic
how to constrain diversity-search to maximize perfor-         0.35   ACES random
mance on a target test distribution down the line. We                ACES
                                                              0.30   Random Gen
thus test for correlations between the Pass@10 per-


                                                           Pass@k
formance and both diversity metrics and metrics as-           0.25
sessing the distance between generated puzzle-solution
                                                              0.20
pairs from P3’s test set (target distribution coverage).
Over the test metrics we only found: an anti-correlation      0.15
with the number of valid puzzles generated, an anti-
                                                              0.10
correlation with the number of cells discovered and                1 2    3     4 5   6 7  8   9   10
                                                                                    k
an anti-correlation with the average pairwise distance Figure 6: Downstream performance on
between generated puzzles in the Code5P embedding P3’s test set. Pass@k is the fraction of
space, all mostly driven by Static Gen’s low numbers puzzles solved after k attempts (k ∈
and high performance. The FID score in embedding [1:10]). Green overlaps with yellow.
space (Heusel et al., 2017), number of puzzles in cells
covered by the test set, number of test cells discovered or the average distance between test puzzles
and their nearest neighbors in the generated sets computing in embedding space all measure how
much the generated puzzle-solution pairs cover the test distribution of puzzles but none of them
were found to be significantly correlated with the downstream performance metric.


5   D ISCUSSION

This paper introduced ACES, an autotelic generative algorithm that optimizes for diversity in a
custom semantic description space adapted for the generation of programming puzzles. ACES pro-
duces stronger diversity in semantic and several embedding spaces, which results in the generation
of interesting and creative puzzles as detected by manual inspection (Section 4.3).
Our last set of experiments uncovered a counter-intuitive result calling for more research: generat-
ing more puzzles of higher diversity does not translate into the higher downstream performance of
an LLM finetuned on the generated data as measured over a target distribution of problems (here
P3’s test set). Surprisingly, we could not find any significant correlation between downstream per-
formance and metrics measuring how much the generated set covers the target distribution. These
results might be explained by more superficial drifts between the generated data and the test data:
e.g. by the shift of the computational burden from the solution function to the problem function ex-
posed in Section 4.3. This raises questions for future research: what are causal predictors of final
downstream performance? Can we design the goal sampler of our autotelic diversity search to both
search for maximal diversity while exploring the space of puzzle that will lead to good downstream
performance? Can we characterize the trade-off between diversity and downstream performance?
Future work could also improve various aspects of ACES. One could replace the default uniform
goal sampling with more sophisticated autotelic sampling methods (e.g. using novelty or learning
progress intrinsic motivations, Colas et al., 2022) or improve on the selection of in-context examples
to help the puzzle generator. ACES currently explores a fixed set of semantic features and is thus
somewhat constrained to combinatorial forms of creativity (Boden, 1998). Moving forward, we
could give it the ability to come up with new semantic features or prune others as the exploratory
process unfolds, opening the door to more exploratory and transformational forms of creativity or
even historical creativity if this system were to interact with human cultural evolution processes, as
defined in Boden’s work on human and artificial creativity (Boden, 1996; 1998).
Pure diversity-search is useful beyond its data augmentation applications. On the first end, it could
be used to generate diverse and interesting problems to educate the new generations of programmers.
It could also be combined with autotelic solving systems where it would optimize for both interesting
diversity and quality. High-quality problems could for instance be the ones that are intermediately
difficult for the learner (Florensa et al., 2018), or those that maximize its learning progress (Oudeyer
& Kaplan, 2007). This paves the way for collaborative processes that endlessly co-evolve new
interesting problems and their solutions, open-ended discovery systems that could be helpful for
science (e.g. automatic theorem discovery and proving).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI Feedback, December 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
  08073. arXiv:2212.08073 [cs].
Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Active learning of inverse models with intrinsically moti-
  vated goal exploration in robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1):49–73, January 2013.
  ISSN 0921-8890. doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2012.05.008. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0921889012000644.
Margaret A. Boden. Chapter 9 - creativity. In Margaret A. Boden (ed.), Artificial Intelligence,
 Handbook of Perception and Cognition, pp. 267–291. Academic Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-12-
 161964-0. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012161964-0/50011-X. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012161964050011X.
Margaret A Boden. Creativity and artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence, 103(1-2):347–356,
 1998.
Herbie Bradley, Andrew Dai, Jenny Zhang, Jeff Clune, Kenneth Stanley, and Joel Lehman. Quality
  diversity through ai feedback. CarperAI Blog, May 2023a. URL https://carper.ai/
  quality-diversity-through-ai-feedback/.
Herbie Bradley, Honglu Fan, Francisco Carvalho, Matthew Fisher, Louis Castricato, reciprocated,
  dmayhem93, Shivanshu Purohit, and Joel Lehman. OpenELM, January 2023b. URL https:
  //github.com/CarperAI/OpenELM.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Angelica Chen, David M Dohan, and David R So. Evoprompting: Language models for code-level
  neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14838, 2023.
Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 1691–1703. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
 mlr.press/v119/chen20s.html.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavar-
 ian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plap-
 pert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol,
 Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William
 Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
 Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Pe-
 ter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Zaremba. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code, July 2021. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs].
Junyi Chu and Laura E. Schulz. Play, curiosity, and cognition. Annual Review of Developmen-
  tal Psychology, 2(1):317–343, 2020. doi: 10.1146/annurev-devpsych-070120-014806. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-devpsych-070120-014806.
Cédric Colas, Tristan Karch, Nicolas Lair, Jean-Michel Dussoux, Clément Moulin-Frier, Peter
   Dominey, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Language as a Cognitive Tool to Imagine Goals in Curios-
   ity Driven Exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
   3761–3774. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
   paper/2020/hash/274e6fcf4a583de4a81c6376f17673e7-Abstract.html.
Cédric Colas, Tristan Karch, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Autotelic Agents with Intrin-
   sically Motivated Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning: a Short Survey, July 2022. URL
   http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09830. arXiv:2012.09830 [cs].
Cédric Colas, Laetitia Teodorescu, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Xingdi Yuan, and Marc-Alexandre Côté.
   Augmenting Autotelic Agents with Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12487,
   2023.
Thomas H Cormen. Introduction to algorithms, by thomas h cormen, 2009.
Antoine Cully. Autonomous skill discovery with quality-diversity and unsupervised descriptors. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 81–89, 2019.
Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular
  framework. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(2):245–259, 2018a. doi:
  10.1109/TEVC.2017.2704781.
Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Hierarchical behavioral repertoires with unsupervised descrip-
  tors. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 69–76, 2018b.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06692, 2023.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak
  coherent english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Mayalen Etcheverry, Clément Moulin-Frier, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Hierarchically organized
 latent modules for exploratory search in morphogenetic systems. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 33:4846–4859, 2020.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1515–1528.
  PMLR, 2018.
Sébastien Forestier, Rémy Portelas, Yoan Mollard, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Intrinsically motivated
   goal exploration processes with automatic curriculum learning. The Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 23(1):6818–6858, 2022. Publisher: JMLRORG.
Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. The vendi score: A diversity evaluation metric for machine
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02410, 2022.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark, and Tushar Khot. Complexity-based prompting
  for multi-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00720, 2022.
Xinyang Geng and Hao Liu. Openllama: An open reproduction of llama, May 2023. URL https:
  //github.com/openlm-research/open_llama.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Grizou, Laurie J. Points, Abhishek Sharma, and Leroy Cronin. A curious formulation
  robot enables the discovery of a novel protocell behavior. Science Advances, 6(5):eaay4237,
  2020. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay4237. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.
  1126/sciadv.aay4237.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language Models Can Teach Them-
  selves to Program Better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language Models Can Teach
  Themselves to Program Better, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14502.
  arXiv:2207.14502 [cs].
Vincent Herrmann, Louis Kirsch, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning one abstract bit at a time
  through self-invented experiments encoded as neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14374,
  2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tun-
  ing language models with (almost) no human labor. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
  and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 14409–14428, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.806. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.806.
Adrien Laversanne-Finot, Alexandre Pere, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Curiosity driven exploration
  of learned disentangled goal spaces. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 487–504. PMLR,
  2018.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O. Stanley. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty
  search and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on Genetic and
  Evolutionary Computation, GECCO ’11, pp. 211–218, New York, NY, USA, 2011a. Associa-
  tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450305570. doi: 10.1145/2001576.2001606. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/2001576.2001606.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Abandoning objectives: evolution through the search for
  novelty alone. Evol. Comput., 19(2):189–223, February 2011b.
Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O. Stan-
  ley. Evolution through Large Models, June 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  08896. arXiv:2206.08896 [cs].
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu, Chongyang Tao, Jing
  Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. Wizardcoder: Empowering code large language models with
  evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08568, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J. MacQueen. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. 1967.
   Published: Proc. 5th Berkeley Symp. Math. Stat. Probab., Univ. Calif. 1965/66, 1, 281-297 (1967).
Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Yiming Yang, and Graham Neubig. Language models of
 code are few-shot commonsense learners. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1384–1403, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
 December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.
 90. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.90.
Elliot Meyerson, Mark J Nelson, Herbie Bradley, Arash Moradi, Amy K Hoover, and Joel
  Lehman. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12170, 2023.
Clément Moulin-Frier, Sao M Nguyen, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Self-organization of early vocal
  development in infants and machines: the role of intrinsic motivation. Frontiers in psychology, 4:
  1006, 2014.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015a.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015b.
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Muhammad U Nasir, Sam Earle, Julian Togelius, Steven James, and Christopher Cleghorn. Llmatic:
 Neural architecture search via large language models and quality-diversity optimization. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2306.01102, 2023.
OpenAI.       Openai api, 2023.         URL https://openai.com/blog/openai-api.
  https://openai.com/blog/openai-api.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and Frederic Kaplan. What is intrinsic motivation? a typology of computa-
  tional approaches. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 1:6, 2007.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and Linda B Smith. How evolution may work through curiosity-driven devel-
  opmental process. Topics in Cognitive Science, 8(2):492–502, 2016.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Chris Reinke, Mayalen Etcheverry, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Intrinsically motivated discovery of
  diverse patterns in self-organizing systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06663, 2019.
Chris Reinke, Mayalen Etcheverry, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Intrinsically Motivated Discovery of
  Diverse Patterns in Self-Organizing Systems. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2020.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Powerplay: Training an increasingly general problem solver by continually
   searching for the simplest still unsolvable problem. Frontiers in psychology, 4:313, 2013.
John Schulman, Barret Zoph, Christina Kim, Jacob Hilton, Jacob Menick, Jiayi Weng, Juan Fe-
  lipe Ceron Uribe, Liam Fedus, Luke Metz, Michael Pokorny, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Shengjia
  Zhao, Arun Vijayvergiya, Eric Sigler, Adam Perelman, Chelsea Voss, Mike Heaton, Joel Parish,
  Dave Cummings, Rajeev Nayak, Valerie Balcom, David Schnurr, Tomer Kaftan, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Nicholas Turley, Noah Deutsch, Vik Goel, Jonathan Ward, Aris Konstantinidis, Woj-
  ciech Zaremba, Long Ouyang, Leonard Bogdonoff, Joshua Gross, David Medina, Sarah Yoo,
  Teddy Lee, Ryan Lowe, Dan Mossing, Joost Huizinga, Roger Jiang, Carroll Wainwright, Diogo


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Almeida, Steph Lin, Marvin Zhang, Kai Xiao, Katarina Slama, Steven Bills, Alex Gray, Jan
  Leike, Jakub Pachocki, Phil Tillet, Shantanu Jain, Greg Brockman, Nick Ryder, Alex Paino,
  Qiming Yuan, Clemens Winter, Ben Wang, Mo Bavarian, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Ing-
  mar Kanitscheider, Mikhail Pavlov, Matthias Plappert, Nik Tezak, Heewoo Jun, William Zhuk,
  Vitchyr Pong, Lukasz Kaiser, Jerry Tworek, Andrew Carr, Lilian Weng, Sandhini Agarwal, Karl
  Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Alethea Power, Stanislas Polu, Jesse Han, Raul Puri, Shawn Jain, Ben-
  jamin Chess, Christian Gibson, Oleg Boiko, Emy Parparita, Amin Tootoonchian, Kyle Kosic,
  and Christopher Hesse. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt. Ac-
  cessed: 2023-09-25.

Tal Schuster, Ashwin Kalyan, Alex Polozov, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Programming Puzzles. June
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fe_hCc4RBrg.

Hugo Steinhaus. Sur la division des corps matériels en parties. Bulletin de l’Académie Polonaise
  des Sciences, Classe 3, 4:801–804, 1957. ISSN 0001-4095.

Vassilis Vassiliades, Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Using Centroidal
  Voronoi Tessellations to Scale Up the Multi-dimensional Archive of Phenotypic Elites Algorithm,
  July 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05729. arXiv:1610.05729 [cs].

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
  Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models,
  May 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291. arXiv:2305.16291 [cs].

Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–
  13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.754.

Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven C. H. Hoi.
  CodeT5+: Open Code Large Language Models for Code Understanding and Generation, May
  2023c. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07922. arXiv:2305.07922 [cs].

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, and Morgan Funtowicz. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in
  natural language processing: system demonstrations, pp. 38–45, 2020.

Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244, 2023.

Jenny Zhang, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. OMNI: Open-endedness via Models
  of human Notions of Interestingness, June 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  01711. arXiv:2306.01711 [cs].


R EPRODUCIBILITY

Our experiments rely on ChatGPT (version gpt-3.5-turbo-0613) and will therefore be reproducible
to the extent that this model stays available through the OpenAI API (OpenAI, 2023). This said, we
expect our results to gain in impact and significance as the base LLM performance improves, which
seems to be the current trend (e.g. GPT-4). Indeed, as the puzzle labeler improves, the labeling
will become more and more reliable and closer to human-generated labels. As the puzzle generator
improves, the semantic goals will be achieved more reliably, which will drive a better exploration.
The implementations of ACES and other baselines, as well as the script to generate figures will be
made available on github with the camera-ready version of this paper.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS
The experiments presented in this work did not involve any human participants and the authors
declare no conflicts of interest. Methods building on ours can be applied in educational settings, in
which case the generated samples need to be validated as being appropriate.
A more general comment on autotelic and open-ended methods is that they could lead to the creation
of potentially harmful artefacts through the open-ended exploration process. This can be mitigated
by methods to control the distribution of generated artefacts, but this increases the chance that ill-
intentioned actors could use the technology.

A     A PPENDIX
A.1   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

A recent line of work has begun using large models as evolution operators in Neural Architecture
Search (Chen et al., 2023; Nasir et al., 2023).
This work is also linked to prior approaches to generate synthetic data for models in language and
code modalities. The seminal work here is by Honovich et al. (2023), whose technique is not
autotelic and is stationary, not reusing prior generated data (related work in the code domain is
Haluptzok et al. (2022); Roziere et al. (2023)). A step in the direction of non-stationarity is Self-
Instruct (Wang et al., 2023b), which does not do any goal targeting. There are goal-conditioned
approaches to synthetic data generation (Eldan & Li, 2023) which do not involve any data evolution
and mainly build on concrete goals whereas we use abstract ones. The generation process for the
Phi-1 model (Gunasekar et al., 2023) seems related but few details are given in the paper. Finally,
Evol-Instruct Xu et al. (2023); Luo et al. (2023) is an evolutionary method that uses several prompts
(with more abstract instruction like increasing difficulty) to evolve a set of instructions. It does not
perform goal targeting in an abstract space, but its use of abstract instruction is related to targeting
goals in our semantic space. None of these approaches perform explicit diversity maximization,
instead, they rely on their inherent generation mechanisms; and many do not perform extensive
diversity evaluation.

A.2   P ROMPTS

Here are the various prompts we use for ACES and all baselines.

Skills description. Skills description used to label problem. see prompt A.2
    Skills description

    0 - Sorting and Searching: Sorting refers to arranging a collection of elements in a specific
    order, typically in ascending or descending order. Searching involves finding the location or
    presence of a particular element in a collection.
    1 - Counting and Combinatorics: Understanding principles of counting and combinatorial
    analysis, including permutations, combinations, and other counting techniques. These
    skills are essential for solving problems that involve counting the number of possibilities or
    arrangements.
    2 - Trees and Graphs: Analyzing and solving problems related to tree and graph structures
    involving nodes connected by edges. This includes tasks such as traversal, finding shortest
    paths, detecting cycles, and determining connectivity between nodes.
    3 - Mathematical Foundations: Strong understanding of mathematical concepts such as
    summations, probability, arithmetics, and matrices.
    4 - Bit Manipulation: Performing operations at the bit level to solve problems.
    5 - String Manipulation: Operations and algorithms specifically designed for working with
    strings. This includes tasks like concatenation, searching, replacing, and parsing strings.
    6 - Geometry and Grid Problems: Understanding geometric concepts and algorithms for
    problem-solving, including grid-related problems. This involves tasks such as grid traversal,
    finding distances, detecting patterns, and solving geometric problems on grids.
    mybox 7 - Recursion and Dynamic Programming: Utilizing recursive techniques and



                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   dynamic programming approaches to solve problems by breaking them down into smaller
   subproblems and building solutions incrementally.
   8 - Stacks and Queues: Data structures used to store and retrieve elements in a specific
   order. Stacks follow Last-In-First-Out, while queues follow First-In-First-Out. They are used
   for managing function calls, recursion, and implementing search algorithms.
   9 - Optimization Algorithms: These algorithms aim to find the best possible solution for a
   given problem by minimizing or maximizing an objective function. They involve searching for
   optimal values within a given solution space, considering various constraints and parameters.
   For example, brute-force search (checks all possible solutions to a problem without using
   heuristics) and greedy search (locally optimal choices at each step to find the best solution)
   are examples of optimization algorithms in this category.



Prompt for the puzzle labeler.     This prompt is used for ACES and all variants involving semantic
representations.
   Puzzle labelling

   User: I will give you a Python programming puzzle f (and its solution g) and a list of
   programming skills. Your role is to say which programming skills are required to understand
   and solve the problem.
   skills:

   [Skills description]

   The puzzle is:

   [Insert Puzzle to label here]

   After completing your reasoning (you can start by explaining the problem and the so-
   lution in a few sentences). Ensure you remove every listed skills that are unnecessary for
   understanding or solving the given problem. It is necessary to summarize your answer by
   writing every index of categories explicitly used in the problem or solution in a Python list,
   following the format provided below. Please ensure the correct usage of the following text
   where <Python list> is a list with numbers from 0 to 9: ”Therefore, the list of indices for the
   problem is: <Python list>”

   ChatGPT:



   Example of puzzle labelling

   Puzzle to label:



       def f(s: str) -> bool:\\
           """Find a string with 1000 'o's but no two adjacent 'o's.
               """\\
           return s.count('o') == 1000 and s.count('oo') == 0\\
       def g():\\
           return ('h' + 'o') * 1000\\
       assert f(g())\\


   ChatGPT: To solve the problem, we need to understand the logic of the ‘f‘ function and how
   it checks for the presence of 1000 ’o’s and no adjacent ’o’s. We also need to understand the
   implementation of the ‘g‘ function, which generates the string with 1000 ’o’s.

   Based on this understanding, the necessary programming skills are:
   - 1: Counting and combinatorics (to understand the counting of ’o’s and ’oo’s in the string)



                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   - 5: String Manipulation (to understand the string concatenation and searching)

   Therefore, the list of indices for the problem is: [1, 5]



Prompt for the puzzle generator of ACES. This prompt is used for ACES and all autotelic
variants.
   ACES

   User:
   I will give you 3 (Puzzle 0 to Puzzle 2) Python Programming Puzzle (P3). A P3 consists of a
   problem f and its corresponding solution g. The puzzle is solved if f(g()) == True. Your role is
   to generate new puzzles according to the instructions given.
   In addition each of those puzzles are associated with a list of skills. Here is a detailed
   description of those skills:

   [Skills description]


   Your role is to generate 3 new puzzles (Puzzle 3 to Puzzle 5) that require those skills: [Insert
   list skills to target].
   Note that the first argument of f is the output g(). Make sure to define and set values for all
   arguments of the function ’f’ (excluding the first argument, as it is the solution that needs to be
   found and given by g). Both functions, ’f’ and ’g’ should have matching argument signatures:
   def f(arg0, arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...) and def g(arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...). Please
   provide all values (value1, value2, ... ) for all arguments. For example f(solution,arg1=1,
   arg2=2, ...) and g(arg1=1, arg2=2, ...). And you should not use f inside g.
   Additionally, make sure to import any necessary libraries to ensure your code runs smoothly.
   Please ensure the mutated puzzles fall into all those skills: [Insert list skills to target].
   —-
   Puzzle 0, required skills [Insert list of skills associated with Puzzle 0]:
   [Insert Puzzle 0]
   —
   Puzzle 1, required skills [Insert list of skills associated with Puzzle 1] :
   [Insert Puzzle 1]
   —
   Puzzle 2, required skills [Insert list of skills associated with Puzzle 2]:
   [Insert Puzzle 2]
   —

   Could you please write 3 new interesting correct Python Programming Puzzles (from
   Puzzle 3 to Puzzle 5)? Please, ensure the new puzzles must necessitate the utilization of
   the following skills (required skills [Insert list skills to target]):
   [index skill 1 to target - Name of the skill 1 targeted
   [index skill 2 to target - Name of the skill 2 targeted]
   .
   .
   .

   ChatGPT:


Prompt for the puzzle generator of Static gen.
   Static gen

   User: I will give you 3 (Puzzle 0 to Puzzle 2) Python Programming Puzzle (P3). A P3
   consists of a problem f and its corresponding solution g. The puzzle is solved if f(g()) ==
   True. Your role is to write 3 new puzzles (Puzzle 3 to Puzzle 5). Note that the first argument
   of f is the output g(). Make sure to define and set values for all arguments of the function ’f’
   (excluding the first argument, as it is the solution that needs to be found and given by g).
   Both functions, ’f’ and ’g’ should have matching argument signatures: def f(arg0,



                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...) and def g(arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...). Please pro-
   vide all values (value1, value2, ... ) for all arguments. For example f(solution,arg1=1, arg2=2,
   ...) and g(arg1=1, arg2=2, ...). And you should not use f inside g.
   Additionally, make sure to import any necessary libraries to ensure your code runs smoothly.
   —-
   Puzzle 0:

   [Insert Puzzle]
   —
   Puzzle 1:

   [Insert Puzzle]
   —
   Puzzle 2:

   [Insert Puzzle]
   —
   ChatGPT:


Prompt for the puzzle generator of ELM and ELM semantic. This prompt is used for non-
autotelic baselines.


   ELM and ELM semantic

   User: I will give you 3 (Puzzle 0 to Puzzle 2) Python Programming Puzzle (P3). A P3
   consists of a problem f and its corresponding solution g. The puzzle is solved if f(g()) ==
   True. Your role is to write 3 new puzzles (Puzzle 3 to Puzzle 5). Note that the first argument
   of f is the output g(). Make sure to define and set values for all arguments of the function ’f’
   (excluding the first argument, as it is the solution that needs to be found and given by g).
   Both functions, ’f’ and ’g’ should have matching argument signatures: def f(arg0,
   arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...) and def g(arg1=value1, arg2=value2, ...). Please pro-
   vide all values (value1, value2, ... ) for all arguments. For example f(solution,arg1=1, arg2=2,
   ...) and g(arg1=1, arg2=2, ...). And you should not use f inside g.
   Additionally, make sure to import any necessary libraries to ensure your code runs smoothly.
   —-
   Puzzle 0:

   [Insert Puzzle]
   —
   Puzzle 1:

   [Insert Puzzle]
   —
   Here is the puzzle to mutate:
   Puzzle 2:

   [Insert Puzzle to mutate]
   —
   Could you please mutate the Puzzle 2 into 3 new correct Python Programming Puzzles (from
   Puzzle 3 to Puzzle 5)? Please, ensure the mutated puzzles are meaningfully different from
   the existing puzzles.

   ChatGPT:



   Example Generation

   Puzzle to mutate:



                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        from typing import*
        def f(n: int, lst=['apple', 'banana', 'orange', 'grape']) ->
            bool:
            """Check if the given element n is a prefix of any element
                  in the list lst"""
            for word in lst:
                if word.startswith(n):
                     return True
            return False

        def g(lst=['apple', 'banana', 'orange', 'grape']):
            return lst[1]

        assert f(g())


    ChatGPT:


        from typing import*
        import math
        def f(n: int, lst=[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) -> bool:
            """Check if the given list contains any perfect square
                number and if it is divisible by n."""
            for num in lst:
                if math.isqrt(num)**2 == num:
                    return n % num == 0
            return False
        def g(lst=[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]):
            for num in lst:
                if math.isqrt(num)**2 == num:
                    return num
            return None
        assert f(g())


A.3   S AMPLING EXAMPLES FOR CONFUSION MATRIX COMPUTATION

We sample 60 puzzles from one of our ACES experiments that we manually label with the sat of
skills. To make sure all skills are represented in the sampled puzzles while ensuring we stay close
enough to the distribution of puzzles encountered in training, we sample half 1 of these puzzles
uniformly over all generated puzzles in the seed, and we sample half 2 according to the following
principle: each time we sample a new puzzle we sample among the list of puzzles involving the
currently least represented skill. While examining the dataset (see Figure 7) we noticed a certain
number of outlier puzzles which had been labeled with all the skills, and which would be overrepre-
sented in the dataset because they contain all (and thus rare) skills. When inspecting these puzzles
we did not find them to be a true combination of all skills. Thus when sampling half 2 (but not half
1) of the manually labeled puzzles we have excluded the anomalous puzzles labeled with all labels.

A.4   E XAMPLES OF GENERATED PUZZLES

In this section we present a few puzzles and solution generated by our different methods and examine
them qualitatively. In example A.4, the generated puzzles combines a string manipulation problem,
a grid problem and a recursion problem, through the search for a path in a grid filled with characters
of a given input string. The example also illustrates the drift in task semantics mentioned in the main
text: in this example the function g only gives the argument of the puzzle, which is both defined
and solved in f. We additionally confirm our intuition of the drift in meaning of the puzzles through
histograms of the proportion between puzzle and solution complexity, in Figure 8. The intuition is


                                                  19
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Static gen                                                            ELM                                                ELM semantic
                    3500                                                         3500        3494                                              3500
                                3143                                                    3069
                    3000                                                         3000                                                          3000        2962
number of puzzles


                    2500                                                         2500                                                          2500   2445
                           2096
                    2000                                                         2000                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                              1651
                    1500                                                         1500                                                          1500
                                                                                                1191                                                             1265
                                   1125
                    1000                                                         1000                                                          1000
                                           653                                                          767
                                                                                                                                                                         540 456
                    500                          322 269                         500                          392 409                          500
                                                           143 49 31                                                    216              237                                       211 118           216
                      0                                                 10 136     0
                                                                                                                              78 45 24
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                             77 41
                            0          2          4         6       8      10            0          2          4         6       8       10            0          2       4         6        8       10
                                           number of labels                                             number of labels                                              number of labels
                                                  ACES                                                        Train Set                                                   Test Set
                                3685
                    3500                                                         3500                                                          3500

                    3000                                                         3000                                                          3000
number of puzzles


                    2500
                                   2540                                          2500                                                          2500

                    2000                                                         2000                                                          2000

                    1500                                                         1500                                                          1500
                                           1097
                    1000                                                         1000                                                          1000
                           763
                    500                          416                             500                                                           500
                                                       222 113
                                                                 54 28 22 128            70 183 138 82 34 10 9 4 2 1 3                                171 291 282 124 65
                      0                                                            0                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                              24 12 6 1               5
                            0          2          4         6       8      10            0          2          4         6       8       10            0          2       4         6        8       10
                                           number of labels                                             number of labels                                              number of labels
                                                                                               (a) random-gen

 Figure 7: Distributions of number of skills labeled by ChatGPT for (a) ACES, (b) ACES-random,
 (c) ELM-Semantic, (d) ELM, (e) static gen. A noteworthy effect of the goal-targeting in ACES
 and ACES-random is the low number of puzzle with no skill labels compared to the other methods.
 Goal-targetting seems to have an effect of how much generated puzzles fit to the predefined ontology.


                                                                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 ELM                           ELM_Semantic                             ACES                        Static-Gen                        P3 train
                                                                    600                                 350
500                               1000                                                                                                    20
                                                                    500                                 300
400                               800                                                                   250
                                                                    400                                                                   15
300                               600                                                                   200
                                                                    300
                                                                                                        150                               10
200                               400                               200                                 100
100                               200                                                                                                     5
                                                                    100                                  50
  0                                 0                                 0                                   0                               0
   0.0    0.2     0.4     0.6            0.0   0.2   0.4      0.6      0.00      0.25      0.50     0.75 0.0      0.2    0.4     0.6            0.2      0.4         0.6
                 ELM                           ELM_Semantic                             ACES                        Static-Gen                        P3 train
                                  1000                              500                                                                   25
                                                                                                         400
400                               800                               400                                                                   20
                                                                                                         300
300                               600                               300                                                                   15
200                                                                                                      200
                                  400                               200                                                                   10
100                               200                               100                                  100                              5
  0                                 0                                 0                                   0                               0
   0.00   0.25     0.50    0.75          0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6            0.00   0.25    0.50     0.75     0.00   0.25    0.50     0.75        0.2     0.4     0.6         0.8


Figure 8: Relative complexity of the generated solutions. We report the number of characters (top)
and the size of nodes in the parsed abstract syntax tree (bottom) for the four algorithms and P3’s
train set (rightmost column). We can see a loss of relative complexity in all methods, less severe in
Static-Gen.


that methods that generate puzzles with very short (and thus very simple) solutions have shifted from
implementing algorithms in puzzles rather than in solutions. There is a clear difference between the
train set from the P3 dataset and the data generation methods, with Static-Gen suffering less. This
might have an influence on downstream performance.


                                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Combination of String and Grid (ACES)


       from typing import*
       from typing import List

       def f(grid: List[List[int]], s: str) -> bool:
           """
           Given a 2D grid of characters and a string, check if the
               string can be formed by traversing adjacent cells in
               the grid.
           The goal is to find a path in the grid that forms the
               given string.
           """

            def dfs(i: int, j: int, k: int) -> bool:
                # Base case: If we have reached the end of the string,
                     return True
                if k == len(s):
                    return True

                 # Check if the current cell matches the next character
                      in the string
                 if grid[i][j] == s[k]:
                     # Mark the current cell as visited
                     visited[i][j] = True

                      # Check each neighbor of the current cell
                      for di, dj in [(1, 0), (-1, 0), (0, 1), (0, -1)]:
                          ni, nj = i + di, j + dj
                          # If the neighbor is within the grid
                              boundaries and has not been visited
                          if 0 <= ni < len(grid) and 0 <= nj < len(grid
                              [0]) and not visited[ni][nj]:
                              # Recursively search for the remaining
                                  characters in the string
                              if dfs(ni, nj, k + 1):
                                  return True

                      # Mark the current cell as unvisited
                      visited[i][j] = False

                 return False

            # Start the search from each cell in the grid
            for i in range(len(grid)):
                for j in range(len(grid[0])):
                    visited = [[False] * len(grid[0]) for _ in range(
                        len(grid))]
                    if dfs(i, j, 0):
                        return True

            return False

       def g():
           grid = [
                ['a', 'b', 'c', 'e'],
                ['s', 'f', 'c', 's'],
                ['a', 'd', 'e', 'e']
           ]
           return (grid, "abcced")


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Example generation for ACES

   Label: [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*
       from typing import List

       def f(nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
           """Given a list of integers, sort the list in non-
               decreasing order using the bubble sort algorithm.
           Return the sorted list.
           """
           def bubble_sort(nums):
               n = len(nums)
               for i in range(n):
                   for j in range(0, n - i - 1):
                       if nums[j] > nums[j + 1]:
                           nums[j], nums[j + 1] = nums[j + 1], nums[j
                               ]
               return nums

             return bubble_sort(nums)

       def g():
           nums = [9, 5, 2, 8, 1]
           return nums


   Labels: [1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*

       def f(s: str, n: int) -> bool:
           """Check if the given string is a palindrome and if the
               given number is divisible by 3 and 5."""
           is_palindrome = s == s[::-1]

             is_divisible_by_three_and_five = n % 3 == 0 and n % 5 == 0

             return is_palindrome and is_divisible_by_three_and_five

       def g():
           s = "deed"
           n = 30
           return s, n


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Example generation for ELM-Semantic

   Label: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*

       def f(numbers: List[int], target_sum=100) -> bool:
           """Check if there are three numbers in the list that add
               up to the target sum."""
           for i in range(len(numbers)):
               for j in range(i+1, len(numbers)):
                   for k in range(j+1, len(numbers)):
                       if numbers[i] + numbers[j] + numbers[k] ==
                           target_sum:
                           return True
           return False

       def g(target_sum=100):
           return [10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90]


   Labels: [0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*

       def f(words: List[str], prefix='in') -> bool:
           """Check if any word from the list starts with the given
               prefix"""
           return any((w.startswith(prefix)) for w in words)

       def g(prefix='in'):
           return ['input', 'information', 'innovation', 'great']


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Example generations for ELM

   Labels: [1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0]


       from typing import*
       from typing import List

       def f(names: List[str], name_length: int) -> bool:
           """Check if there exists a name in the given list that has
                the specified length"""
           for name in names:
               if len(name) == name_length:
                   return True
           return False

       def g(names=['John', 'Alice', 'Bob', 'Eve'], name_length=5):
           return names, name_length


   Labels: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*

       def f(arr: List[int], k=10) -> bool:
           """Find if there exists a pair of integers in the array
               whose sum is equal to k"""
           for i in range(len(arr)):
               for j in range(i+1, len(arr)):
                   if arr[i] + arr[j] == k:
                       return True
           return False

       def g(k=10):
           return [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Example generations for Static-Gen

   Labels: [1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]



       from typing import*

       def f(n: int, m=5) -> bool:
           """Check if n is divisible by any prime number less than m
               """
           primes = [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41,
               43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83, 89, 97]
           return any(n % prime == 0 for prime in primes if prime < m
               )

       def g(m=5):
           return 100


   Label: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]


       from typing import*

       def f(x: int, lst1=[7, 5, 3, 1], lst2=[1, 3, 5, 7]) -> bool:
           """Check if two lists are equal when reversed"""
           return lst1[::-1] == lst2

       def g(lst1=[7, 5, 3, 1], lst2=[1, 3, 5, 7]):
           return lst1[::-1]


A.5   A DDITIONAL RESULTS

Additionally, we can visualize language diversity by projecting the semantic embeddings into 2D
space via dimensionality reduction techniques like UMAP. We expect to measure diversity in a set
of puzzles by looking at the coverage of the map. As the diversity increases, they should achieve
both a wider spread of embeddings and potentially clearer cluster separation compared to baselines,
showcasing greater linguistic diversity. of puzzles’ embedding projected in 2d plane with UMAP.


                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Skill 10
                                                                                                Skill 9


                                                                    Skill 8
                                                                              Skill 7
 Skill 2


                                  Skill 6
           Skill 4


                                            Skill 5



                       Skill 3

                                            Skill 1
                     Figure 9: Explanation of the representation used in the Figure 10


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            ELM                              ELM semantic
                                                                                                 45000



                                                                                                 40000



                                                                                                 35000


                           ACES                                 Static Gen                       30000


                                                                                                          Discovery Generation
                                                                                                 25000



                                                                                                 20000



                                                                                                 15000

                        P3 train                                   P3 test
                                                                                                 10000



                                                                                                 5000



                                                                                                 0



Figure 10: Niche discovered over time 2d representation of cells filled in the skill space. More detail
on the representation is given in the Figure 9


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: UMAP projection of the Code5P-110M embeddings of discovered puzzles for one seed
of each algorithm.


                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: UMAP projection of the WizardCoder-1B embeddings of discovered puzzles for one
seed of each algorithm.


                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: UMAP projection of the WizardCoder-3B embeddings of discovered puzzles for one
seed of each algorithm.


                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: UMAP projection of the WizardCoder-3B embeddings of discovered puzzles for one
seed of each algorithm.


                                             32
