Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VARIATIONAL L ANGUAGE C ONCEPTS FOR
I NTERPRETING P RETRAINED L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) such as BERT and its variants have achieved
         remarkable success in natural language processing. To date, the interpretability
         of PLMs has primarily relied on the attention weights in their self-attention lay-
         ers. However, these attention weights only provide word-level interpretations,
         failing to capture higher-level structures, and are therefore lacking in readability
         and intuitiveness. To address this challenge, we first provide a formal definition
         of conceptual interpretation and then propose a variational Bayesian framework,
         dubbed VAriational LANguage ConcEpt (VALANCE), to go beyond word-level
         interpretations and provide concept-level interpretations. Our theoretical analysis
         shows that our VALANCE finds the optimal language concepts to interpret PLM
         predictions. Empirical results on several real-world datasets show that our method
         can successfully provide conceptual interpretation for PLMs.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Pretrained language models (PLMs) such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and its variants (Lan et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; He et al., 2021; Portes et al., 2023) have achieved remarkable success in
natural language processing. These PLMs are usually large attention-based neural networks that
follow a pretrain-finetune paradigm, where models are first pretrained on large datasets and then
finetuned for a specific task. As with any machine learning models, interpretability in PLMs has
always been a desideratum, especially in decision-critical applications (e.g., healthcare).
To date, PLMs’ interpretability has primarily relied on the attention weights in self-attention layers.
However, these attention weights only provide raw word-level importance scores as interpretations.
Such low-level interpretations fail to capture higher-level semantic structures, and are therefore lack-
ing in readability, intuitiveness and stability. For example, low-level interpretations often fail to cap-
ture influence of similar words to predictions, leading to unstable or even unreasonable explanations
(see Sec. 5.4 for details). In this paper, we make an attempt to go beyond word-level attention and
interpret PLM predictions at the concept (topic) level. Such higher-level semantic interpretations
are complementary to word-level importance scores and often more readable and intuitive.
We start by developing a comprehensive and formal definition of conceptual interpretation with
four desirable properties: (1) multi-level structure, (2) normalization, (3) additivity, and (4) mutual
information maximization. With this definition, we then propose a variational Bayesian framework,
dubbed VAriational LANguage ConcEpt (VALANCE), to provide dataset-level, document-level,
and word-level (the first property) conceptual interpretation for PLM predictions. Our theoretical
analysis shows that maximizing our VALANCE’s evidence lower bound is equivalent to inferring the
optimal conceptual interpretation with Properties (1-3) while maximizing the mutual information
between the inferred concepts and the observed embeddings from PLMs, i.e., Property (4).
The core of our idea is to treat a PLM’s contextual word embeddings (and their corresponding atten-
tion weights) as observed variables and build a probabilistic generative model to automatically infer
the higher-level semantic structures (e.g., concepts or topics) from these embeddings and attention
weights, thereby interpreting the PLM’s predictions at the concept level. Our VALANCE is compat-
ible with any attention-based PLMs and can work as an conceptual interpreter, which explains the
PLM predictions at multi-levels with theoretical guarantees. Our contributions are as follows:


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    • We identify the problem of multi-level interpretations for PLM predictions, develop a formal
      definition of conceptual interpretation, and propose VALANCE as the first general method to
      infer such conceptual interpretation.
    • Our theoretical analysis shows that learning our VALANCE is equivalent to inferring the opti-
      mal conceptual interpretation according to our definition.
    • Quantitative and qualitative analysis on three real-world datasets show that VALANCE can infer
      meaningful language concepts to effectively and intuitively interpret PLM predictions.



2     R ELATED W ORK

Pretrained Language Models. Pretrained language models are large attention-based neural net-
works that follow a pretrain-finetune paradigm. Usually they are first pretrained on large datasets in
a self-supervised manner and then finetuned for a specific downstream task. BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018) is a pioneering PLM that has shown impressive performance across multifple downstream
tasks. Following BERT, there have been variants, such as ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019), Distil-
BERT (Sanh et al., 2019), and Tinybert (Jiao et al., 2019), that achieve performance comparable to
BERT with fewer parameters. Other variants such as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and BART (Lewis
et al., 2019) improve the performance using more sophisticated training schemes for the masked
language modeling learning objective. More recently, there have also been BERT variants that de-
sign different self-supervised learning objectives to achieve better performance; examples include
DeBERTa (He et al., 2021), ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019). While
these PLMs naturally provide attention weights for each word to intepret model predictions, such
low-level interpretations fail to capture higher-level semantic structures, and are therefore lacking
in readability and intuitiveness. In contrast, our VALANCE goes beyond word-level attention and
interpret PLM predictions at the concept (topic) level. These higher-level semantic interpretations
are complementary to word-level importance scores and tend to more readable and intuitive.
Topic Models. Our work is also related to topic models Blei (2012); Blei et al. (2003), which
typically build upon latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). Topic models takes the
(discrete) bag-of-words representations of the documents (i.e., vocabulary-length vectors that count
word occurrences) as input, discover hidden topics from them during training, and infer the topic
proportion vector for each document during inference (Blei et al., 2003; Blei & Lafferty, 2006; Wang
et al., 2012; Chang & Blei, 2009). Besides these ‘shallow’ topic models, there has been recent work
that employs ‘deep’ neural networks to learn topic models more efficiently (Card et al., 2017; Xing
et al., 2017; Peinelt et al., 2020), using techniques such as amortized variational inference. There
is also work that improves upon traditional topic models by either leveraging word similarity as a
regularizer for topic-word distributions (Das et al., 2015; Batmanghelich et al., 2016) or including
word embeddings into the generative process (Hu et al., 2012; Dieng et al., 2020; Bunk & Krestel,
2018; Duan et al., 2021).
There are also works that build topic models upon embeddings from PLMs (Grootendorst, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022). However, they typically
use a pipeline consisting of dimensionality reduction followed by a simple clustering algorithm; they
are not end-to-end and therefore often suffer from information loss between the PLMs’ embeddings
and the clustering results, leading to interpretations that are not faithful to the target PLM. Moreover,
they can only generate single-level concepts, e.g., document-level concepts, and fail to provide the
multi-level structure of conceptual interpretations (the first property of our definition). In contrast,
our method is inherently multi-level and end-to-end, models concepts across dataset, document and
word levels, and produces faithful post-hoc interpretations for any prediction models based on PLM
embeddings with theoretical guarantees.



3     M ETHODS

In this section, we formalize the definition of conceptual interpretation, and describe our proposed
VALANCE for conceptual interpretation of PLMs.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1    P ROBLEM S ETTING AND N OTATION

We consider a corpus of M documents, where the m’th document contains Jm words, and a
PLM f (Dm ), which takes as input the document m (denoted as Dm ) with Jm words and out-
puts (1) a CLS embedding cm ∈ Rd , (2) Jm contextual word embeddings em ≜ [emj ]Jj=1 m
                                                                                       ,
                                      (h)        (h)
and (3) the attention weights am ≜ [amj ]Jj=1  m
                                                  between each word and the last-layer CLS token,
where h denotes the h’th attention head. We denote the average attention weight over H heads as
            PH     (h)
amj = H1 h=1 amj and correspondingly am ≜ [amj ]Jj=1            m
                                                                        (see the PLM at the bottom of Fig. 1).
In PLMs, these last-layer CLS embeddings
are used as document-level representations for                                            attentions
                                                                                                           VALANCE
downstream tasks (e.g., document classifica-          𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏
tion). Furthermore, our VALANCE assumes
K concepts (topics) for the corpus. For doc-
ument m, our VALANCE interpreter tries to
infer a concept distribution vector θ m ∈ RK                 𝑪𝑪𝒎𝒎         𝒆𝒆𝐦𝐦𝐦𝐦 … 𝒆𝒆mn           𝒆𝒆mn    … … 𝒆𝒆m(L-1)
                                                                                                       𝒆𝒆mn
(also known as the topic proportion in topic              a        m0 a  m1      a
                                                                                 mn         a
                                                                                         m(L-1)

models) for the whole document and a concept                                       …                         …
distribution vector ϕmj = [ϕmjk ]K  k=1 ∈ R
                                              K


                                                                    …
                                                                                              BERT
                                                                                             PLM


                                                                                                                …
for word j in document m. In our continu-
ous embedding space, the k’th concept is repre-
sented by a Gaussian distribution, N (µk , Σk ),           [𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪]         𝑰𝑰     … 𝒓𝒓𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒆𝒆 [𝑪𝑪𝑺𝑺𝑺𝑺] 𝑯𝑯𝒆𝒆 … 𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒋𝒆𝒆
of contextual word embeddings; we use short-
hand Ωk = (µk , Σk ) for brevity. The goal is Figure 1: Overview of VALANCE framework.
to interpret PLMs’ predictions at the concept level using the inferred document-level concept vector
θ m , word-level concept vector ϕmj , and the learned embedding distributions {N (µk , Σk )}K                     k=1 for
each concept (see Sec. 5.4 for detailed descriptions and visualizations).


3.2    F ORMAL D EFINITION OF L ANGUAGE C ONCEPTS

Below we formally define “conceptual interpretation” for PLM predictions (see notations
in Sec. 3.1):

Definition 3.1 (Conceptual Interpretation). Assume K concepts and a dataset D containing M
documents, each with Jm words (m ∈ {1, . . . , M }). Conceptual interpretation for a document m
consists of K dataset-level variables {Ωk }K
                                           k=1 , a document-level variable θ m , and Jm word-level
variables {ϕmj }Jj=1
                  m
                     with the following properties:
(1) Multi-Level Structure. Conceptual interpretation has a three-level structure:
   (a) Each dataset-level variable Ωk = (µk , Σk ) describes the k’th concept; µk ∈ Rd and Σk ∈
        Rd×d denote the mean and covariance of the concept in the embedding space Rd , respectively.
   (b) Each document-level variable θ m ∈ RK   ≥0 describes document m’s relation to the K concepts.
   (c) Each word-level variable ϕmj ∈ RK    ≥0 describes word j’s relation to the K concepts.
(2) Normalization. The document- and word-level interpretations, θ m and ϕmj , are normalized:
        PK
   (a)         θmk = 1 for document m.
        Pk=1
           K
   (b)     k=1 ϕmjk = 1 for word j in document m.
(3) Additivity. We can add/subtract the k’s concept from the contextual embeddings emj of word
     j in document m, i.e. emj ← emj ± xk µk , where xk is the editing weight of the k’s concept.
(4) Mutual Information Maximization. The conceptual interpretation achieves maximum mu-
     tual information between the observed contextual embeddings em in PLMs and the document-
     level/word-level interpretation, θ m and ϕmj .

In Definition 3.1, Property (1) provides comprehensive three-level conceptual interpretation for PLM
predictions, Property (2) ensures proper normalization in concept assignment at the document and
word levels, Property (3) enables better concept editing (more details in Sec. 5.3) to modify PLM
predictions, and Property (4) ensures minimal information loss when interpreting PLM predictions.


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   VA RIATIONAL LAN GUAGE C ONC E PTS (VALANCE)

Method Overview. We then propose our model, VAriational LANguage ConcEpts (VALANCE),
to infer the optimal conceptual interpretation described in Definition 3.1. Different from static word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) and topic models, PLMs produce contextual word embeddings
with continuous-value entries [emj ]Jj=1
                                      m
                                         and more importantly, associate each word embedding with
a continuous-value attention weight [amj ]Jj=1
                                             m
                                               ; therefore this brings unique challenges.
To effectively discover latent concept structures learned by PLMs at the dataset level and interpret
PLM predictions at the data-instance level, our VALANCE treats both the contextual word embed-
dings and their associated attention weights as observations to learn a probabilistic generative model
of these observations, as shown in Fig. 1. The key idea is to use the attention weights from PLMs
to compute a virtual continuous count for each word, and model the contextual word embedding
distributions with Gaussian mixtures. The generative process of VALANCE is as follows (we mark
key connection to PLMs in blue and show the corresponding graphical model in Fig. 2):
For each document m, 1 ≤ m ≤ M ,
 1. Draw the document-level concept distribution vector θ m ∼ Dirichlet(α).
 2. For each word j (1 ≤ j ≤ Jm ),
   (a) Draw the word-level concept index zmj ∼ Categorical(θ m ).
  (b) With a continuous word count wmj ∈ R from the PLM’s attention weights, Draw the con-
       textual word embedding of the PLM from the corresponding Gaussian component emj ∼
       N (µzmj , Σzmj ).
Given the generative process above, discovery of latent concept structures in PLMs at the dataset
level boils down to learning the parameters {µk , Σk }Kk=1 for the K concepts. Intuitively the global
parameters {µk , Σk }Kk=1  are shared across different  documents, and they define a mixture of K
Gaussian distributions. Each Gaussian distribution describes a ‘cluster’ of words and their contextual
word embeddings.
Similarly, interpretations of PLM predictions at the data-instance level is equivalent to inferring the
latent variables, i.e., document-level concept distribution vectors θ m and word-level concept indices
zmj . Below we highlight several important aspects of our VALANCE designs.
Attention Weights as Continuous Word Counts. Different from typical topic models (Blei et al.,
2003; Blei, 2012) and word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) that can only handle discrete word
counts, our VALANCE can handle continuous (virtual) word counts; this better aligns with contin-
uous attention weights in PLMs. Specifically, we denote as wmj ∈ R≥0 the (non-negative real-
valued) continuous word count for the j’th word in document m. We explore three schemes of
computing wmj :
  • Identical Weights: Use identical weights for different words, i.e., wmj = 1, ∀m, j. This is
    equivalent to typical discrete word counts.
  • Attention-Based Weights with Fixed Length: Use wmj = J ′ amj , where J ′ is a fixed se-
    quence length shared across all documents.
  • Attention-Based Weights with Variable Length: Use wmj = Jm amj/ Ji=1      ami , where Jm is
                                                                          P m
                                                                PJm
    true sequence length without padding. Note that in practice, i=1 ami ̸= 1 due to padding
    tokens in PLMs.
Contextual Continuous Word Representations. Note that different from topic models (Blei et al.,
2003) and typical word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013; Dieng et al., 2020) where word represen-
tations are static, word representations in PLMs are contextual; specifically, the same word can have
different embeddings in different documents (contexts). For example, the word ‘soft’ can appear
as the j1 ’th word in document m1 and as the j2 ’th word in document m2 , and therefore have two
different embeddings (i.e., em1 j1 ̸= em2 j2 ).
Correspondingly, in our VALANCE, we do not constrain the same word to have a static embedding;
instead we assume that a word embedding is drawn from a Gaussian distribution corresponding
to its latent topic. It is also worth noting that word representations in VALANCE is continuous,
which is different from typical topic models (Blei et al., 2003) based on (discrete) bag-of-words
representations.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4     O BJECTIVE F UNCTION

Below we discuss the inference and learning proce-
                                                                                                    PLM
                                                                                                   BERT
dure for VALANCE. We start by introducing the infer-                         &%         '%
ence of document-level and word-level concepts (i.e.,                                        K
zmj and θ m ) given the global concept parameters (i.e.,
{(µk , Σk )}K
            k=1 ), and then introduce the learning of these
global concept parameters.                                       !      "!         #mj       $!"    %#$
                                                                                                          Lm
3.4.1    I NFERENCE                                                                                            M

                                                                Figure 2: Graphical model of our
Inferring Document-Level and Word-Level Concepts.
                                                                VALANCE. The striped circle repre-
We formulate the problem of interpreting PLM predic-
                                                                sents continuous word counts.
tions at the concept level as inferring document-level and
word-level concepts. Specifically, given global concept parameters {(µk , Σk )}K      k=1 , the contextual
word embeddings em ≜ [emj ]j=1 , and the associated attention weights am ≜ [amj ]Jj=1
                                  Jm                                                           m
                                                                                                  , a PLM
produces for each document m, our VALANCE infers the posterior distribution of the document-
level concept vector θ m , i.e., p(θ m |em , am , {(µk , Σk )}K
                                                              k=1 ), and the posterior distribution of the
word-level concept index zmj , i.e., p(zmj |em , am , {(µk , Σk )}K k=1 ).

Variational Distributions. These posterior distributions are intractable; we therefore resort to vari-
ational inference (Jordan et al., 1998; Blei et al., 2003) and use variational distributions q(θ m |γ m )
and q(zmj |ϕmj ) to approximate them. Here γ m ∈ RK and ϕmj ≜ [ϕmjk ]K            k=1 ∈ R
                                                                                            K
                                                                                               are vari-
ational parameters to be estimated during inference. This leads to the following joint variational
distribution:
                                                                       YJm
               q(θ m , {zmj }Jj=1
                               m
                                  |γ m , {ϕmj }Jj=1
                                                 m
                                                    ) = q(θ m |γ m ) ·     q(zmj |ϕmj )               (1)
                                                                        j=1
Evidence Lower Bound. For each document m, finding the optimal variational distributions is then
equivalent to maximizing the following evidence lower bound (ELBO):
                                                                      XJm
     L(γ m , {ϕmj }Jj=1
                     m
                        ; α, {(µk , Σk )}K
                                         k=1 ) = Eq [log p(θ m |α)] +       Eq [log p(zmj |θ m )]
                                                                        j=1
        XJ m                                                            XJm
     +         Eq [log p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj )] − Eq [log q(θ m )] −      Eq [log q(zmj )],    (2)
            j=1                                                                   j=1
where the expectation is taken over the joint variational distribution in Eqn. 1.
Likelihood with Continuous Word Counts. One key difference between VALANCE and typi-
cal topic models (Blei et al., 2003; Blei, 2012) is the virtual continuous (real-valued) word counts
(discussed in Sec. 3.3). Specifically, we define the likelihood in the third term of Eqn. 2 as:
                        p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj ) = [N (emj ; µmj , Σmj )]wmj .                          (3)
Note that Eqn. 3 is the likelihood of wmj (virtual) words, where wmj can be a continuous value
derived from the PLM’s attention weights (details in Sec. 3.3).
Correspondingly, in the third item of Eqn. 2, we have:
                                                X
          Eq [log p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj )] =          ϕmjk wmj log N (emj |µk , Σk )
                                                   m,j,k
          X
       =            ϕmjk wmj {− 12 (emj − µk )T Σ−1k (emj − µk ) − log[(2π)
                                                                            d/2
                                                                                |Σk |1/2 ]}.               (4)
                m,j,k
Update Rules. Taking the derivative of the ELBO in Eqn. 2 w.r.t. ϕmjk (see Appendix A for details)
and setting it to 0 yields the update rule for ϕmjk :
                    w
                                              X
        ϕmjk ∝ |Σ mj   1/2
                           exp[Ψ(γmk ) − Ψ(         γmk′ ) − 12 (emj − µk )T Σ−1
                                                                              k (emj − µk )], (5)
                     k|                          k′
                                    PK
with the normalization constraint k=1 ϕmjk = 1.
                                                 XJm
                                    γmk = αk +            ϕmjk wmj ,                          (6)
                                                        j=1

where α ≜ [αk ]K k=1 is the hyperparameter for the Dirichlet prior distribution of θ m . In summary,
the inference algorithm will alternate between updating ϕmjk for all (m, j, k) tuples and updating
γ mk for all (m, k) tuples.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4.2   L EARNING
Learning Dataset-Level Concept Parameters. The inference algorithm in Sec. 3.4.1 assumes
availability of the dataset-level (global) concept parameters {(µk , Σk )}K
                                                                          k=1 . To learn such these
parameters, one needs to iterate between (1) inferring document-level variational parameters γ m as
well as word-level variational parameters ϕmj in Sec. 3.4.1 and (2) learning dataset-level concept
parameters {(µk , Σk )}Kk=1 .

Update Rules. Similar to Sec. 3.4.1, we expand the ELBO in Eqn. 2 (see Appendix A for details)
and set its derivative w.r.t. µk and Σk to 0, yielding the update rule for learning µk and Σk :
                                                                           µk )(emj −µk )T
                    P                                  P
                      m,j ϕmjk wmj emj                 m,j ϕmjk w mj (emj −
             µk =    P                 ,     Σk =               P                          .        (7)
                       m,j ϕmjk wmj                               m,j ϕ mjk wmj


Effect of Attention Weights. From Eqn. 7, we can ob- Algorithm 1: Algorithm for
serve that the attention weight of the j’th word in doc- VALANCE
ument m, i.e., amj , affects the virtual continuous word
count wmj (see Sec. 3.3), thereby affecting the update of Input: M      Initialized {γ m }M
                                                                                          m=1 ,
                                                                                         K
the dataset-level concept center µk and covariance Σk .          {ϕ m m=1 , and {Ωk }k=1 ,
                                                                      }
                                                                 documents {Dm }M    m=1 , number of
Specifically, if we use attention-based weights with fixed       epochs T.
length or variable length in Sec. 3.3, the continuous word for t = 1 : T do
count wmj will be proportional to the attention weight            for m = 1 : M do
amj . Therefore, when updating the concept center µk as             Update ϕm and γ m using
a weighted average of different word embeddings emj ,            Eqn. 5 and Eqn. 6, respectively.
VALANCE naturally places more focus on words with                 Update {Ωk }K   k=1 using Eqn. 7.
higher attention weights amj from PLMs, thereby making
the interpretations sharper (see Sec. 5.4 for detailed results and Appendix I for theoretical analysis).
Interestingly, we also observe that PLMs’ attention weights on stop words such as ‘the’ and ‘a’ tend
to be much lower; therefore VALANCE can naturally ignore these concept-irrelevant stop words
when learning and inferring concepts (topics). This is in contrast to typical topic models (Blei et al.,
2003; Blei, 2012) that require preprocessing to remove stop words.

4   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide theoretical guarantees that our VALANCE satisfies the four properties
in Definition 3.1.
Multi-Level Structure. As shown in Alg. 1, VALANCE (1) learns the dataset-level interpretation
{Ωk }K k=1 describing the K concepts, (2) infers the distribution of document-level interpretation
θ m for document m, i.e., q(θ m |γ m ), which is parameterized by γ m , and (3) infers the posterior
distribution of word-level concept index, i.e., q(zmj |ϕmj ), parameterized by ϕmj . Such three-level
interpretations correspond to Property (1) in Definition 3.1.
Normalization. The variational distribution q(θ m |γ m ) (Eqn. 1) which VALANCE learns is a
                                         PK
Dirichlet distribution; therefore we have k=1 θmk = 1. The update of ϕmj (Eqn. 5) is naturally
                PK
constrained by k=1 ϕmjk = 1 since ϕmj parameterizes a Categorical distribution (over zmj ).
Additivity. VALANCE is able to add or subtract the learned concept activation µk from PLM
embeddings via the following Quadratic Programming (QP) problem (x = [xk ]K
                                                                          k=1 ):
                     XK                                              XK
       minx∈RK ∥             xk µk − em ∥2 ,   subject to x ≥ 0 and           xk = 1.   (8)
                           k=1                                                      k=1
                                                                                     ∗
Given learned concepts {(µk , Σk )}K
                                   k=1 , VALANCE obtains this QP’s optimal solution x ∈ R
                                                                                          K
                                                                                  ∗
and add/subtract any concept k from arbitrary PLM embedding em by: em ← em ± xk µk . Alg. 2
summarizes this concept editing process; one can also replace emj with the CLS embedding cm for
document-level editing (see Appendix D for details).
Mutual Information Maximization. Theorem 4.1 below shows that our inferred document-level
and word-level interpretation, θ m and {ϕmj }Jj=1
                                               m
                                                  , satisfy Property (4), Mutual Information Maxi-
mization, in Definition 3.1.

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.1 (Mutual Information Maximization). In Eqn. 2,                          the ELBO
              Jm                   K
L(γ m , {ϕmj }j=1 ; α, {(µk , Σk )}k=1 ) is upper bounded by the mutual information between
contextual embeddings em and multi-level interpretation θ m , {ϕmj }Jj=1    m
                                                                              in Definition 3.1.
Formally, with approximate posteriors q(θ m |γ m ) and q(zmj |ϕmj ), we have
             L(γ m , {ϕmj }Jj=1
                             m
                                ; α, {(µk , Σk )}K                          Jm
                                                 k=1 ) ≤ I(em ; θ m , {zmj }j=1 ) − H(em ),            (9)
where the entropy term H(em ) is a constant.

From Theorem 4.1 we can see that maximizing the ELBO in Eqn. 2 is equivalent to maximizing the
mutual information between our document-level/word-level concepts and the observed contextual
embeddings in PLMs (proof is provided in Appendix H).
In summary, VALANCE enjoys all four properties in Definition 3.1 and therefore generates the
optimal conceptual interpretation for PLMs. In contrast, state-of-the-art methods only satisfy a
small part of them (Table 2 and Sec. 5.2). In Appendix I, we provide theoretical guarantees that (1)
under mild assumptions our VALANCE can learn better conceptual interpretations for PLMs for in
noisy data and (2) attention-based schemes is superior to the identical scheme (Sec. 3.3).

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1    E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets. We use three datasets with various text lengths     Table 1: Dataset statistics, including the
in our experiments, namely 20 Newsgroups, M10 (Lim &          number of documents (M ), vocabulary
Buntine, 2015), and BBC News (Greene & Cunningham,            size (V ), the number of corpus cate-
2006). We follow Terragni et al. (2021) and Zhang et al.      gories (L), and the average document
(2022) to pre-process these datasets. The statistics of the   length (J).
datasets are summarized in Table 1. We use the standard         Dataset          M        V      L    J
8:1:1 train/validation/test set split.
                                                                20 Newsgroups   16,309   1,612   20   48
Baselines. We compare our method with the following             M10              8,355   1,696   10   5.9
                                                                BBC News         2,225   2,949    5   120
state-of-the-art baselines:
    • SHAP and LIME Lundberg & Lee (2017); Ribeiro et al. (2016) are interpretation methods that
      attribute importance scores to input features. In this paper, we use embeddings of ‘CLS’ token
      as input to SHAP/LIME.
    • BERTopic Grootendorst (2020) is a clustering-based model that uses HDBSCAN (McInnes &
      Healy, 2017) to cluster sentence embeddings from BERT, performs Uniform Manifold Approx-
      imation Projection (UMAP) (McInnes et al., 2018), and then uses class-based TF-IDF (c-TF-
      IDF) to obtain words for each cluster.
    • CETopic Zhang et al. (2022) is a clustering-based model that first uses UMAP to perform
      dimensionality reduction on BERT sentence embeddings, performs K-Means clustering (Lloyd,
      1982), and then uses weighted word selection for each cluster.
Evaluation Metric. Inspired by Koh et al. Algorithm 2: Algorithm for VALANCE
(2020), we perform concept editing experiments Concept Editing
to evaluate conceptual interpretation for PLMs; Input: PLM f (·), classifier g(·),
higher accuracy gain after editing indicates bet-    classification loss L, document Dm with
ter interpretation performance. We leverage J words, labels y, constant factor             ω.
BERT-base-uncased (Devlin et al., 2018) as the formj = 1 : J do e = f (D )
                                                                  m         mj         mj
contextual embedding model. To compare our
learned concepts with the baseline models, we          x∗ = QP (emj , {µk }K  k=1 )
                                                         ∗                              ∗
first follow their configurations (Grootendorst,       k   = arg min  k L(g(e mj − ω · xk µk ), ym )
                                                                            ∗
2020; Zhang et al., 2022) to fix BERT model pa-        emj ← emj − ω · xk∗ µk∗
rameters when learning the topics/concepts, train a classifier on top of the fixed contextual embed-
dings, and then perform concept pruning (Koh et al., 2020) for different evaluated models on the
same classifier. We use accuracy on the test set as our metric.
We can perform concept editing on either input tokens or contextual embeddings of PLMs. Specif-
ically, we can perform hard concept editing for concept k by directly removing tokens that belong


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


concept k (applicable for hard clustering methods such as our baselines); we could also perform
soft concept editing for concept k by removing concept subspace vectors from contextual embed-
dings em (applicable for VALANCE using Alg. 2). For SHAP/LIME, we treat the ‘CLS’ token’s
embedding as the input features to interpret.

5.2   C OMPARISON ON F OUR P ROPERTIES IN D EFINITION 3.1

In Sec. 4 we show that VALANCE satisfies                   Table 2: Comparing different methods on the
the four properties of conceptual interpretation           four properties in Definition 3.1 (MIM: Mutual
in Definition 3.1. In contrast, baseline models do         Information Maximization).
not necessarily learn concepts that meet these re-          Model     Multi-Level Normalization Additivity MIM
quirements. Table 2 summarizes the comparison               SHAP/LIME    No           No         Partial   No
between our VALANCE and the baselines. We                   BERTopic     No          Hard        Partial   No
                                                            CETopic      No          Hard        Partial   No
can see that VALANCE is superior to baselines               VALANCE      Yes          Soft        Full     Yes
in terms of the following four aspects:
(1) Multi-Level Structure. Baselines either apply clustering algorithms directly on the document-
    level embeddings from PLMs and therefore can only provide document-level interpretation or
    assign importance scores to input features, and thus can only provide single-level interpretation.
    In contrast, VALANCE provides dataset-level, document-level, and word-level interpretation.
(2) Normalization. BERTopic and CETopic assign each word to exactly one concept and therefore
    satisfies hard-normalization. SHAP/LIME produce importance scores that are not normalized.
    In contrast, VALANCE learn fractional concept interpretations γ m and ϕmj and therefore sat-
    isfies soft-normalization, which is more flexible and intuitive.
(3) Additivity. Baselines cannot perform complete addition or subtraction of language concepts,
    because they operate only at a single level (i.e., word or document). In contrast, VALANCE’s
    additivity and concept editing (Alg. 2) work for both document and word levels.
(4) Mutual Information Maximization. Baselines either use a multi-step pipeline or produce
    only importance scores; they are therefore prone to lose information between raw PLM embed-
    dings and final clustering/scoring results. In contrast, VALANCE is theoretically guaranteed to
    maximally preserve information (Theorem 4.1).

5.3   C ONCEPT E DITING R ESULTS

Accuracy Gain. We perform greedy concept Table 3: Accuracy gain on 20 Newsgroups
editing (Koh et al., 2020) for BERTopic, CE- (20NG), M10, and BBC News (BBC) (%). We
Topic, and our VALANCE to evaluate the qual- mark the best result with bold face and the second
ity of their learned concepts. Higher accuracy best results with underline.
gain after pruning indicates better performance.   Dataset      Unedited
                                                                         SHAP
                                                                                BERTopic CETopic VALANCE
                                                                                                         Finetune
                                                                         /LIME                           (Oracle)
Specifically, we perform concept pruning to the            Acc.  51.26    61.74  60.76    61.93    62.54  64.38
                                                   20NG
CLS embeddings for VALANCE (see details                    Gain    -      10.48   9.50    10.67    11.28  13.12
                                                           Acc.  69.74    75.60  76.79    79.18    80.74  82.54
in Alg 2). Since BERTopic and CETopic can in-       M10
                                                           Gain    -      5.86    7.05    9.44     11.00  12.80
fer concepts (topics) only at the document level,   BBC
                                                           Acc.  93.72    95.96  95.52    96.86    96.41  97.76
                                                           Gain    -      2.24    1.80     3.14     2.69   4.04
their only choice is to prune a concept by com-
pletely removing input tokens assigned to the concept (as mentioned in Sec. 5.1 and 5.2).
Table 3 show the results for different methods in three real-world datasets, where ‘Finetune (Ora-
cle)’ refers to finetuning both the backbone and the classifier of BERT. VALANCE’s concept edit-
ing can improve the accuracy upon the unedited model by more than 11% in 20 Newsgroups and
M10, almost on par with ‘Finetune (Oracle)’. Compared with the baselines, VALANCE achieves
the most accuracy gain in 20 Newsgroups and M10 and the second most accuracy gain in BBC
News, demonstrating the effectiveness of VALANCE’s four properties in Definition 3.1. Note that
SHAP and LIME both interpret the CLS token’s embedding and therefore has identical accuracy
gain (see Appendix E for details).
Ablation Study. Thanks to its full additivity (Definition 3.1), VALANCE is capable of differ-
ent concept editing schemes, including ‘Random’, ‘Unweighted’, and ‘Weighted’. Specifically,
weighted pruning uses the concept editing algorithm in Alg. 2 with the optimal hyperparameter ω;
unweighted pruning runs Alg. 2 with ω = 1; random pruning first randomly picks a concept, sets
ω · xk = 1/K, ∀k ∈ {1, ..., K}, and then runs Alg. 2.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                           M10                                                  M10
      Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics   Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 5: sampling, sequence, similarity, mapping, reconstruction, shift
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 84: analyze, explore, integrate, accept, incorporate, recover, explain
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 62: environment, mix, farm, formation, life, origin, growth, source
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 98: term, cycle, isotope, summer, heating, environment
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 24: forthcoming, proceeding, prospect, overview, grow, profit
                                                                                                                Concept (Topic) 74: peer, connect, collaborative, learning, transaction, change

                                                                                                                Feature selection vs theory reformulation: A    Banks and markets: The changing character
                                                                                                                study of genetic refinement of knowledge-       of European finance
                                                                                                                based neural networks
                                                                                                                                                                Document Topic: 84
                                                                                                                Document Topic: 5
                                                                                                                                                                Prediction: 4 (financial economics)
                                                                                                                Prediction: 3 (computer science)
                                                                                                                                                                Label: 4 (financial economics)             (d)
                                                                                                                Label: 3 (computer science)              (a)

                                                                                                                                                                Bio-inspired computing tissues: towards
                                                                                                                Deep learning with kernel regularization for
                                                                                                                                                                machines that evolve, grow, and learn
                                                                                                                visual recognition
                                                                                                                                                                Document Topic: 62, 24
                                                                                                                Document Topic: 5
                                                                                                                                                                Prediction: 9 (social science)
                                                                                                                Prediction: 3 (computer science)
                                                                                                                                                                Label: 2 (biology)                          (e)
                                                                                                                Label: 3 (computer science)               (b)

                                                                                                                Mobile search for a black hole in an            The influence of intermittency on air-water gas
                                                                                                                anonymous ring                                  transfer measurements
                                                                                                                Document Topic: 84                              Document Topic: 5
                                                                                                                Prediction: 8 (physics)                         Prediction: 0 (agriculture)
                                                                                                                Label: 8 (physics)                        (c)   Label: 7 (petroleum chemistry)               (f)


Figure 3: Visualization of VALANCE’s three-level conceptual interpretation. Left and Middle:
Dataset-level interpretation with 6 concepts’ µk and Σk with nearest word embeddings. For better
readability, we show 3 concepts in each plot. Right: Top words in each concept and 6 example
documents with the associated document-level and word-level interpretations.
Table 4 shows accuracy for VALANCE’s dif- Table 4: VALANCE Editing Accuracy (%). We
ferent schemes. As expected, random pruning mark the best result with bold face and the second
barely improves upon the unedited model. Un- best results with underline.
weighted pruning improves upon the unedited        Dataset      Unedited Random Unweighted Weighted
                                                                                                    Finetune
                                                                                                    (Oracle)
model by 1.5 ∼ 3.5%. Weighted pruning im-          20 Newsgroups 51.26    51.13   54.63     62.54    64.38
proves the accuracy by around 11% upon the         M10           69.74    69.76   73.56     80.74    82.54
unedited model on 20 Newsgroups and M10.           BBC News      93.72    93.72   95.52     96.41    97.76



5.4     C ONCEPTUAL I NTERPRETATION (M ORE FOR D IFFERENT TASKS IN A PPENDIX F)

Dataset-Level Interpretations. As a case study, we train VALANCE on M10, sample 6 concepts
(topics) from the dataset, and plot the word embeddings of the top words (closest to the center µk )
in these concepts using PCA in Fig. 3(left and middle). We can observe Concept 5 is mostly about
data analysis, including words such as ‘sampling’ and ‘similarity’. Concept 84 is mostly about
reasoning, with words ‘explore’, ’accept’, ‘explain’, etc. Concept 62 is mostly about nature, with
words ‘environment’, ‘formation’, ‘growth’, etc. Concept 98 is mostly about farming, with words
‘term’, ‘summer’, ‘heating’, etc. Concept 24 is mostly about economics, with words ‘forthcoming’,
‘prospect’, ‘grow’, etc. Concept 74 is mostly about social contact, containing words such as ‘peer’,
‘connect’, and ‘collaborative’. Interestingly, Concept 24 (economics) and Concept 74 (social con-
tact) are both related to social science and are therefore closer to each other in Fig. 3(middle), while
Concept 98 (farming) is farther away, showing VALANCE’s cability of capturing concept similarity.
Document-Level Interpretations. Fig. 3(right) shows that VALANCE can provide conceptual in-
terpretations on why correct or incorrect PLM predictions happen for specific documents. For exam-
ple, document (e) belongs to class 2 (biology), but BERT misclassifies it as class 9 (social science);
our VALANCE interprets that this is because document (e) involves Concept 24 (economics), which
is related to social science. On the other hand, document (b) is related to machine learning and
BERT correctly classifies it as class 3 (computer science); VALANCE interprets that this is be-
cause document (b) involves Concept 5 (data analysis).
Word-Level Interpretations. Fig. 3(right) also shows that VALANCE can interpret which words
and what concepts of these words lead to specific PLM predictions. For example, document (f)
belongs to class 7 (petroleum chemistry), but BERT misclassifies it as class 0 (agriculture);
VALANCE attributes this to the word ‘air’, which belongs to Concept 98 (farming). For docu-
ment (b), VALANCE interprets that BERT correctly classifies it as class 3 (computer science)
because the document contains the word ‘kernel’, which belongs to Concept 5 (data analysis).

6     C ONCLUSION
We identify the problem of multi-level interpretations for PLM predictions, develop a formal defi-
nition of conceptual interpretation, and propose VALANCE as the first general method to infer such
conceptual interpretation, with promising empirical results. Our theoretical analysis shows that
VALANCE is guaranteed to generate the optimal conceptual interpretation by our definition. Future
work includes extending VALANCE beyond BERT variants and natural language processing.


                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kayhan Batmanghelich, Ardavan Saeedi, Karthik Narasimhan, and Sam Gershman. Nonparametric
  spherical topic modeling with word embeddings. In Proceedings of the conference. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. Meeting, volume 2016, pp. 537. NIH Public Access, 2016.
David M Blei. Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4):77–84, 2012.
David M Blei and John D Lafferty. Dynamic topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd international
  conference on Machine learning, pp. 113–120, 2006.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. the Journal of
  machine Learning research, 3:993–1022, 2003.
Stefan Bunk and Ralf Krestel. Welda: enhancing topic models by incorporating local word context.
  In Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IEEE on Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, pp. 293–302,
  2018.
Dallas Card, Chenhao Tan, and Noah A Smith. A neural framework for generalized topic models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09296, 2017.
Jonathan Chang and David Blei. Relational topic models for document networks. In Artificial
  intelligence and statistics, pp. 81–88. PMLR, 2009.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and Christopher D Manning. Electra: Pre-training
  text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
Rajarshi Das, Manzil Zaheer, and Chris Dyer. Gaussian lda for topic models with word embeddings.
  In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
  the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 795–804, 2015.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Adji B Dieng, Francisco JR Ruiz, and David M Blei. Topic modeling in embedding spaces. Trans-
  actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:439–453, 2020.
Zhibin Duan, Dongsheng Wang, Bo Chen, Chaojie Wang, Wenchao Chen, Yewen Li, Jie Ren, and
  Mingyuan Zhou. Sawtooth factorial topic embeddings guided gamma belief network. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2903–2913. PMLR, 2021.
Derek Greene and Pádraig Cunningham. Practical solutions to the problem of diagonal dominance
  in kernel document clustering. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 377–384, 2006.
Maarten Grootendorst. Bertopic: Leveraging bert and c-tf-idf to create easily interpretable topics.
 Zenodo, Version v0, 9, 2020.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In ICLR, 2021.
Matthew Hoffman, Francis Bach, and David Blei. Online learning for latent dirichlet allocation.
 advances in neural information processing systems, 23:856–864, 2010.
Pengfei Hu, Wenju Liu, Wei Jiang, and Zhanlei Yang. Latent topic model based on gaussian-lda for
  audio retrieval. In Chinese Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 556–563. Springer, 2012.
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun Liu.
  Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10351,
  2019.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction
 to variational methods for graphical models. In Learning in graphical models, pp. 105–161.
 Springer, 1998.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
  cut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1910.13461, 2019.
Kar Wai Lim and Wray Buntine. Bibliographic analysis with the citation network topic model. In
  Asian conference on machine learning, pp. 142–158. PMLR, 2015.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Stuart Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE transactions on information theory, 28(2):
  129–137, 1982.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Leland McInnes and John Healy. Accelerated hierarchical density based clustering. In 2017 IEEE
  International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pp. 33–42. IEEE, 2017.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Yu Meng, Yunyi Zhang, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, and Jiawei Han. Topic discovery via latent space
  clustering of pretrained language model representations. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Confer-
  ence 2022, pp. 3143–3152, 2022.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00937, 2017.
Nicole Peinelt, Dong Nguyen, and Maria Liakata. tbert: Topic models and bert joining forces for
  semantic similarity detection. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 7047–7055, 2020.
Jacob Portes, Alexander R Trott, Sam Havens, Daniel King, Abhinav Venigalla, Moin Nadeem,
  Nikhil Sardana, Daya Khudia, and Jonathan Frankle. Mosaicbert: How to train bert with a lunch
  money budget. In Workshop on Efficient Systems for Foundation Models@ ICML2023, 2023.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ” why should i trust you?” explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Silvia Terragni, Elisabetta Fersini, Bruno Giovanni Galuzzi, Pietro Tropeano, and Antonio Can-
   delieri. Octis: comparing and optimizing topic models is simple! In Proceedings of the 16th
   Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System
   Demonstrations, pp. 263–270, 2021.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
  Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chong Wang, David Blei, and David Heckerman. Continuous time dynamic topic models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1206.3298, 2012.
Dongsheng Wang, Dandan Guo, He Zhao, Huangjie Zheng, Korawat Tanwisuth, Bo Chen, and
  Mingyuan Zhou. Representing mixtures of word embeddings with mixtures of topic embeddings.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01570, 2022.
Chen Xing, Wei Wu, Yu Wu, Jie Liu, Yalou Huang, Ming Zhou, and Wei-Ying Ma. Topic aware
  neural response generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 31, 2017.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
  Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Zihan Zhang, Meng Fang, Ling Chen, and Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad. Is neural topic modelling
  better than clustering? an empirical study on clustering with contextual embeddings for topics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09874, 2022.
He Zhao, Dinh Phung, Viet Huynh, Trung Le, and Wray Buntine. Neural topic model via optimal
  transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.13537, 2020.


A    D ETAILS ON L EARNING VALANCE
Update Rules. Similar to Sec. 3.4.1 of the main paper, we expand the ELBO in Eqn. 2 of the main
paper, take its derivative w.r.t. µk and set it to 0:
                                      X
                               ∂L
                              ∂ µk  =     ϕmjk wmj Σ−1k (emj − µk ) = 0,                   (10)
                                         m,j

yielding the update rule for learning µi :
                                                       P
                                                         m,j ϕmjk wmj emj
                                          µk =          P                 ,                      (11)
                                                          m,j ϕmjk wmj


where Σ−1
       k is canceled out. Similarly, setting the derivatives w.r.t. Σ to 0, i.e.,
                     X
            ∂L
           ∂ Σk
                =  1
                   2     ϕmjk wmj (−Σ−1           −1
                                          k + Σk (emj − µk )(emj − µk ) Σk ),
                                                                                T −1
                                                                                                 (12)
                         m,j

we have
                                                                    µk )(emj −µk )T
                                         P
                                          m,j ϕmjk wmj (emj −
                               Σk =                P
                                                                ϕmjk wmj            .            (13)
                                                            m,j


                                          &&           (0          )&


                                                                           PLM
                                                                          BERT
                                    *&            &%        '%
                                                                   K


                                !            "!         #mj         $!"    %#$
                                                                                 Lm
                                                                                      M

                 Figure 4: Probabilistic graphical model of smoothed VALANCE.
Smoothing with Prior Distributions on {(µk , Σk )}K  k=1 . To alleviate overfitting and prevent singu-
larity in numerical computation, we impose priors distributions on µk and Σk to smooth the learning
process (Fig. 4). Specifically, we use a Normal-Inverse-Wishart prior on µi and Σi :


                                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Σk ∼ IW(Λ0 , ν0 ),
                                          µk |Σk ∼ N (µ0 , Σk /κ0 ),
where Λ0 , ν0 , µ0 , and κ0 are hyperparameters for the prior distributions. Taking the expectations of
                                                            (n)     (n)  (n)   (n)
µk and Σk over the posterior distibution N IW(µk , Σk |µk , Λk , κk , νk ), we have the update
rules as:
                                            κ µ +n µ
                       µk ← EN IW [µk ] = 0 κ00 +nkk k ,
                                                      e
                                                                                                   (14)
                                           Λ0 +Sk + κκ00+n
                                                         nk e
                                                             (µk −µ0 )(µ
                                                                       e −µ )T
                                                                        k   0
                        Σk ← EN IW [Σk ] =                 k
                                                        ν0 +nk −K−1            ,                                                         (15)
                             X
                        Sk =      ϕmjk wmj (emj − µ   e k )(emj − µe k )T .                                                              (16)
                                   m,j
              P
where nk = m,j ϕmjk wmj is the total virtual word counts used to estimate µk and Σk . Eqn. 14
and Eqn. 15 are the smoothed version of Eqn. 7 of the main paper. From the Bayesian perfective,
they correspond to the expectations of µk ’s and Σk ’s posterior distributions. Alg. 1 of the main
paper summarizes the learning of VALANCE.
Online Learning of µk and Σk . Note that PLMs are deep neural networks trained using mini-
batches of data, while Eqn. 14 and Eqn. 15 need to go through the whole dataset before each update.
Inspired by Hoffman et al. (2010); Oord et al. (2017), we using exponential moving average (EMA)
to work with minibatchs. Specifically, we update them as:
                                  µk ← ρ · N · µk + (1 − ρ) · B · µ
                                                                  ek,
                                  Σk ← ρ · N · Σk + (1 − ρ) · B · Σ
                                                                  e k,
                                   N ← ρ · N + (1 − ρ) · B,
                                       µ
                                   µ ← k , Σ ← Σk ,
                                     k         N              k          N
where B is the minibatch size, N is a running count, and ρ ∈ (0, 1) is the momentum hyperparam-
eter. µ
      e k and Σ
              e k are the updated µk and Σk after applying Eqn. 14 and Eqn. 15 only on the current
minibatch.

B    I NTERPRETATION OF THE ELBO
We can expand the ELBO in Eqn. 2 of the main paper as:

                                               K
                                               X              K
                                                              X                       K
                                                                                      X                              K
                                                                                                                     X
                    K        K
      L(γ, ϕ; α, {µ}k=1 , {Σ}k=1 ) = log Γ(          αk ) −         log Γ(αk ) +           (αk − 1)(Ψ(γ k ) − Ψ(            γ k′ ))
                                               k=1            k=1                     k=1                           k′ =1
                                         J X
                                         X K                                 K
                                                                             X
                                     +               ϕjk (Ψ(γ k ) − Ψ(               γ k′ ))
                                         j=1 k=1                             k′ =1
                                         X                                   T   −1                           d/2        1/2
                                     +         ϕjk wj {− 12 (ej − µk ) Σk (ej − µk ) − log[(2π)                     |Σk |      ]}
                                         j,k

                                                 K
                                                 X                K
                                                                  X                      K
                                                                                         X                              K
                                                                                                                        X
                                     − log Γ(          γj ) +           log Γ(γ k ) −          (γ k − 1)(Ψ(γ k ) − Ψ(          γ k′ ))
                                                 k=1              k=1                    k=1                           k′ =1
                                         J X
                                         X K
                                     −               ϕjk log ϕjk .                                                                        (17)
                                         j=1 k=1



We can interpret the meaning of each term of ELBO as follows:

       • The sum of the first and the fourth terms, namely Eq [log p(θ m |α)]−Eq [log q(θ m )], is equal
         to −KL(q(θ m )|p(θ m |α)), which is the negation of KL Divergence between the variational
         posterior probability q(θ m ) and the prior probability p(θ m |α) of the topic proportion θ m
         for document m. Therefore maximizing the sum of these two terms is equivalent to min-
         imizing the KL Divergence KL(q(θ m )|p(θ m |α)); this serves as a regularization term to
         make sure the inferred q(θ m ) is close to its prior distribution p(θ m |α).


                                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Similarly, the sum of the second and the last terms (ignoring the summation over the
         word index j for simplicity), namely Eq [log p(zmj |θ m )] − Eq [log q(zmj )] is equal to
         −KL(q(zmj )|p(zmj |θ m )), which is the negation of the KL Divergence between the vari-
         ational posterior probability q(zmj ) and the prior probability p(zmj |θ m ) of the word-level
         topic assignment zmj for word j of document m. Therefore maximizing the sum of these
         two terms is equivalent to minimizing the KL Divergence KL(q(zmj )|p(zmj |θ m )); this
         serves as a regularization term to make sure the inferred q(zmj ) is close to its “prior” dis-
         tribution p(zmj |θ m ).
                          PJm
       • The third term j=1      Eq [log p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj )] is to maximize the log likelihood
         p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj ) of every contextual embedding emj (for word j of document m)
         conditioned on the inferred zmj and the parameters (µzmj , Σzmj ).


C    E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We will release all code, models, and data. Below we provide more details on the experimental
settings and practical implementation.
Datasets. We use the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018) to perform additional conceptual
interpretation in this section. This benchmark includes multiple sub-tasks of predictions, with the
paired sentences as inputs. In this paper, we use 4 datasets from GLUE (MRPC, RTE, STS-B, and
QQP) to show contextual interpretations.
Visualization Postprocessing. For better showcase the dataset-level concepts as in Fig. 3 of the
main paper, we may employ simple linear transformations on the embedding of words after the
aforementioned PCA step, in order to scatter all the informative words on the same figures. However,
for some datasets such as STS-B, this is not necessary; therefore we do not use it for these datasets.
Topic (Concept) Identification. Inspired
by Blei et al. (2003), we identify meaning- Algorithm 3: Algorithm for VALANCE
ful topics by listing the top-5 topics for each Document-Level Concept Editing
word, computing the inverse document fre- Input: PLM f (·), classifier g(·), classification
quency (IDF), and filtering out topics with the   loss L, dataset {Dm }Mm=1 , labels y, constant
lowest IDF scores. Note that although GLUE        factor ω.
benchmark are datasets that consists of doc- for m = 1 : M do
uments with small size, making it particu-         cm = f (Dm )
larly challenging for traditional topic mod-       x∗ = QP (cm , {µk }K k=1 )
els (such as LDA) to learn topics; interest-                      K
                                                   k = arg mink=1 L(g(cm − ω · x∗k µk ), ym )
                                                     ∗
ingly our VALANCE can still perform well           cm ← cm − ω · x∗k∗ µk∗
in learning the topics. We contribute this to
the following observations: (1) Compared to
traditional LDA using discrete word representations, VALANCE uses continuous word embeddings.
In such a continuous space, topics learned for one word can also help neighboring words; this allevi-
ates the sparsity issue caused by short documents and therefore learns better topics. (2) VALANCE’s
attention-based continuous word counts further improves sample efficiency. In VALANCE, impor-
tant words have larger attention weights and therefore larger continuous word counts. In this case,
one important word in a sentence possesses statistical (sample) power equivalent to multiple words;
this leads to better sample efficiency in VALANCE.


D    D OCUMENT-L EVEL C ONCEPT E DITING

We describe the document-level concept eding algorithm of VALANCE in Alg. 3. cm denotes the
‘CLS’ embedding of document m (see Fig. 1 of the main paper).


E    M ORE D ETAILS ON C ONCEPT E DITING

Assume each BERT model contains a backbone and a classifier. To perform concept editing:


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (1) We first train a classifier on top of the fixed BERT embeddings generated by the fixed
        backbone to get the original accuracy in the “Unedited” column (in Table 3 and Table 4 of
        the main paper).
    (2) We then apply the same embedding cluster methods to these BERT embeddings to infer the
        concepts/topics for each dataset.
    (3) Finally, with the inferred concepts/topics from the baselines (SHAP/LIME, BERTopic and
        CETopic in Table 3 of the main paper) and our VALANCE variants (Unweighted and
        Weighted in Table 4 of the main paper), we perform concept editing and feed the concept-
        edited embeddings into the trained classifier from Step (1) to compute the editing accuracy
        for different methods.

Since here one does not fully finetune the BERT model (i.e., keeping the backbone fixed), the editing
accuracy is expected to be lower than the “Finetune” column (in Table 3 and Table 4 of the main
paper), which serves as the oracle. Table Table 3 of the main paper shows that our VALANCE learns
better concepts than the baselines, and Table 4 of the main paper shows that the weighted variant of
VALANCE performs better.
Note that SHAP and LIME both interpret the CLS token’s embedding, and hence their concept
vectors have the same dimension as the PLM embedding vector (768 in our case). When we conduct
concept editing on the k’th dimension/concept, we simply subtract the CLS embedding’s dimension
k with the average value in the batch on dimension k (which means that we know little about the
concept/dimension k on this document), and keep values of the other dimensions unchanged. Note
that the pruning process is exactly the same for SHAP and LIME. Therefore SHAP and LIME have
identical test accuracy and accuracy gain.


F    M ORE C ONCEPTUAL I NTERPRETATION R ESULTS IN D IFFERENT
     D OWNSTREAM TASKS

Dataset-Level Interpretations. As in the main paper, we leverage VALANCE as an interpreter
on MRPC, RTE, STS-B and QQP, respectively, sample 3, 3, 4, 4 concepts (topics) for each dataset
respectively, and plot the word embeddings of the top words (closest to the center µi ) in these con-
cepts using PCA. Fig. 5(left) shows the concepts from MRPC. We can observe Concept 20 is mostly
about policing, including words such as ‘suspect’, ‘police’, and ‘house’. Concept 24 is mostly
about politics, including words such as ‘capital’, ‘Congress’, and ‘Senate’. Concept 27 contains
mostly names such as ‘Margaret’ and ‘Mary’. Similarly, Fig. 5(right) shows the concepts from
RTE. We can observe Concept 67 is related to West Asia and includes words such as ‘Quran’ and
‘Pasha’. Concept 13 is related to Europe and includes European countries/names such as ‘Prussia’
and ‘Salzburg’. Concept 91 is mostly about healthcare and includes words such as ‘physiology’
and ‘insulin’. Fig. 6 shows the concepts from STS-B. We can observe Concept 63 is mostly about
household and daily life, including words such as ‘trash’, ‘flowers’, ‘airs’, and ‘garden’. Concept 60
is mostly about tools, including words such as ‘stations’, ‘rope’, ‘parachute’, and ‘hose’. Concept
84 is mostly about national security, including words such as ‘guerilla’, ‘NSA’, ‘espionage’, and
‘raided’. Concept 55 contains mostly countries and cities such as ‘Kiev’, ‘Moscow’, ‘Algeria’, and
‘Ukrainian’. Similarly, Fig. 7 shows the concepts from QQP. We can observe that Concept 12 is
mostly about negative attitude, including words such as ‘boring’, ‘criticism’, and ’blame’. Concept
73 is mostly about Psychology, including words such as ‘adrenaline’, ‘haunting’, and ’paranoia’.
Concept 34 is mostly about prevention and conservatives, including words such as ‘destroys’, ‘unac-
ceptable’, and ’prohibits’. Concept 64 is mostly about strategies, including words such as ‘rumours’,
‘boycott’, and ’deportation’.
Document-Level Interpretations. For document-level conceptual interpretations, we sample two
example documents from MRPC (Fig. 5(left)), three from RTE (Fig. 5(right)), six from STS-B
(Fig. 6) and eight from QQP (Fig. 7), respectively, where each document contains a pair of sentences.
The MRPC task is to predict whether one sentence paraphrases the other. For example, in the first
document of MRPC, we can see that our VALANCE correctly interprets the model prediction ‘True’
with Concept 24 (politics). The RTE task is to predict whether one sentence entail the other. For
example, in the second document of RTE, VALANCE correctly interprets the model prediction
‘True’ with Concept 13 (countries). The STS-B task is to predict the semantic similarity between


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        MRPC                            He playfully chided the Senate’s little                                 RTE                                 It said it carried out both the Taba and
   Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics   bitty tax relief plan. [SEP] We don’t            Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics         Sharm El - Sheikh attacks in obedience to
                                                        need a little bitty tax relief plan.                                                                        the leaders of Jihad [SEP] Sheikh Osama
                                                                                                                                                                    Bin Laden and Sheikh Ayman Al - Zawahri
                                                        Concept (Topic) 24: capital,                                                                                are the leaders of Al Qaeda .
                                                        Congress, John, Clinton, Senate, gov,
                                                                                                                                                                    Concept (Topic) 67: Quran, shah, Pasha,
                                                        fort, secretary
                                                                                                                                                                    Shiva, mir, Kuwait, mosque, Iran
                                                        Concept (Topic) 20: delegation, prep,                                                                       Document Topic: 67   Prediction: False
                                                        speaker, suspect, mono, seat, police,
                                                        house, right, chair, oversee, ask
                                                                                                                                                                    The united states told Polish leaders it wants
                                                        Document Topic: 24   Prediction: True                                                                       to open formal negotiations on the possibility
                                                                                                                                                                    of locating ground-based interceptor missiles
                                                                                                                                                                    in their country as part of a larger missile
                                                                                                                                                                    defense system [SEP] United states wants
                                                        “Close cooperation between law
                                                                                                                                                                    to enlarge their missile defense system.
                                                        enforcement agencies and
                                                        intelligence services lie at the heart                                                                      Concept (Topic) 13: Prussia, Hell, Salzburg,
                                                        of the ongoing fight against terrorism,”                                                                    Magnet, Juan, Berlin, Raleigh, hood,
                                                        Mr. Howard said. [SEP] Close                                                                                Hanover, shopping, Hui, Torino
                                                        cooperation between regional law
                                                                                                                                                                    Document Topic: 13   Prediction: True
                                                        enforcement agencies and
                                                        intelligence services was at the heart
                                                                                                                                                                    Green tea consumption is associated with
                                                        Concept (Topic) 27: Margaret, Mary,                                                                         decreased risk of breast , pancreatic , colon ,
                                                        lieu, Scott, Sue, Congress, Shelley                                                                         oesophageal , and lung cancers in humans .
                                                                                                                                                                    [SEP] Tea protects from some diseases .
                                                        Concept (Topic) 83: your, replace,
                                                                                                                                                                    Concept (Topic) 91: physiology, chemical,
                                                        county, hill,
                                                                                                                                                                    insulin, diabetes, fry, weigh
                                                        Document Topic: 83 Prediction: True                                                                         Document Topic: 91   Prediction: False


Figure 5: Visualization of VALANCE’s learned topics of contextual word embeddings. Left:
MRPC’s dataset-level interpretation with two example documents. Concept 83 is relatively far from
the other three concepts in the embedding space; therefore we omit it on the left panel for better
readability. Right: RTE’s dataset-level interpretation with three example documents.

                                                STS-B
                     Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics

                                                                                                        Concept (Topic) 63: trash, flowers, airs, garden, wild, closet, sofa, vase, carrot, seeds,
                                                                                                        turf, playground, floors
                                                                                                        Concept (Topic) 60: stations, rope, parachute, hose, clarinet, sink, axe, rifle
                                                                                                        Concept (Topic) 84: guerrilla, NSA, espionage, raided, Canadian, Croatia, historic
                                                                                                        Concept (Topic) 55: Kiev, Moscow, resistance, Algeria, agrees, Ukrainian, emerge,
                                                                                                        Qaeda, final

                                                                                                        A man and a woman watch two                Syria agrees to surrender chemical weapons [SEP]
                                                                                                        dogs. [SEP] A man in a                     UK’s Cameron: Syria, Russia must show chemical
                                                                                                        maroon bathing suit swings on              arms proposal is genuine.
                                                                                                        a rope on a lake.
                                                                                                                                                   Document Topic: 84
                                                                                                        Document Topic: 63, 60
                                                                                                                                                   Prediction: 1.975                                          (d)
                                                                                                        Prediction: 0.118                (a)
                                                                                                                                                   South Korean soldier reportedly flees after killing 5
                                                                                                        A woman is pouring egg into a              comrades at border with North Korea [SEP] South
                                                                                                        frying pan. [SEP] A man is                 Korean soldier kills comrades and flees
                                                                                                        petting two dogs.
                                                                                                                                                   Document Topic: 84, 55
                                                                                                        Document Topic: 63
                                                                                                                                                   Prediction: 3.905                                          (e)
                                                                                                        Prediction: 0.115                 (b)
                                                                                                                                                   Russian opposition leader under house arrest [SEP]
                                                                                                        A cat is playing on the floor.             Russian opposition leader placed under house
                                                                                                        [SEP] A man is slicing garlic.             arrest
                                                                                                        Document Topic: 63                         Document Topic: 84
                                                                                                        Prediction: 0.100                (c)       Prediction: 4.672                                           (f)


Figure 6: Visualization of VALANCE’s learned topics of contextual word embeddings. We show
STS-B’s dataset-level interpretation with six example documents. The prediction of VALANCE is
between the range of [0, 5].


two sentences with the score range of [0, 5]. For example, in Document (a) of Fig. 6, we can see
that VALANCE correctly interpret the model’s predicted similarity score ‘0.118’ (which is relatively
low,) with Concept 63 (household and daily life) and Concept 60 (tools). Similarly, in Document (f)
of Fig. 6, we can see that VALANCE correctly interpret the model’s predicted similarity score
‘4.672’ (which is relatively high) with Concept 84 (national security). The QQP task is to predict
whether the two questions are paraphrase of each other. For example, in Document (b) of Fig. 7,
we can see that VALANCE correctly interprets the model’s predicted label ‘False’ with Concept 73
(Psychology). Similarly, in Document (e) of Fig. 7, we can see that VALANCE correctly interprets
the model’s predicted label ‘True’ with Concept 64 (strategies).
Word-Level Interpretations. For word-level conceptual interpretations, we can observe that
VALANCE interpret the PLM’s prediction on MRPC’s first document (Fig. 5(left)) using words
such as ‘senate’ and ‘bitty’ that are related to politics. Note that the word ‘bitty’ is commonly
used (with ‘little’) by politicians to refer to the small size of tax relief/cut plans. Similarly, for
RTE’s first document (Fig. 5(right)), VALANCE correctly identifies Concept 67 (West Asia) and
interprets the model prediction ‘False’ by distinguishing between keywords such as ‘Jihad’ and ‘Al


                                                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               QQP
         Dimensionality Reduction of Embeddings with Topics
                                                              Concept (Topic) 12: boring, criticism, poorer, blame, empathy, punishment, critic, destroys, cry
                                                              Concept (Topic) 73: adrenaline, predatory, haunting, paranoia, twitching
                                                              Concept (Topic) 34: destroys, unacceptable, prohibits, straining, ruined
                                                              Concept (Topic) 64: rumours, boycott, deportation, affiliation, arbitration, scandals, indicted, factions,
                                                              competitors, bodyguards, competing

                                                              What is the best anime to watch when you are               What are Hillary Clinton's plans for India? [SEP]
                                                              bored? [SEP] What is the most boring anime you             What would be Hillary Clinton's policy on India?
                                                              have ever watched?
                                                                                                                         Document Topic: 64
                                                              Document Topic: 73
                                                                                                                         Prediction: True                                    (e)
                                                              Prediction: True                                     (a)
                                                                                                                         How can I turn my idea into a fundable business?
                                                              Why do we cry while chopping an onion? [SEP]               [SEP] How do I turn my idea into a successful
                                                              Why is assisted-suicide not legal for mentally ill         company?
                                                              people?
                                                                                                                         Document Topic: 64
                                                              Document Topic: 73
                                                                                                                         Prediction: True                                    (f)
                                                              Prediction: False                                    (b)
                                                                                                                         What are the different factions within the
                                                              Are there any famous cases of pronoia (the                 conservative party? [SEP] What are the organised
                                                              opposite of paranoia)? [SEP] What are some good            factions of the conservative party?
                                                              examples of pronoia, the opposite of paranoia?
                                                                                                                         Document Topic: 34
                                                              Document Topic: 73
                                                                                                                         Prediction: True                                    (g)
                                                              Prediction: True                                     (c)
                                                                                                                         How can I start hacking from scratch? [SEP]
                                                              Why is India trying to sabotage CPEC? [SEP] why            Where/how do I start to learning hacking as a
                                                              does India oppose CPEC?                                    newbie?
                                                              Document Topic: 64                                         Document Topic: 64
                                                              Prediction: True                                     (d)   Prediction: True                                    (h)


Figure 7: Visualization of VALANCE’s learned topics of contextual word embeddings. We show
QQP’s dataset-level interpretation with eight example documents.

                      Table 5: Example concepts on RTE dataset learned by VALANCE.
     Concepts                                                           Top Words
     bio-chem       cigarette biological  ozone   cardiovascular chemist     liver     chemical    toxin
     citizenship     indies bolivian        fiji      surrey     jamaican   dutch        latino  caribbean
     names           mozart spielberg    einstein      bush        kurt      liszt       hilton     lynn
     conspiracy     secretly corrupt     disperse    infected       ill     hidden     illegally   sniper
     administration reagan     interior ambassador prosecutor    diplomat legislative spokesman embassy
     crime            fraud laundering    sheriff   prosecutor corruption    fool       robber     greed


Qaeda’. likewise, we can observe that VALANCE interprets PLM’s prediction on Document (c) of
Fig. 6 using words such as ‘cat’, ‘floor’, and ‘garlic’ that are related to household and daily life.
Also, VALANCE interprets PLM’s prediction on Document (e) of Fig. 6 using words such as ‘sol-
dier’ and ‘border’ that are related to national security. Similarly, for QQP’s Document (d) (Fig. 7),
VALANCE correctly interprets the model prediction ‘True’ by identifying keywords such as ‘sab-
otage’ and ‘oppose’ with similar meanings in the topic of strategies. For QQP’s Document (g),
(Fig. 7), VALANCE interprets the words in the both sentences with the same semantics, such as
‘conservative’ that is related to prevention and conservatives (note that in politics, ‘conservative’
refers to parties that tend to prevent/block new policies or legislation), and thereby predicting the
correct label ‘True’.
Example Concepts. Following Blei et al. (2003), we show the learned concepts on the RTE dataset
in Table 5, which is complementary to aforementioned explanations. We select several different
topics from Fig. 5. As in Sec. 5.4 of the main paper, we obtain top words from each concept
via first calculating the average of the each word’s corresponding contextual embeddings over the
dataset, and then getting the nearest words to each topic center (µk ) in the embedding space. As we
can see in Table 5, VALANCE can capture various concepts with profound and accurate semantics.
Therefore, although PLM embeddings are contextual and continuous, our VALANCE can still find
conceptual patterns of words on the dataset-level.


G    D OCUMENT C LASSIFICATION WITH VALANCE C ONCEPTS

We ran additional experiments to perform document classification with the ‘CLS’ token’s embedding
and θ (inferred from VALANCE) as features. Table 6 below shows the results on three datasets. The
results show that our VLANCE can learn meaningful concept vector θ, which can improve model
predictions of document labels.


                                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 6: Comparison of Unedited and Unedited+θ on 20 Newsgroups, M10, and BBC News
                                                            Unedited        Unedited+θ
                                  20 Newsgroups               51.26              51.74
                                  M10                         69.74              70.76
                                  BBC News                    93.72              94.90


H    T HEORY ON THE M UTUAL I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION P ROPERTY

We provide the following proof of Theorem 4.1 of the main paper.
For convenience, let Ω = (µK      K
                           k=1 , Σk=1 ), and β = (θ m , zm ).

We then introduce a helper joint distribution of the variables em and β, s(em , β) = p(em )q(β|em ).
According to the definition of ELBO of Section 3.4.1, in Eqn. 9, we have


         LHS = L(γm , ϕm ; α, Ω) = Ep(em ) [Eq(β) [log p(em |Ω, β)]] + Eq(β) [log q(β|Ω)].                                      (18)
Since Eq(β) [log q(β|Ω)] ≤ 0, we only need to prove that
                     Ep(em ) [Eq(β) [log p(em |Ω, β)]] ≤ Is (em ; β) − H(em ) = RHS.                                            (19)
Then we have that
    Ep(em ) [Eq [log p(em |β, Ω)]] ≤ Ep(em ) [Eq [log p(em |β)]]
                                                       q(em |β) p(em )p(em |β)
                                  = Ep(em ) [Eq [log    p(em )     q(em |β)
                                                                               ]]
                                                       q(em |β)                                                   p(e |β)
                                  = Ep(em ) [Eq [log    p(em )
                                                                ]] + Ep(em ) [Eq [log p(em )]] + Ep(em ) [Eq [log q(em |β) ]]
                                                                                                                     m

                                  = Is (em ; β) − H(em ) − Eq [KL(q(em |β)|p(em |β))]

                                  ≤ Is (em ; β) − H(em ) − 0 = RHS,                                                              (20)

which concludes the proof of Theorem 4.1.

I   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS ON C ONTINUOUS W ORD C OUNTS

Before going to the claims and proofs, first we specify some basic problem settings and assumptions.
Suppose there are K +1 topic groups, each of which is regarded to be sampled from a parameterized
multivariate Gaussian distribution. In specific, the K + 1 ’th distribution of topic has a much larger
covariance, and in the same time, closed to the center of embedding space. The prementioned
properties can be measured by a series of inequalities:
The approximate marginal log-likelihood of word embeddings, i.e., the third term of the ELBO as
mentioned in Eqn. 2 of the main paper, is:
              XJ m
   L(train) =         Eq [log p(emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj )]
                  j=1
               X
            =      ϕmjk wmj {− 21 (emj − µk )T Σ−1  k (emj − µk ) − log[(2π)
                                                                            d/2
                                                                                |Σk |1/2 ]}. (21)
                  m,j,k

The above equation is the training objective, yet for fair comparison of different training schemes,
we calculate the approximated likelihood with word count 1 for all words.

                       XJ m
         L(eval) =               Eq [log p′ (emj |zmj , µzmj , Σzmj )]
                           j=1
                        X
                   =           ϕmjk {− 21 (emj − µk )T Σ−1
                                                        k (emj − µk ) − log[(2π)
                                                                                 d/2
                                                                                     |Σk |1/2 ]}.                               (22)
                       m,j,k


                                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.1   G AUSSIAN M IXTURE M ODELS

Suppose we have a ground truth GMM model with parameters π ∗ ∈ RK and {µ∗k , Σ∗k }K     k=1 , with K
different Gaussian distributions. In the dataset, let N and Ns denote the numbers of non-stop-words
and stop-words, respectively. Then the marginal log likelihood of a learned GMM model on a given
data sample e can be written as
                                                                    K
                                                                    X
                                  p(e|{µ, Σ}, π) =                        π k N (e; µk , Σk ).                                              (23)
                                                                    k=1

Assuming a dataset of N + Ns words {ei }N     +Ns
                                            i=1   and taking the associated weights wi for each word
into account, the log-likelihood of the dataset can be written as
        NX
         +Ns                                N           K                                  NX
                                                                                            +Ns           K
                              K
                                            X           X                                                 X
               p(ei |{µk , Σk }k=1 , π) =         log         wi π k N (ei ; µk , Σk ) +            log         wi π k N (ei ; µk , Σk ).    (24)
         i=1                                i=1         k=1                                i=N +1         k=1


Leveraging Jensen’s inequality, we obtain a lower bound of the above quantity (denoting as Θ the
collection of parameters {µk , Σk }K
                                   k=1 and π):

                                N
                                X              K
                                               X                              NX
                                                                               +Ns              K
                                                                                                X
            LGMM (Θ, {wi }) =         wi log         πk N (ei ; µk , Σk ) +            wi log         πk N (ei ; µk , Σk ) + C,              (25)
                                i=1            k=1                            i=N +1            k=1


where C is a constant.
In the following theoretical analysis, we consider the following three different configurations of the
weights wi .
Definition I.1 (Weight Configurations). We define three different weight configurations as follows:
                                   1
       • Identical Weights: wi = N +N s
                                        , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N + Ns }
                                                       1
                                           i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }
                                                         N,
       • Ground-Truth Weights : wi =
                                       0, i ∈ {N + 1, N + 2, . . . , N + Ns }
                                       (
                                                  1
                                         λ1 ∈ [ N +N  , 1 ], i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }
                                                    s N
       • Attention-Based Weights: wi =              1
                                         λ2 ∈ [0, N +Ns ], i ∈ {N + 1, N + 2, . . . , N + Ns }
Definition I.2 (Advanced Weight Configurations). We define three different weight configurations
as follows:
                                   1
       • Identical Weights: wi = N +N s
                                        , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N + Ns }
                                                       1
       • Ground-Truth Weights : wi =  N , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }
                                      0, i ∈ {N + 1, N + 2, . . . , N + Ns }
                                      (
                                        [ 1 , 1 ], i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }
       • Attention-Based Weights: wi ∈ N +N1s N
                                        [0, N +Ns ], i ∈ {N + 1, N + 2, . . . , N + Ns }
Definition I.3 (Optimal Parameters). With Definition I.1, the corresponding optimal parameters
are then defined as follows:
                                      ΘI = arg max L(Θ; w → Identical),                                                                     (26)
                                                Θ
                                      ΘG = arg max L(Θ; w → GT),                                                                            (27)
                                                Θ
                                      ΘA = arg max L(Θ; w → Attention),                                                                     (28)
                                                Θ
where w → Identical, w → GT, and w → Attention indicates that ‘Identical Weights’, ‘Ground-
Truth Weights’, and ‘Attention-Based Weights’ are used, respectively.


                                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma I.1. Suppose we have two series of functions {f1,i (x)} and {f2,i (x)}, with two non-
negative weighting parameters λ1 , λ2 satisfying N λ1 + Ns λ2 = 1. We define the final objective
function f (·) as:
                                                         N
                                                         X                          Ns
                                                                                    X
                               f (x; λ1 , λ2 ) = λ1            f1,i (x) + λ2                f2,i (x).        (29)
                                                         i=1                       i=N +1

We assume two pairs of parameters (λ1 , λ2 ) and (λ′1 , λ′2 ), where
                                                          λ1 ≥ λ′1 ,                                         (30)
                                                          λ2 ≤ λ′2 .                                         (31)

Defining the optimal values of the objective function for different weighting parameters as
                                              x
                                              b = arg max f (x; λ1 , λ2 ),                                   (32)
                                                            x
                                              b′ = arg max f (x; λ′1 , λ′2 ),
                                              x                                                              (33)
                                                               x
we then have that
                                               f (b               x′ ; N1 , 0).
                                                  x; N1 , 0) ≥ f (b                                          (34)

Proof. We prove this theorem by contradiction. Suppose that we have
                                               f (b               x′ ; N1 , 0).
                                                  x; N1 , 0) < f (b                                          (35)

According to Eqn. 30, i.e., λ1 ≥ λ′1 , and the equation N λ1 + Ns λ2 = 1, we have
                                                     1−N λ′1
                                    λ1 λ′2 = λ1        Ns    ≥ λ′1 1−N
                                                                     Ns
                                                                       λ1
                                                                          = λ′1 λ2 .                         (36)

According to Eqn. 33, we have the following equality:
                                                x; λ′1 , λ′2 ) ≤ f (b
                                             f (b                   x′ ; λ′1 , λ′2 ).                        (37)
Combined with the aforementioned assumption in Eqn. 35, we have that
                                       N
                                       X                                 Ns
                                                                         X
        λ′2 f (b
               x; λ1 , λ2 ) = λ1 λ′2               x) + λ2 λ′2
                                             f1,i (b                             f2,i (b
                                                                                       x)                    (38)
                                       i=1                              i=N +1
                 N
                 X                           Ns
                                             X                                                          N
                                                                                                        X
      =(λ′1 λ2               x) + λ′2 λ2
                       f1,i (b                             x)) + (N (λ1 λ′2 − λ′1 λ2 ) · N1
                                                     f2,i (b                                  f1,i (b
                                                                                                    x))      (39)
               i=1                        i=N +1                                          i=1

             x; λ′1 , λ′2 ) + N (λ1 λ′2 − λ′1 λ2 )f (b
      =λ2 f (b                                         x; N1 , 0)                                            (40)
             x′ ; λ′1 , λ′2 ) + N (λ1 λ′2 − λ′1 λ2 )f (b
      <λ2 f (b                                          x′ ; N1 , 0)                                         (41)
               XN                           XNs                                            XN
      =(λ′1 λ2       f1,i (b x′ ) + λ′2 λ2              x′ )) + (N (λ1 λ′2 − λ′1 λ2 ) · N1
                                                  f2,i (b                                            x′ ))
                                                                                               f1,i (b       (42)
               i=1                         i=N +1                                          i=1
                N
                X                            Ns
                                             X
      =λ1 λ′2               x′ ) + λ2 λ′2
                      f1,i (b                              x′ )
                                                     f2,i (b                                                 (43)
                i=1                         i=N +1
      =λ′2 f (b  ′
              x ; λ1 , λ2 ),                                                                                 (44)
which contradicts the definition of x
                                    b in Eqn. 32 (i.e., x
                                                        b maximizes f (x; λ1 , λ2 )), completing the
proof.
Lemma I.2. Suppose we have two series of functions {f1,i (x)} and {f2,i (x)}, with two series
                                                                       Ns                PN
of non-negative weighting parameters λ1 = [λ1,i ]N   i=1 , λ2 = [λ2,i ]i=N +1 satisfying  i=1 λ1,i +
PNs
   i=N +1 λ2,i = 1. We define the final objective function f (·) as:
                                                  N
                                                  X                              Ns
                                                                                 X
                             f (x; λ1 , λ2 ) =           λ1,i f1,i (x) +                λ2,i f2,i (x).       (45)
                                                   i=1                        i=N +1



                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We assume two pairs of parameters (λ1 , λ2 ) and (λ′1 , λ′2 ), where
                                λ1,i ≥ λ′1,i , i ∈ {1, 2, ..., N },                                           (46)
                                λ2,i ≤ λ′2,i ,    i ∈ {N + 1, N + 2, ..., Ns }.                               (47)

Defining the optimal values of the objective function for different weighting parameters as
                                         x
                                         b = arg max f (x; λ1 , λ2 ),                                         (48)
                                                       x
                                         b′ = arg max f (x; λ′1 , λ′2 ),
                                         x                                                                    (49)
                                                       x
                                         x∗ = arg max f (x, N
                                                            1
                                                              , 0).                                           (50)
Under the following Assumptions (with 1 and 0 denoting vectors with all entries equal to 1 and 0,
respectively):

                            x′ , 0, λ2 ).
            x, 0, λ2 ) ≤ f (b
      1. f (b
      2. f (x; λ, 0) ≥ f (x′ ; λ, 0), iff ∥x − x∗ ∥ ≤ ∥x′ − x∗ ∥, λ ≥ 0, ∥λ∥1 = 1.

we have that
                                            f (b  1
                                               x; N           x′ ; N
                                                    , 0) ≥ f (b    1
                                                                     , 0).                                    (51)

Proof. We start with proving the following equality by contradiction:
                                              x − x∗ ∥ ≤ ∥b
                                             ∥b           x′ − x∗ ∥.                                          (52)
Specifically, if
                                              x − x∗ ∥ > ∥b
                                             ∥b           x′ − x∗ ∥,                                          (53)
leveraging the Assumption 1 and 2 above, we have that
   f (b
      x; λ1 , λ2 ) = f (b
                        x; λ1 , 0) + f (b               x′ ; λ1 , 0) + f (b
                                        x; 0, λ2 ) < f (b                 x′ ; 0, λ2 ) = f (b
                                                                                            x′ ; λ1 , λ2 ),   (54)
which contradicts Eqn. 48. Therefore, Eqn. 52 holds.
Combining Eqn. 52 and Assumption 2 above, we have that
                                            f (b  1
                                               x; N           x′ ; N
                                                    , 0) ≥ f (b    1
                                                                     , 0),                                    (55)
concluding the proof.

Based on the definitions and lemmas above, we have the following theorems:
Theorem I.3 (Advantage of ΘA in the Simplified Case). With Definition I.1 and Definition I.3,
comparing ΘI , ΘG , and ΘA by evaluating them on the marginal log-likelihood of non-stop-words,
i.e., L(·, w → GT), we have that
               LGMM (ΘI ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘG ; w → GT).                                  (56)

Proof. First, by definition one can easily find that ΘG achieves the largest L(·; w → GT) among
the three:
   max[LGM M (ΘI ; w →   GT), LGM M (ΘA ; w → GT)] ≤ max LGM M (Θ; w → GT) = LGM M (ΘG ; w → GT).              (57)
                                                            Θ


Next, we set {wi }N      i=1   to λ1 and {wi }N      +Ns
                                                   i=N +1  to λ2 , respectively; we rewrite
   PK
log k=1 πk N (ei ; µk , Σk ) as f1,i (x) for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N } and f2,i (x) for i ∈
{N + 1, N + 1, . . . , N + Ns }, where x corresponds to Θ ≜ (π, {µk , Σk }K
                                                                          k=1 ). By Lemma I.1, we
have that
                            LGMM (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘG ; w → GT).                                          (58)

Combining Eqn. 57 and Eqn. 58 concludes the proof.


                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem I.3 shows that under mild assumptions, the attention-based weights can help produce better
estimates of Θ in the presence of noisy stop-words and therefore learns higher-quality topics from
the corpus, improving interpretability of PLMs.
Theorem I.4 (Advantage of ΘA in the General Case). With Definition I.2 and Definition I.3,
comparing ΘI , ΘG , and ΘA by evaluating them on the marginal log-likelihood of non-stop-words,
i.e., LGM M (·, w → GT), we have that
              LGMM (ΘI ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘG ; w → GT).                                          (59)

Proof. First, by definition one can easily find that ΘG achieves the largest L(·; w → GT) among
the three:
         max[LGMM (ΘI ; w →    GT), LGMM (ΘA ; w → GT)] ≤ max LGMM (Θ; w → GT) = LGMM (ΘG ; w → GT).                  (60)
                                                                     Θ

                                                                           N +Ns
Next, we invoke Lemma I.2 by (1) setting {wi }N    i=1 to λ1 and {wi }i=N +1 to λ2 , respectively, and
                   PK
(2) rewriting log k=1 πk N (ei ; µk , Σk ) as f1,i (x) for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N } and f2,i (x) for i ∈ {N +
1, N + 1, . . . , N + Ns }, where x corresponds to Θ ≜ (π, {µk , Σk }K       k=1 ). By Lemma I.2, we then
have that
                              LGMM (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LGMM (ΘG ; w → GT).                                               (61)
Note that because f1,i (·) and f2,i (·) are Gaussian, therefore Assumption 1 and 2 in Lemma I.2 hold
naturally under mild regularity conditions.
Combining Eqn. 60 and Eqn. 61 concludes the proof.

I.2   VALANCE AS I NTERPRETERS

As mentioned in Eqn. B , the ELBO of the marginal likelihood (denoting as Θ the collection of
parameters ϕ, γ and {µk , Σk }K
                              k=1 ) is as follows:
                                  XL′
          LVALANCE (Θ; {wi }) =           Eq [log p(emj |zmj , µz        , Σzmj )]
                                    j=1                             mj

                                                                        T −1                      H/2      1/2
                                  X           X
                                                          1 (e
                                                  ϕmjk {− 2
                              =         wmj                    mj − µk ) Σk (emj − µk ) − log[(2π)    |Σk |    ]}.    (62)
                                  m,j         k



Based on the definitions and lemmas above, we have the following theorems:
Theorem I.5 (Advantage of ΘA in the Simplified Case). With Definition I.1 and Definition I.3,
comparing ΘI , ΘG , and ΘA by evaluating them on the marginal log-likelihood of non-stop-words,
i.e., L(·, w → GT), we have that
      LVALANCE (ΘI ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).                                      (63)

Proof. First, by definition one can easily find that ΘG achieves the largest L(·; w → GT) among
the three:
  max[LVALANCE (ΘI ; w →   GT), LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT)] ≤ max LVALANCE (Θ; w → GT) = LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).          (64)
                                                                    Θ


                                                                           N +N
Next, we set ∪m {wmj }N                                    m
                              j=1 to λ1 and ∪m {wmj }j=Nm +1
                                m                              m,s
                                                                    to λ2 , respectively; we rewrite
               1               T −1                            d/2      1/2
P
    ϕ
   i mji {−      (e
               2 mj    −  µ i )  Σi  (emj    −  µi ) − log[(2π)    |Σ i|    ]} as f1,j (x) for j ∈
∪m {1, 2, . . . , Nm } and f2,j (x) for j ∈ ∪m {Nm + 1, Nm + 1, . . . , Nm + Nm,s }, where x cor-
responds to Θ ≜ (ϕ, γ, {µk , Σk }K    k=1 ). By Lemma I.1, we have that

                           LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).                                          (65)

Combining Eqn. 64 and Eqn. 65 concludes the proof.

Theorem I.5 shows that under mild assumptions, the attention-based weights can help produce better
estimates of Θ in the presence of noisy stop-words and therefore learns higher-quality topics from
the corpus, improving and interpretability of PLMs.


                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem I.6 (Advantage of ΘA in the General Case). With Definition I.2 and Definition I.3,
comparing ΘI , ΘG , and ΘA by evaluating them on the marginal log-likelihood of non-stop-words,
i.e., LV ALAN CE (·, w → GT), we have that
      LVALANCE (ΘI ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).                                (66)

Proof. First, by definition one can easily find that ΘG achieves the largest L(·; w → GT) among
the three:
  max[LVALANCE (ΘI ; w →   GT), LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT)] ≤ max LVALANCE (Θ; w → GT) = LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).    (67)
                                                          Θ

                                                                                              N +N
Next, we invoke Lemma I.2 by (1) setting ∪m {wmj }N                                       m    m,s
                                                              j=1 to λ1 and ∪m {wmj }j=Nm +1 to λ2 ,
                                                                m

                                                1              T −1
respectively, and (2) rewriting i ϕmji {− 2 (emj − µi ) Σi (emj − µi ) − log[(2π) |Σi |1/2 ]}d/2
                                    P
as f1,j (x) for j ∈ ∪m {1, 2, . . . , Nm } and f2,j (x) for j ∈ ∪m {Nm + 1, Nm + 1, . . . , Nm + Nm,s },
where x corresponds to Θ ≜ (ϕ, γ, {µk , Σk }K       k=1 ). By Lemma I.2, we then have that

                           LVALANCE (ΘA ; w → GT) ≤ LVALANCE (ΘG ; w → GT).                                    (68)
Note that because f1,j (·) and f2,j (·) are very close to Gaussian, therefore Assumption 1 and 2
in Lemma I.2 hold naturally under mild regularity conditions.
Combining Eqn. 67 and Eqn. 68 concludes the proof.


                                                        23
