Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING TO C OMPOSE : I MPROVING O BJECT C EN -
TRIC L EARNING BY I NJECTING C OMPOSITIONALITY

    Whie Jung, Jaehoon Yoo, Sungjin Ahn, Seunghoon Hong
    School of Computing, KAIST
    {whieya, wogns98, sungjin.ahn, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr



                                             A BSTRACT

         Learning compositional representation is a key aspect of object-centric learning as
         it enables flexible systematic generalization and supports complex visual reasoning.
         However, most of the existing approaches rely on auto-encoding objective, while
         the compositionality is implicitly imposed by the architectural or algorithmic bias
         in the encoder. This misalignment between auto-encoding objective and learning
         compositionality often results in failure of capturing meaningful object represen-
         tations. In this study, we propose a novel objective that explicitly encourages
         compositionality of the representations. Built upon the existing object-centric
         learning framework (e.g., slot attention), our method incorporates additional con-
         straints that an arbitrary mixture of object representations from two images should
         be valid by maximizing the likelihood of the composite data. We demonstrate that
         incorporating our objective to the existing framework consistently improves the
         objective-centric learning and enhances the robustness to the architectural choices.


1    I NTRODUCTION

As the world is highly compositional in nature, relatively few composable units, such as objects or
words, can describe infinitely many observations. Consequently, human intelligence has evolved to
recognize the environment as a combination of composable units, (e.g., objects) which enables rapid
adaptation to unseen situations by recomposing the already learned concepts (Spelke, 1990; Lake
et al., 2017). Mimicking human intelligence, perceiving environment with composable abstractions
have shown consistent improvement in tasks related to systematic generalization (Kuo et al., 2021;
Bogin et al., 2021; Rahaman et al., 2021), and visual reasoning tasks (D’Amario et al., 2021; Assouel
et al., 2022) compared to distributed counterparts.
Inheriting this spirit, object-centric learning (Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019; Engelcke et al.,
2020; Locatello et al., 2020) aims to discover a composable abstraction purely from data without
external supervision. Instead of depicting a scene with a distributed representation, it decomposes
the scene into a set of latent representations, where each latent is expected to capture a distinct
object. To discover such representation in an unsupervised manner, most existing works employed an
auto-encoding framework, where the model is trained to encode the scene into a set of representations
and decode them back to the original image.
However, the auto-encoding objective is inherently insufficient to learn compositional representation,
since maximizing the reconstruction quality does not necessarily requires the object-level disentangle-
ment. To reduce this gap, the existing works incorporate strong inductive biases to further regularize
the encoder, such as architectural bias (Locatello et al., 2020) or algorithmic bias (Burgess et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020). However, it has been widely observed that these methods are
highly sensitive to the choice of hyper-parameters, such as encoder and decoder architectures, and a
number of slots, often resulting in suboptimal decompositions by position or partial attributes (Singh
et al., 2022a; Sajjadi et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2023) instead of objects. Finding the optimal model
configuration is also not straightforward in practice due to the missing object labels.
In this work, we present a novel objective that directly optimizes the compositionality of repre-
sentations. Based upon the auto-encoding framework, our method extracts object representations
independently from two distinct images and simulates their composition by the random mixture.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The composite representation is rendered to an image by the decoder, whose likelihood is evaluated
by the generative prior. The encoder is then jointly optimized to minimize the reconstruction error
of the individual images to encode relevant information of the scene (auto-encoding path) while
maximizing the likelihood of the composite image to ensure the compositionality of the representation
(composition path). Overall, our method can be viewed as extending the conventional auto-encoding
approach with an additional regularization on compositionality. We show that directly injecting
compositionality this way significantly boosts the overall quality of object-centric representations
and robustness in training.
Our contributions are as follows. (1) We introduce a novel objective that explicitly encourages
compositionality of representations. To this end, we investigate strategies to simulate the composi-
tional construction of an image and propose a learning objective for maximizing the likelihood of
the composite images. (2) We evaluate our framework on four datasets and verify that our model
consistently surpasses auto-encoding based baselines by a substantial margin. (3) We show that our
objective enhances the robustness of object-centric learning on three major factors, such as number
of latents, encoder and decoder architectures.

2    P RELIMINARY
Problem setup Object-centric learning aims to discover a set of composable representations from
an unlabeled image. Formally, given an image x ∈ RH×W ×C represented by either RGB pixels or
feature from the pre-trained encoder, the objective is to extract the set S = {s1 , . . . , sN } = Eθ (x),
where each element si ∈ RD corresponds to the representation of a composable concept (e.g., an
object). Since object concepts should emerge from the data without supervision, a typical approach is
to use an auto-encoding framework to formulate the learning process. Formally, the object-centric
encoder Eθ : RH×W ×C → RN ×D is trained jointly with a decoder Dϕ : RN ×D →            − RH×W ×C by
minimizing the reconstruction loss.
                                   LAE (θ, ϕ) = Ex [d(x, Dϕ (Eθ (x))] ,                               (1)
where d is a distance metric (e.g., MSE).

Slot Attention Encoder Eθ Since the auto-encoding objective is insufficient to learn highly
structured representation, the existing approaches incorporate a strong architectural bias in the
encoder Eθ to guide the object-level disentanglement in S. Among many variants, we consider Slot
Attention encoder Locatello et al. (2020) due to its popularity and generality. It employs a dot-product
attention mechanism between a query (slot) and a key (input), where normalization is applied over
the slots by:
                                                   k(z) · q(S)T

                         A(x, S) = softmax             √           ∈ RM ×N ,                         (2)
                                          N               D
                               ′
where z = fθ (x) ∈ RM ×D is a flattened input feature encoded by CNN encoder fθ , and k, q
represents linear projection matrices. Note that softmax operation is normalized in the query (slots)
direction, inducing competition among slots. Based on Equation 2, the slots are iteratively refined by:
         S(n+1) = GRU(S(n) , Normalize(A(x, S(n) )T · v(z))), S(0) ∼ N (µ, diag(σ)).                  (3)

Here, S(n) denotes the slot representation after n iterations, µ, σ are learnable parameters characteriz-
ing the distribution of the initial slots, v is a linear projection matrix, and Normalize(·) is a weighted
mean operation introduced by Locatello et al. (2020) to improve stability of the attention.

Slot Decoder Dϕ While the architectural choice for Dϕ is not constrained to a specific form in
principle, subsequent works (Singh et al., 2022a; Jiang et al., 2023) have empirically found that the
choice of the decoder crucially impacts the quality of the object-centric representation. Locatello
et al. (2020) proposed a pixel-mixture decoder that renders each slot independently into pixels and
combines them with alpha-blending. Although slot-wise decoding provides a strong incentive for
the encoder to capture distinct objects in each slot, its limited expressiveness hinders its application
to complex scenes. To address this issue, Singh et al. (2022a) employed Transformer decoder that
takes the entire slots S as an input and produces an image in an autoregressive manner. By modeling


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the complex interactions among the slots, it has shown great improvements in slot representation
learning even in complex scenes.
Recently, Jiang et al. (2023) employed a diffusion model for the slot decoder. Instead of directly recon-
structing an input image x, it optimizes the auto-encoding of Equation 1 via denoising objective (Ho
et al., 2020) by:
               LDiff (θ, ϕ) = Eϵ∼N (0,I),t∼U (0,1) w(t) · ∥Dϕ (xt , t, S = Eθ (x)) − ϵ∥2 ,

                                                                                                      (4)
               √         √
where xt = ᾱt x + 1 − ᾱt is an corrupted image of an input x by the forward diffusion process
                 Qt
at step t, ᾱt = i (1 − βi ) is a schedule function, and w(t) is the weighting parameter. In practice,
the diffusion decoder is implemented based on UNet architecture (Rombach et al., 2022), where each
layer consists of a CNN-layer followed by a slot-conditioned Transformer. Once trained, the decoder
generates an image x ∼ pϕ (x|S) using iterative denoising, starting from the random Gaussian
noise (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022). Employing a diffusion decoder significantly enhances
object-centric representation and generation quality compared to previous arts especially in complex
scenes Jiang et al. (2023).

2.1   L IMITATIONS

While the slot attention with auto-encoding objectives has shown promise in object-centric learning,
its success highly depends on the model architectures, such as number of slots and architectures
of the encoder and decoder, where suboptimal configuration often leads to dividing the scenes into
tessellations (Singh et al., 2022a; Sajjadi et al., 2022) and objects into the parts (Jiang et al., 2023).
However, the optimal model configuration varies depending on the datasets, and discovering them
through cross-validation is practically infeasible due to the missing object labels in an unsupervised
setting. We argue that such instability is primarily because the auto-encoding objective is inherently
misaligned with the one for object-centric learning, since the former guides the encoder only to
minimize the information loss on the input, while the latter demands the object-level disentanglement
in the representation, potentially sacrificing the reconstruction quality. This motivates us to seek an
alternative approach that directly encourages object-level disentanglement in the objective function
instead of designing architectural biases.

3     L EARNING TO C OMPOSE
Our goal is to improve object-centric learning by modifying its objective function to be more directly
aligned with learning compositional slot representation than the auto-encoding loss. Our main
intuition is that arbitrary compositions of object representation are likely to yield another valid
representation. To realize this intuition, our framework is designed to generate composite images by
mixing slot representations from two images and maximize their validity measured by the data prior.
Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework of our method. Our framework is built upon the conven-
tional object-centric learning that learns both the slot encoder and decoder by the auto-encoding path
on individual images (Section 2). To impose compositionality on slot representation, we incorporate
an additional composition path that constructs a composite slot representation from two images by
the mixing strategy (Section 3.1) and assesses the quality of the image generated from the mixed slots
by the generative prior (Section 3.2). This way, the auto-encoding path ensures that each slot contains
the relevant information of an input image, while such slots are constrained to capture composable
components of the scenes (e.g., objects) by regularizing the encoder through the composition path.

3.1   M IXING S TRATEGY FOR COMPOSING SLOT REPRESENTATION

Given S1 , S2 ∈ RN ×D extracted from two distinct images x1 , x2 , we construct their composite slot
representation Sc ∈ RN ×D by
                                       Sc = π(S1 , S2 ),                                         (5)
where π(·, ·) denotes a composition function of two sets. The primary role of the composition
function is to simulate potential combinations of slot-wise compositions. Since our goal is to
maximize the compositionality of unseen slot combinations, the composition function should be
capable of exploring a broad range of compositional possibilities. Below, we introduce simple
instantiations of such function.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Auto-encoding Path
      Image 1                    Slot 1                  Reconstruction 1


                   Encoder                   Decoder

                                                                                  Composition Path


                        Mixing              (one-shot)                        Generative
                                             Decoder                            Prior
                                                                                               Validity
                        Slots

                                                         Composite Image



                   Encoder                   Decoder


      Image 2                    Slot 2                  Reconstruction 2


Figure 1: Overview of our method. Our framework consists of two paths: an auto-encoding
path and a composition path. The auto-encoding path ensures slot representations encode relevant
information about an image. In contrast, the composition path encourages the compositionality of the
representations by constructing the composite representation through the mixture of slots from two
separate images (Section 3.1), and assessing the quality of the composite image by the generative
prior (Section 3.2). The encoder is jointly optimized by both paths.
                                                                                                      N
Random Sampling In this approach, we randomly sample N slots among 2N slots i.e., Sc ∼
(S1 ∪ S2 ). As it explores over all of the possible combinations, this composition function encourages
the slot representation itself to be highly composable to generate valid images for any combinations.
On the other hand, it may produce invalid combinations of slots on rare occasions, e.g., omitting the
background slots or sampling two objects placed in the same location.

Sharing Slot initialization One way to mitigate such suspicious compositions is to constrain Sc
to be valid composition of the scene. However, strictly ensuring this constraint is non-trivial due
to the stochastic nature of slot attention i.e., each slot is sampled stochastically from its underlying
distribution and the association between the slots and scenes varies depending on the initialization.
Instead, we adopt a rather simple approach that employs the identical slot initialization S(0) in
Equation 3 for two images, and sample the exclusive set of slots. Formally, let I1 and I2 be a random
partition of slot indices i.e., I1 ∪ I2 = {1, ..., N }, I1 ∩ I2 = ∅. Then we construct the composite slot
by Sc = S1I1 ∪ S2I2 , where S1 and S2 are slots extracted by Equation 3 from x1 and x2 , respectively,
which are initialized with the same S(0) .The underlying intuition is that the slot initialization is
reasonably correlated with the objects it captures (Figure 6), hence sampling from exclusive slots is
likely to be valid scenes than the random sampling.

3.2     M AXIMIZING LIKELIHOOD OF THE COMPOSITE IMAGE

Given the composite slot Sc obtained by the previous section, our next step is quantifying its validity
i.e., measuring how valid the composition of two image slots is. To this end, we decode it back to an
image by xc = Dϕ (Ss ) and measure the likelihood of the image using the generative prior p(xc ).

Generative Prior To model the generative prior p(xc ), we opt for a diffusion model (Ho et al.,
2020) due to its excellence in generation quality and mode coverage (Xiao et al., 2022). The
latter is especially important in our framework since the model evaluates the prior over potentially
out-of-distribution samples generated by the composition (Section 3.1). Instead of introducing an
additional pre-trained diffusion model, we employ the diffusion-based decoder in the auto-encoding
path (Section 2), and reuse it as a generative prior. This way, our decoder Dϕ is trained by minimizing
the reconstruction loss by denoising objective in Equation 4, while serving as a generative prior in
the composition path. It greatly improves the parameter-efficiency and memory, and the need for
pre-trained generative prior per dataset.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maximizing p(xc ) Given the generative prior, we maximize the likelihood p(xc ) with respect to
xc in the composition path. Since LDiff in Equation 4 is minimizing the upper bound of negative log
likelihood of xc (Ho et al., 2020), minimizing LDiff with respect to xc leads to the maximization of
the likelihood p(xc ). However, computing the gradient of LDiff requires expensive computation of
Jacobian maxtrix of the decoder and it often degrades the overall training stability. Following (Poole
et al., 2022), the gradient of LDiff with respect to θ can be approximated as:
                                                                              ∂xc
                          ∇θ LPrior (θ) = Et,ϵ [w(t)(Dϕ (xct , t, Sc ) − ϵ)       ].                      (6)
                                                                              ∂θ
where ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is a noise, t ∼ √ U(tmin , tmax ) is a timestep, respectively, w(t) is a weighting
function dependent to t, and xct = ᾱt xc + σt ϵ is a corrupted image of xc from forward diffusion
process. By updating the encoder parameters θ with ∇θ LPrior , xc is guided toward high probability
density region following the diffusion prior. Note that optimization of the Equation 6 is with only
respect to the encoder parameter while fixing the decoder. It prevents suspicious collaboration
between the encoder and decoders in generating composite images from suboptimal slots.

Surrogate One-Shot Decoder As discussed earlier, our framework exploits the diffusion model
Dϕ as a decoder and generative prior in the auto-encoding and composition paths, respectively.
One drawback is that the diffusion decoder requires an iterative denoising process to generate the
composite image xc , which takes significant time and makes the backpropagation through the decoder
non-trivial. To address this problem, we employ a one-shot decoder Dψ as a surrogate for Dϕ to
support fast and differentiable decoding of xc . 1
We employ a bidirectional Transformer (Devlin et al., 2019) that takes the composite slot Sc and
the learnable mask tokens m ∈ RHW ×C as input, and produces the composite image by a single
forward process by xc = Dψ (m, Sc ). The decoder is trained along with the auto-encoding path by:

                                LRecon (θ, ψ) = ||Dψ (m, Eθ (x)) − x||2 .                                 (7)
Note that the generation quality of the one-shot decoder Dψ is behind the powerful diffusion decoder
Dϕ , and serves only to compute the xc in Equation 6. We observe that such weak decoder is sufficient
to compute the meaningful gradient through the Equation 6, presumably because the gradients are
accumulated over various noise levels t.

3.3   L EARNING O BJECTIVE

In this section, we summarize the overall framework and objective function. Our framework consists
of two paths; auto-encoding path and composition path. In auto-encoding path, encoder Eθ and
two different decoders Dϕ , Dψ are trained to minimize auto-encoding objective in Equation 4 and
Equation 7. In composition path, we first extract Sc with Equation 5 and generate xc with the
deterministic decoder Dψ , and update the encoder to maximize the Equation 6 while fixing decoders
Dϕ and Dψ . We find that incorporating an additional regularization term on the slot attention mask is
helpful in enhancing object-centric representations:
                      LReg (θ) = A1 · sg(||x1 − xc ||2 ) + A2 · sg(||x2 − xc ||2 ),                       (8)
                         (n)                     (n)
where A1 = A(x2 , S1 ), A2 = A(x1 , S2 ) are attention masks from the last iteration of slot
attention for x1 , x2 (Equation 2), respectively, and sg(·) denotes stop-gradient operator. It encourages
the source and the composite images to be consistent over the object area captured by the slots,
enhancing the content-preserving composition. The overall objective is then formulated as follow:
       LTotal (θ, ϕ, ψ) = λPrior LPrior (θ) + λDiff LDiff (θ, ϕ) + λRecon LRecon (θ, ψ) + λReg LReg (θ)   (9)
where λPrior , λDiff , λRecon , λReg are hyperparameters for controlling the importance of each term. We
empirically find that λPrior = λDiff = λRecon = 1.0, λReg = 0.25 generally works well and use it
throughout the experiments.
  1
    We also consider one-step denoising result of the diffusion decoder using Tweedie’s formula (Stein, 1981;
Robbins, 1992) but observe severe degradation in performance due to its inferior quality.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4       R ELATED W ORK

Object-centric learning The most dominant paradigm of object-centric learning is employing the
auto-encoding objective (Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019; Engelcke et al., 2020; 2021; Lin
et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Eslami et al., 2016; Crawford & Pineau, 2019). To guide the model
to learn structured representation under reconstruction loss, Locatello et al. (2020) introduces Slot
Attention, where each slot is iteratively refined with dot-product attention mechanism normalized
in slot direction, inducing competition between the slots. Follow-up studies (Singh et al., 2022a;
Seitzer et al., 2022; Sajjadi et al., 2022) demonstrate that Slot Attention with an auto-encoding
objective has the potential to attain object-wise disentanglement even in complex scenes. Nonetheless,
auto-encoding alone often involves training instability, which leads to attention-leaking problem (Kim
et al., 2023), or dividing the scene into Voronoi tessellations (Sajjadi et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2023).
To overcome such challenges, there have been a few attempts on revising the learning objective such
as replacing image reconstruction loss with denoising objective (Jiang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024)
or contrastive loss (Hénaff et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2022). Nevertheless, these approaches still do not
impose direct learning of object-centric representations.
Generative Prior There are increasing interests in exploiting the knowledge pre-trained from gen-
erative prior to various applications such as solving inverse problems (Chung et al., 2023), guidance
in conditional generation (Graikos et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), and image manipulations (Ruiz et al.,
2023a; Zhang et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023b). One prominent approach in this direction is text-to-3D
Generation, where a large-scale pre-trained 2D diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022) is leveraged to generate realistic 3D data without ground-truth (Wang et al., 2023a; Lin et al.,
2023; Metzer et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). The seminal work by (Poole et al., 2022) formulates a
loss based on a probability density distillation to distill a pre-trained 2D image prior to a 3D model.
Back-propagating the loss through a randomly initialized 3D model, e.g., NeRF (Mildenhall et al.,
2020), the model gradually updates to generate high-fidelity 3D renderings. Inspired by this line of
work, we employ a generative model in our approach to maximize the validity of the given images.

5       E XPERIMENT

Implementation Details We base our implementation on existing frameworks (Singh et al., 2022a;
Jiang et al., 2023). We employ the features from the pre-trained auto-encoder2 to represent an image.
For the slot encoder, we employ the CNN based on UNet architecture (Singh et al., 2022b; Jiang et al.,
2023) to produce a high-resolution attention map. Also, we employ an implicit Slot Attention (Chang
et al., 2022) to stabilize the iterative refinement process in slot attention. For the slot mixing strategy,
we opt for a sampling with sharing slot initializations for all the experiments unless specified, since
it shows slightly better performance than the random sampling strategy. When we compute LPrior
(Equation 6), we use tmin = 0.02, tmax = 0.5 following a recent report in (Wang et al., 2023b) that
employing too high noise level impairs the optimization.
Datasets We validate our method on four datasets. CLEVRTex (Karazija et al., 2021) consists of
various rigid objects with homogeneous textures. MultiShapeNet (Stelzner et al., 2021) includes more
complex and realistic furniture objects. PTR (Hong et al., 2021) and Super-CLEVR (Li et al., 2023)
contain objects composed of multi-colored parts and textures. All of the datasets are center-cropped
and resized to 128x128 resolution images. .
Baselines We compare our method against two strong baselines in the literature, SLATE (Singh
et al., 2022a) and LSD (Jiang et al., 2023), which employ autoregressive Transformer and diffusion-
based decoders, respectively. Note that our method without composition path reduces to LSD. For a
fair comparison, we employ the same encoder architecture based on slot attention (Locatello et al.,
2020) in all compared methods including ours. For LSD and our method, we employ the same
pre-trained auto-encoder (Rombach et al., 2022) to represent an input image. Since SLATE runs on
discrete features, we employ the features from the pre-trained VQGAN model (Esser et al., 2021)
and denote it as SLATE+. All baselines including ours are trained for 200K iterations.
Evaluation Metrics Following the previous works (Jiang et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2022a;b; Chang
et al., 2022), we report the unsupervised segmentation performance with three measures: Adjusted
    2
        https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/sd-vae-ft-ema-original


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison results on unsupervised object segmentation. We evaluate the how well the
slot attention masks coincide with the ground-truth objects using FG-ARI, mIoU, and mBO (The
higher is better). All results are evaluated on held-out validation set.
                            (a) CLEVRTex                                        (b) MultiShapeNet
             Model        FG-ARI          mIoU     mBO           Model          FG-ARI      mIoU     mBO
             SLATE+        71.29          52.04    52.17         SLATE+          70.44      15.55    15.64
             LSD           76.44          72.32    72.44         LSD             67.72      15.39    15.46
             Ours          93.06          74.82    75.36         Ours            89.8       59.21    59.4

                                (c) PTR                                         (d) Super-CLEVR
             Model        FG-ARI          mIoU     mBO           Model          FG-ARI       mIoU    mBO
             SLATE+        91.25           14.1    14.22         SLATE+          43.73       29.12   29.49
             LSD            61.1          10.18    10.33         LSD             54.79       14.12   14.43
             Ours          90.65          40.89    41.45         Ours            63.08       47.17   48.03
GT
Ours
SLATE+ LSD


                     ClevrTex                MultiShapeNet                PTR                 Super-CLEVR
Figure 2: Qualitative results on unsupervised object segmentation. The baselines tend to split an
object into different slots (CleverTex) and/or combine different objects and background into a single
(MultiShapeNet, PGR, Super-CLEVR). On the other hand, our method produces consistently better
object masks, showing improved disentanglement of objects and background in all datasets. More
results are presented in the Figure 7. Zoom in for better view.

rand index for foreground objects (FG-ARI), mean intersection over union (mIoU), and mean best
overlap (mBO). These metrics measure the overlap between the slot attention masks and ground-truth
object masks, where FG-ARI focuses more on the coverage of theobject area.

5.1            U NSUPERVISED O BJECT S EGMENTATION

We first present the comparison results of our method with baselines on unsupervised object segmen-
tation. Table 1 summarizes the quantitative results. Our method significantly improves the FG-ARI
scores over the baselines in all datasets (8 to 29% improvement) except PTR, indicating that it captures
an object holistically into an individual slot while the baselines tend to split the object into multiple
parts and distribute it across multiple slots. In terms of mIoU and mBO, our method improves the
baselines over all datasets, especially when the background is monolithic (MultiShapeNet, PTR, and
Super-CLEVR). It indicates that the baselines struggle to separate the objects from the background
when there exists a strong correlation between them, while our method can still robustly identify
the objects. Overall, the results indicate that our method consistently outperforms the baselines by a
significant margin. Notably, the consistent and significant improvement over LSD indicates that our
regularization on the compositionality is effective in learning object-centric representation.
We also present the qualitative results in Figure 2. It shows that SLATE frequently splits the
foreground object masks into multiple segments in CLEVRTex and Super-CLEVR datasets, and fails
to capture object entities in PTR and MultiShapeNet. Similarly, LSD fails to segment the object in all
datasets except CLEVRTex dataset, and tends to rely on positional bias in PTR and Super-CLEVR.
In contrast, our method consistently captures objects with tight boundaries.


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              90
                                              80                                    90
                                              70
                                                                                    80


                                     FG-ARI


                                                                           FG-ARI
                                              60
                                              50                                    70
                                              40                                                            100%
                                                                                                            133%
                                              30                   UNet             60                      166%
                                              20                   CNN                                      200%
                                              10 SLATE+   LSD      Ours                  SLATE+    LSD     Ours
      (a) Number of slots                     (b) Encoder architecture                   (c) Decoder capacity

Figure 3: Robustness against various architectural biases. We evaluate the robustness of our model
various different number of slots, encoder architectures, and decoder capacities. Results based on
mIoU and mBO are presented in Figure 5.
5.2 ROBUSTNESS OF C OMPOSITIONAL O BJECTIVE
Compared to approaches based on auto-encoding, our method directly incorporates the objective
to learn compositional representation, thus is more robust to the choice of architectural biases and
hyperparameters. To demonstrate this, we evaluate our method while varying three major factors
that are known to be highly sensitive in the previous approaches, such as number of slots, encoder
architecture, and decoder capacity. Figure 3 summarizes the result on CLEVRTex dataset based on
FG-ARI. All methods are trained up to 100K iterations for fair comparison.
Number of slots Since object-centric learning assumes no prior knowledge on data, the mismatch
between the number of objects and slots is inevitable in practice. To evaluate such robustness, we
vary the number of slots from 11 to 17. Figure 3a presents the result. It shows that the performance
of the baselines is highly sensitive to the number of slots. Specifically, SLATE tends to deteriorate
more as the number of slots increases. Compared to the baseline, our method achieves more robust
performance by encoding an object into a slot while leaving excess slots empty.
Encoder architecture To identify the effect of slot encoder, we consider two popular architectures
in the literature; a multi-layer CNN encoder (Singh et al., 2022b) and UNet-based encoder (Ron-
neberger et al., 2015). Figure 3b summarizes the result. It shows that employing the weaker encoder
generally deteriorates the performance of the baselines significantly, indicating that architectural bias
in the encoder is critical in the auto-encoding objective. Interestingly, the performance of our method
is hardly affected by such drastic modifications, showing great robustness.
Decoder capacity It is widely observed that the choice of decoder is also crucial in object-centric
learning, since the highly expressive decoder can often bypass the object representation to minimize
the reconstruction loss (Singh et al., 2022a). To examine such effect, we gradually increase the feature
dimensions of the decoder to 133%, 166%, and 200%. Figure 3c summarizes the result. It shows that
increasing the decoder capacity hampers the performance in SLATE. LSD exhibits the opposite trends
showing a large improvement in FG-ARI, although its performance drops significantly in mIoU
(Figure 5). Compared to the baselines, our method is much less sensitive to the decoder capacity,
while the performance tends to improve slightly with increased capacity in all measures.
Overall, the results indicate that the quality of object-centric representation is significantly influenced
by various factors in the auto-encoding-based methods. Conversely, our model consistently delivers
outstanding performance across all configurations, even with major alterations to the encoder archi-
tecture. It demonstrates that our regularization through the composite path can directly encourage the
model to learn compositional representation, greatly enhancing robustness to architectural biases.

5.3    I NTERNAL A NALYSIS

Component-wise Contributions To identify the contributions of each component in our framework,
we conduct an ablation study and present the result in Table 2. The first row corresponds to our
model with only the auto-encoding path, while the last row is the complete version of our model.
Comparing the first row with the others shows that incorporating the composition path significantly
improves overall quality. Adding LPrior , we observe a substantial improvement in all three metrics.
Considering that FG-ARI measures the correct cluster membership of pixels within the objects,


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 2: Ablation study on CLEVRTex dataset. All models are trained up to 100K iterations.

                  LPrior              LReg       Share S(0)               FG-ARI         mIoU              mBO
                     ✘                 ✘              ✘                   42.48          52.26             52.41
                     ✓                 ✘              ✘                   65.76          67.72             67.62
                     ✓                 ✘              ✓                   70.29          69.08             69.28
                     ✘                 ✓              ✓                   65.26          58.81             58.99
                     ✓
                    Source             ✓              ✓                   88.15          75.30             75.64


                                                        Source


                                                                                         Source


                                                                                                                        Source
GT


                             Output                              Output                           Output                         Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


             CLEVRTex                        MultiShapeNet                         PTR                         Super-CLEVR
Figure 4: Investigating object representation through compositional generation. We investigate
the compositionality of learned representations by removing (red arrow) and adding (blue arrow)
object slots between two images and generating the composite image. More results are in Figure 8.
increased FG-ARI indicates that the generative prior encourages the encoder to capture more holistic
object representations. This is because the generative prior penalizes the encoder for fragmenting
the objects, thereby discouraging the generation of unrealistic partial objects in the composite image.
Comparing the second and the third rows, we observe that sharing the slot initialization S(0) slightly
enhances mIoU and mBO scores. This improvement is likely attributed to the increased training
stability by avoiding invalid slot combinations as shown in Figure 6. Incorporating regularization
Lreg alone in the composition path does not improve the performance (fourth row), while combined
with generative prior, it leads to significant improvement.

Compositional Generation We present the compositional generation results to further investigate
the impact of our composition path. Figure 4 presents the results. Given two images, we construct
the composite representation by replacing one object slot from the first image (red arrow) to another
from the second image (blue arrow), and producing the image by the decoder. Based on visualization
of the learned slots, we observe that the baselines often fail to learn compositional slot representation,
by separating objects into multiple slots or encoding background with an object. It leads to failures
in object-level manipulation, such as retaining an object after the removal (LSD in MultiShapeNet
and PTR), altering the content of the added object (SLATE in MultiShapeNet), or transforming back-
ground with the object (SLATE in PTR and LSD in Super-CLEVR). In contrast, our method produces
both semantically meaningful and realistic images from composite slot representations, supporting
our claim that we can regularize object-centric learning through the proposed compositional path.

6        C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a method to address the misalignment between object-centric learning
and the auto-encoding objective. Our method is based on auto-encoding framework, and incorporates
an additional branch to directly assess the compositionality of the representation. This involves
constructing composite representations from two separate images and optimizing the encoder jointly
with the auto-encoding path to maximize the likelihood of the composite image. Despite the simplicity,
our extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework consistently improves the object-centric
learning over the auto-encoding frameworks. It also shows that our method greatly enhances the
robustness to the choice of architectural biases and hyperparameters, which typically pose sensitivity
challenges in auto-encoding-centric approaches.


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by Institute of Information & communications
Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant (No.2022-0-00926, 2022-0-00959, 2021-0-02068,
and 2019-0-00075) and National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant (2021R1C1C1012540
and 2022R1C1C1009443) funded by the Korea government(MSIT).

R EFERENCES
Rim Assouel, Pau Rodriguez, Perouz Taslakian, David Vazquez, and Yoshua Bengio. Object-centric
  compositional imagination for visual abstract reasoning. In ICLR2022 Workshop on the Elements
  of Reasoning: Objects, Structure and Causality, 2022.
Ben Bogin, Sanjay Subramanian, Matt Gardner, and Jonathan Berant. Latent compositional represen-
  tations improve systematic generalization in grounded question answering. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:195–210, 2021.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Michael Chang, Tom Griffiths, and Sergey Levine. Object representations as fixed points: Training
 iterative refinement algorithms with implicit differentiation. In NeurIPS, volume 35, pp. 32694–
 32708, 2022.
Hyungjin Chung, Dohoon Ryu, Michael T McCann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Solving 3d
  inverse problems using pre-trained 2d diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.
Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Spatially invariant unsupervised object detection with convolutional
  neural networks. In AAAI, 2019.
Vanessa D’Amario, Tomotake Sasaki, and Xavier Boix. How modular should neural module networks
  be for systematic generalization? In NeurIPS, 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
  Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Andrea Dittadi, Samuele Papa, Michele De Vita, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ole Winther, and Francesco
  Locatello. Generalization and robustness implications in object-centric learning. In ICML, 2022.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Generative
 scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. In ICLR, 2020.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis-v2: Inferring unordered object
 representations without iterative refinement. In NeurIPS, 2021.
SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In CVPR, 2021.
Alexandros Graikos, Nikolay Malkin, Nebojsa Jojic, and Dimitris Samaras. Diffusion models as
  plug-and-play priors. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In ICML, 2019.
Olivier J Hénaff, Skanda Koppula, Evan Shelhamer, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Jaegle, Andrew Zisserman,
  João Carreira, and Relja Arandjelović. Object discovery and representation networks. In ECCV,
  2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Yining Hong, Li Yi, Josh Tenenbaum, Antonio Torralba, and Chuang Gan. Ptr: A benchmark for
  part-based conceptual, relational, and physical reasoning. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Jindong Jiang, Sepehr Janghorbani, Gerard De Melo, and Sungjin Ahn. Scalor: Generative world
   models with scalable object representations. In ICLR, 2020.
Jindong Jiang, Fei Deng, Gautam Singh, and Sungjin Ahn. Object-centric slot diffusion. In NeurIPS,
   2023.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and Christian Rupprecht. ClevrTex: A Texture-Rich Benchmark
  for Unsupervised Multi-Object Segmentation. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
Jinwoo Kim, Janghyuk Choi, Ho-Jin Choi, and Seon Joo Kim. Shepherding slots to objects: Towards
   stable and robust object-centric learning. In CVPR, 2023.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In CVPR, 2023.
Yen-Ling Kuo, Boris Katz, and Andrei Barbu. Compositional networks enable systematic generaliza-
  tion for grounded language understanding. In EMNLP, 2021.
Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and brain sciences, 40:e253, 2017.
Zhuowan Li, Xingrui Wang, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Adam Kortylewski, Wufei Ma, Benjamin
  Van Durme, and Alan L Yuille. Super-clevr: A virtual benchmark to diagnose domain robustness
  in visual reasoning. In CVPR, pp. 14963–14973, 2023.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In CVPR, 2023.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. In ICLR, 2020.
Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang, Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu, Humphrey
  Shi, Anna Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! image synthesis with semantic
  diffusion guidance. In WACV, 2023.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  In NeurIPS, 2020.
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. In CVPR, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In ICLR, 2022.
Nasim Rahaman, Muhammad Waleed Gondal, Shruti Joshi, Peter Gehler, Yoshua Bengio, Francesco
  Locatello, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Dynamic inference with neural interpreters. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Herbert E Robbins. An empirical bayes approach to statistics. In Breakthroughs in Statistics:
 Foundations and basic theory, pp. 388–394. Springer, 1992.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Nassir Navab, Joachim Hornegger, William M. Wells, and Alejandro F.
  Frangi (eds.), Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015, pp.
  234–241, Cham, 2015. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-24574-4.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023a.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Wei Wei, Tingbo Hou, Yael Pritch, Neal Wadhwa,
  Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Hyperdreambooth: Hypernetworks for fast personalization
  of text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06949, 2023b.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Filip Pavetic,
 Mario Lucic, Leonidas J Guibas, Klaus Greff, and Thomas Kipf. Object scene representation
 transformer. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Maximilian Seitzer, Max Horn, Andrii Zadaianchuk, Dominik Zietlow, Tianjun Xiao, Carl-Johann
 Simon-Gabriel, Tong He, Zheng Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Thomas Brox, et al. Bridging the
 gap to real-world object-centric learning. In ICLR, 2022.
Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate dall-e learns to compose. In ICLR, 2022a.
Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple unsupervised object-centric learning for complex
  and naturalistic videos. In NeurIPS, 2022b.
Elizabeth S Spelke. Principles of object perception. Cognitive science, 14(1):29–56, 1990.
Charles M Stein. Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution. The annals of Statistics,
  pp. 1135–1151, 1981.
Karl Stelzner, Kristian Kersting, and Adam R Kosiorek. Decomposing 3d scenes into objects via
  unsupervised volume segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01148, 2021.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In CVPR, 2023a.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. In
  NeurIPS, 2023b.
Xin Wen, Bingchen Zhao, Anlin Zheng, Xiangyu Zhang, and Xiaojuan Qi. Self-supervised visual
  representation learning with semantic grouping. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Ziyi Wu, Jingyu Hu, Wuyue Lu, Igor Gilitschenski, and Animesh Garg. Slotdiffusion: Object-centric
  generative modeling with diffusion models. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Zhisheng Xiao, Karsten Kreis, and Arash Vahdat. Tackling the generative learning trilemma with
  denoising diffusion gans. In ICLR, 2022.
Fisher Yu, Haofeng Chen, Xin Wang, Wenqi Xian, Yingying Chen, Fangchen Liu, Vashisht Madhavan,
  and Trevor Darrell. Bdd100k: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous multitask learning. In
  CVPR, 2020.
Yuxin Zhang, Nisha Huang, Fan Tang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Weiming Dong, and Chang-
  sheng Xu. Inversion-based style transfer with diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Table 3 provides details of hyperparameters used in experiments. For the Slot Attention encoder Eθ
and a diffusion decoder Dϕ , we base our implementation on Jiang et al. (2023). Specifically, in the
Slot Attention encoder, we employ a CNN-based UNet image encoder. Prior to the UNet encoder, we
incorporate a single layer CNN to downsample the original 128 × 128 image to a 64 × 64 image.
Implementing the diffusion decoder Dϕ , we follow the design of the LSD decoder. The overall
structure of Dϕ is based on the U-Net architecture, where each layer is composed of CNN layers and
a transformer layer. The surrogate decoder Dψ is implemented with the Transformer Architecture in
Singh et al. (2022a). It takes slots as input through cross-attention layers. In the experimental setting,
we augment the Super-CLEVR dataset by randomly altering the background color to another color.

                    General                Batch Size                     64
                                           Training Steps                200K
                                           Learning Rate                0.0001
                    CNN Backbone           Input Resolution              128
                                           Output Resolution               64
                                           Self Attention            Middle Layer
                                           Base Channels                  128
                                           Channel Multipliers         [1,1,2,4]
                                           # Heads                         8
                                           # Res Blocks / Layer             2
                                           Slot Size                      192
                    Slot Attention         Input Resolution              64
                                           # Iterations                   7
                                           Slot Size                     192
                    Auto-Encoder           Model                         KL-8
                                           Input Resolution              128
                                           Output Resolution              16
                                           Output Channels                4
                    Diffusion Decoder      Input Resolution               16
                                           Input Channels                  4
                                           β scheduler                  Linear
                                           Mid Layer Attention            Yes
                                           # Res Blocks / Layer            2
                                           # Heads                         8
                                           Base Channels                  192
                                           Attention Resolution        [1,2,4,4]
                                           Channel Multipliers         [1,2,4,4]
                    Surrogate Decoder      Layers                         8
                                           # Heads                        8
                                           Hidden Dim                    384

                       Table 3: Hyperparameters used in our experiments.



B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

B.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON ROBUSTNESS T ESTS

We include results of the robustness test on mIoU, mBO metrics in Figure 5. Similar to the results on
FG-ARI (Figure 3), our model is surprisingly robust to a wide range of hyperparameters. It suggests
that directly optimizing the compositionality of the representation significantly reduce a dependency
on a choice of hyperparameters.


                                                   13
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       80                                                                            80
       75                                       70                                   75
       70                                                                            70
                                                60
       65                                                                            65


                                         mIoU
mIoU


                                                                              mIoU
       60                                       50                                   60
                                    11                                                                           100%
       55                           13          40                                   55                          133%
                                    15                                 UNet                                      166%
       50                           17          30                     CNN           50                          200%
            SLATE+    LSD         Ours               SLATE+    LSD    Ours                SLATE+    LSD      Ours
       80                                                                            80
       75                                       70                                   75
       70                                                                            70
                                                60
       65                                mBO                                         65
mBO


                                                                              mBO
       60                                       50                                   60
                                    11                                                                           100%
       55                           13          40                                   55                          133%
                                    15                                 UNet                                      166%
       50                           17          30                     CNN           50                          200%
            SLATE+    LSD         Ours               SLATE+    LSD    Ours                SLATE+    LSD      Ours
            (a) Number of slots                  (b) Encoder architecture                 (c) Decoder capacity

 Figure 5: Robustness across Various Hyperparameters. We evaluate the robustness of our model
 across different number of slots, encoder type, and decoder capacity. Among various hyperparameters,
 our model steadily shows powerful performance against baselines.

 B.2        U NSUPERVISED O BJECT S EGMENTATION

 We present additional qualitative results for unsupervised segmentation results in Figure 7. Our
 method successfully segmented the object regions across all four datasets. In contrast, baselines
 easily divide each object into multiple segments or capture a wide area around the objects.

 B.3        E FFECT OF M IXING S LOT S TRATEGY

 As discussed in Section 3.1 and Section 5.3, sharing S(0) slightly enhances the performance by roughly
 avoiding suspicious compositions during training. To investigate how sharing slot initialization
 affects the composition, we obtained the slot representations from multiple scenes with the same
 slot initialization and grouped those representations by their order, i.e., si belongs to i-th group.
 Figure 6, we observe that the captured objects from the same initialization are correlated to some
 degree. The slots in the first row mostly capture the backgrounds of the scenes, while other slots tend
 to capture foreground objects. Moreover, we observe that the slots in the fourth row tend to capture
 the objects located in the lower part of the scene. Based on these observations, we conjecture that
 sharing slot initialization stabilizes our framework by alleviating some suspicious compositions, such
 as the occlusion of foreground objects or composing multiple backgrounds.

 B.4        I NVESTIGATION ON C OMPOSITIONALITY OF S LOTS

 In this section, we provide more visual samples of composite images to investigate the composition-
 ality of slot representations in our method. Figure 8 illustrates the results of generating composite
 images by mixing slots from two images, which supplements the Figure 4 in the main paper. It shows
 that the baselines often fail to capture compositional objects into independent slots, while our method
 successfully learns object-level slots through the composition path. As a result, the composite images
 generated by the baselines often fail to adhere the object-level manipulation, such as retaining the
 removed objects or transforming the object identity and background pattern while adding a new
 object. In contrast, our method preserves these semantics more precisely based on accurate object
 slots.


                                                              14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 s1


 s2


 s3


 s4

Figure 6: Grouping of slots by sharing the slot initialization. We obtain slot representation from
various images while sharing the initial values of S(0) and cluster the representation based on their
initial values. Slots initialized as s1 consistently capture backgrounds.


B.5   A DDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS ON COMPOSITIONAL GENERATION

To help a comprehensive understanding of the baselines, we provide more qualitative samples on
compositional generation in Figure 9. While Figure 4 and Figure 8 illustrates the common failure
cases of the baselines, we additionally present compositional generation results where the baselines
also reasonably capture an object into a slot. Despite the reasonable slot attention masks, the
composite image produced by the baseline model often distorts the original appearance of the object
or creates unrealistic partial objects. In contrast, our model consistently produces faithful composite
images, which highlights the importance of the compositional objective.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GT
Ours
SLATE+ LSD                                 CLEVRTex


                                          MultiShapeNet
GT
Ours
SLATE+ LSD


                                               PTR
GT
Ours
SLATE+ LSD


                                          Super-CLEVR
GT
Ours
SLATE+ LSD


             Figure 7: More Qualitative Results on Unsupervised Object Segmentation.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                            (a) CLEVRTex
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                         (b) MultiShapeNet
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                                    (c) PTR
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                          (d) Super-CLEVR

         Figure 8: More Qualitative Results on Compositional Generation between two images.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                            (a) CLEVRTex
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                         (b) MultiShapeNet
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                                    (c) PTR
                     Source


                                          Source


                                                                Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                              Output               Output                Output                Output
Ours
LSD
SLATE+


                                          (d) Super-CLEVR

         Figure 9: More Qualitative Results on Compositional Generation between two images.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Results on object property prediction. We evaluate the quality of the learned representation
through object property prediction. Our model consistently performs better than the baselines across
different properties and datasets.

      Dataset               CLEVRTex                     PTR                      Super-CLEVR
                 Position    Shape     Material   Position     Shape   Position      Shape      Material
      Property
                   (↓)        (↑)       (↑)         (↓)         (↑)      (↓)          (↑)        (↑)
      SLATE+     0.1757      78.72      67.99      0.2218      88.21    0.5397       76.28       68.43
       LSD       0.1563      85.07      82.33      0.5999      75.80    0.4372        76.5       69.24
       Ours      0.1044      88.86      84.29      0.1424      90.00    0.4262       80.67       71.31



B.6     A DDITIONAL E VALUATION ON O BJECT P ROPERTY P REDICTION

To assess the quality of acquired object representations, we employ object property prediction
using the learned representation, following the methodology outlined in Jiang et al. (2023); Dittadi
et al. (2022). During this process, we train a network to predict the property based on a fixed slot
representation. The true label for the slot representation is established through Hungarian matching,
comparing the mask of slots with the foreground objects. The remaining slots after matching are
considered as backgrounds. For predicting properties, we employ a 4-layer MLPs with a hidden
dimension of 196. Accuracy is reported for categorical properties, while mean squared error is
reported for continuous properties. We assess the models on datasets that include object properties.
The results for object property prediction are presented in Table 4. Our model consistently performs
better than the baselines across different properties and datasets. Notably, it excels in predicting shape
and position, as observed in the high segmentation performance depicted in Figure 2 and Table 1.
Furthermore, our model demonstrates improved performance in predicting materials indicating its
ability to capture local and high-frequency information.
On the Super-CLEVR dataset, despite our model’s higher segmentation performance, the mean square
error of position remains competitive with other baselines. We attribute this to the challenging nature
of the dataset, where scenes often include many small and occluded objects. As a result, both our
model and the baselines face increased difficulty in predicting position, leading to a higher error rate
compared to other datasets.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.7   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON R EAL - WORLD DATASET

To explore the scalability of our novel objective in a complex real-world dataset, we examine our
framework in BDD100k dataset Yu et al. (2020), which consists of diverse driving scenes. Since the
images captured on night or rainy days often produce blurry and dark images, we filter the data to
collect only sunny and daytime images using metadata, which leaves about 12k, 1.7k images in the
training/validation set, respectively. Since it has been widely observed that learning the object-centric
representation directly on real-world dataset is challenging, we bootstrap our auto-encoding path with
off-the-shelf models following Jiang et al. (2023). Specifically, we employ pretrained DINOv2 Oquab
et al. (2023) and Stable Diffusion Rombach et al. (2022) for the image encoder and slot decoder in
our auto-encoding path, respectively. Instead of using frozen Stable-Diffusion, we update key and
value mapping layers in cross-attention layers to enhance the overall auto-encoding performance
following Kumari et al. (2023). For efficient training, we first warm up the auto-encoding path for
200k iterations and then train only the surrogate decoder for 140k iterations on top of frozen slot
representations, which significantly boosts up the convergence of the surrogate decoder. Finally, we
optimize our compositional path for 100k iterations. For the baseline, we compare our model trained
with only auto-encoding objective for 300k iterations, which converges closely to the Stable-LSD
Jiang et al. (2023).
Figure 10 illustrates qualitative results on unsupervised object segmentation. The slot attention masks
of our model successfully capture composable instances such as cars, buildings, trees, font hoods,
etc. In contrast, the diffusion model trained without compositional objective often divides the objects
into multiple slots or encodes multiple objects into a slot. For example, the car or truck is frequently
divided into multiple masks, and multiple cars are often encoded into a single slot.
To further examine the compositionality of the learned slot representations, we qualitatively analyze
the visual samples of composite images in Figure 11 similar to Section B.4. We observe that our
method successfully generates realistic scenes, modeling complex correlations among objects and
environments. It appropriately adapts the appearance of newly added/removed objects, their shadow,
reflections in the front glass and hood, and sometimes even global illumination change caused by
removing the sun. In contrast, the auto-encoding model often fails to achieve faithful composition.
For example, in Row 1 of Figure 11, the car still appears in the composite image even after the removal
of the corresponding slot. Also, we observe that removing slots containing partial information of
the object often leads to undesirable artifacts in composite images such as creating a new car in the
first example of Row 2, or leaving unrealistic artifacts in the third example of Row 2. In contrast,
our model produces natural object-wise manipulation. Moreover, the baseline model often fails to
faithfully generate the inserted object as shown in Row 3, while our model tends to maintain the
target object. In Row 4, we identify that our model successfully models complex interaction between
slots such as removing sunlight changing the reflection of the bonnet in the first image, or changing a
blurry car into a sharp car corresponding to bright weather. In summary, we identify that our novel
objective on compositionality can help to learn object-wise disentanglement even in complex scenes
and helps to model complex interactions among objects.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GT
Ours
Stable-LSD
GT
Ours
Stable-LSD


             Figure 10: Qualitative results on unsupervised segmentation in BDD100k.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Source


                                                      Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                                Output                         Output                          Output
Ours
Stable-LSD


                       Source


                                                      Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                                Output                         Output                          Output
Ours
Stable-LSD


                       Source


                                                      Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                                Output                         Output                          Output
Ours
Stable-LSD


                       Source


                                                      Source


                                                                                      Source
GT


                                Output                         Output                          Output
Ours
Stable-LSD


             Figure 11: Qualitative results on compositional generation in BDD100k.


                                               22
