Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T REE - BASED ACTION -M ANIPULATION ATTACK
AGAINST C ONTINUOUS R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
WITH P ROVABLY E FFICIENT S UPPORT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Due to the widespread application of reinforcement learning, research on its adver-
         sarial attacks is necessary for building secure reinforcement learning applications.
         However, most of the current security research focuses only on reinforcement
         learning with discrete states and actions, and these methods cannot be directly
         applied to reinforcement learning in continuous state and action spaces. In this
         paper, we investigate attacks on continuous reinforcement learning. Rather than
         manipulating rewards, observations, or environments, our focus lies in action-
         manipulation attacks that impose more restrictions on the attacker. Our study
         investigates the action-manipulation attack in both white-box and black-box sce-
         narios. We propose a black-box attack method called LCBT, which uses a layered
         binary tree structure-based refinement and segmentation method to handle contin-
         uous action spaces. Additionally, we prove that under the condition of a sublinear
         relationship between the dynamic regret and total step counts of the reinforcement
         learning agent, LCBT can force the agent to frequently take actions according to
         specified policies with only sublinear attack cost. We conduct experiments to
         evaluate the effectiveness of the LCBT attack on three widely-used reinforcement
         learning algorithms: DDPG, PPO, and TD3.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to maximize
the accumulated rewards through the interac-
tion between the agent and the environment.
With the increasing complexity of scenarios,
in many cases, reinforcement learning algo-
rithms for discrete state-action environments
are no longer applicable, while the application
of continuous reinforcement learning is becom- Figure 1: Action-manipulation attack model. Step
ing more and more widespread in various do- 1, the intelligent agent selects action ah based on
mains, such as robot control (Xu et al., 2020), its own policy and is intercepted by the attacker.
autonomous driving (Elallid et al., 2022), game Step 2, the attacker manipulates action ah to e   ah
intelligence (Jeerige et al., 2019) and etc. How- based on their own strategy and submits it to the
ever, these scenarios demand high levels of se- environment. Step 3, the environment responds to
                                                  ah , and the attacker and the intelligent agent re-
curity, thus, investigating its security problems e
such as adversarial attacks is crucial (Garcıa & ceive the current state and reward.
Fernández, 2015).
In reinforcement learning, the interaction information between the agent and the environment is
crucial for training. Therefore, manipulating observations, rewards, actions, and the environment
can all have an impact on the training process. Attackers can exploit these different attack methods
to influence the agent and achieve their own goals. In this paper, we focus on action manipulation.
Specifically, the attacker operates as a third party between the agent and the environment, accessing
interaction data such as state s, reward r, and action a. In this type of attack, the attacker achieves
the attack by manipulating the actions generated by the intelligent agent into other actions in the
action space. For example, in autonomous driving or robotics applications, the attacker can hijack


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and tamper with the action signals. The attack process is illustrated in Fig. 1. It is evident that
compared to manipulating observations, rewards, or the environment, action-manipulation is not
as direct and efficient. Therefore, under such conditions, attackers need to intricately design their
attack strategies to achieve their objectives.
Under the condition of manipulating actions for attack, the attacker can only manipulate within the
agent’s action space. Therefore, assessing actions and selecting appropriate action substitutions for
the original actions are crucial for achieving efficient attacks. Based on action-manipulation attack,
(Liu & Lai, 2021) proposed an attack algorithm that can force the agent to learn a specified policy
while providing an upper bound on the attack cost. Prior to each tampering attempt, the algorithm
evaluates all actions in the action space and then determines which action to select as a replacement
for the original action. However, this method in paper (Liu & Lai, 2021) is clearly not applicable in
a continuous action space. The attack strategy proposed in (Sun et al., 2020) also allows attackers
to achieve an attack by manipulating actions. Its principle involves training an adversarial critic
network using RL trajectories and then manipulating the interaction information between the agent
and the environment to mislead the agent. Although the algorithm in (Sun et al., 2020) supports
continuous action spaces, the attack cost bound is not given, and it requires knowledge of the RL
algorithm used by the agent.
This study aims to explore methods for enabling an intelligent agent to learn specified policies
through action-manipulation while minimizing the associated attack cost. Our research includes
investigations in both white-box and black-box scenarios. We develop corresponding attack algo-
rithms and establish bounds on the attack cost. In the white-box attack scenario, the attacker pos-
sesses comprehensive knowledge of the involved Markov decision processes (MDPs), enabling a
more intuitive evaluation of actions and the design of attack strategies. Conversely, in the black-box
attack scenario, the attacker lacks awareness of the underlying MDP and solely relies on information
extracted from the RL trajectory to devise attack strategies. Additionally, in the black-box setting,
a binary tree-based dynamic partitioning method is employed to thoroughly assess the action space.
This method ensures the continual partitioning and refinement of the action space and achieves ac-
tion evaluation through the utilization of importance sampling and probability-based mathematical
methods. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We have constructed a threat model for action-manipulation attacks under continuous state and ac-
  tion spaces, considering the attacker’s goal, knowledge, and capability. To adapt to the continuous
  action space, we propose the concept of target action space.
• In the white-box scenario, we utilize our understanding of the underlying MDP to intuitively
  propose the oracle attack method. We show that the oracle attack can force the agent who runs
  a sub-linear-regret RL algorithm to choose actions according to the target policies with sublinear
  attack cost.
• In the black-box scenario, we introduce an attack method called Lower Confidence Bound Tree
  (LCBT). It can be demonstrated that the effectiveness of this attack method closely approximates
  the oracle attack.
• We employ the proposed attack methods to target three popular reinforcement learning algorithms:
  DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018). The
  experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.


2   R ELATED W ORK

We elucidate the work related to the security of reinforcement learning from the perspectives of
different attack methods.
Reward manipulation: (Ma et al., 2019), (Zhang et al., 2020), (Ma et al., 2018) and (Huang &
Zhu, 2019) employ reward manipulation to train the agent to learn a specified policy, while (Majadas
et al., 2021) focuses on minimizing the total rewards of the agent using this attack approach. In the
study by (Wu et al., 2022), the modification of rewards was implemented in a multi-agent system to
facilitate the learning of several agents’ target policies.
Observation manipulation: (Foley et al., 2022) employs observation manipulation to cause agent
misbehavior only at specific target states. (Zhang et al., 2021), (Yang et al., 2020), (Pan et al.,
2019) minimize the total rewards of the intelligent agent using the observation manipulation method.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, (Behzadan & Munir, 2017) utilizes the method of observation manipulation to achieve
policy induction attacks.
Environment manipulation: (Xu et al., 2021) train agents to use a target policy for specific obser-
vations through environment manipulation. (Tanev et al., 2021) and (Huang et al., 2017) minimize
the total rewards of the agent through environment manipulation. In (Boloor et al., 2019), the envi-
ronment is manipulated to reach a target state.
Action manipulation: In RL with discrete state and action spaces, (Liu & Lai, 2021) manipulates
actions to force the intelligent agent to learn the specified policy. (Lee et al., 2020) minimizes the
overall reward of the intelligent agent through action manipulation. In addition, (Tessler et al., 2019)
focuses on action robust RL in the presence of noisy environments.

3    P RELIMINARY
This paper considers a finite-horizon MDP over the continuous domains. Such an MDP can be de-
fined as a 6-tuple M = (S, A, P, r, H, µ). where S and A are respectively bounded continuous state
and action spaces, and H denotes the number of steps per episode. µ is the initial state distribution.
P is the transition matrix so that Ph (·|s, a) gives the distribution over states if action a is taken for
state s at step h ∈ [H], and rh : S × A → [0, 1] is the deterministic reward function at step h. Define
K is the total number of episodes. For each episode k ∈ [K], through the interaction between the
agent and the environment over H steps, the trajectory {s1 , a1 , r1 , s2 , a2 , r2 , ..., sH , aH , rH } can be
obtained. This trajectory provides essential data for further training.
We represent the agent’s Markov policy by π. Here, πh : S → A depicts the policy at the step h,
while πh (·|sh ) portrays the probability distribution of actions selected by policy πh , corresponding
to the state sh . A deterministic policy is a policy that maps each state to a particular action. For no-
tation convenience, for a deterministic policy π, we use πh (s) to denote the action a which satisfies
πh (a|s) = 1.
A policy π can be evaluated by the expected reward. Formally, We use the Qπh : S × A → R to
express the expected value obtained by selectinghPaction ah at the state sh according to the policy
                                                                                                  i  π,
                                                   H
which is defined as Qπh (s, a) := rh (s, a) + E    h =h+1 h
                                                    ′      r ′ (sh ′ , πh ′ (sh′ ))|sh = s, ah = a .

Accordingly, we define Vhπ : S → R to represent
                                        hP      the total expected rewards in  i state sh under policy
                         π                  H
π, and it is denoted by Vh (s, a) := Eπ     h′ =h rh′ (sh′ , πh′ (sh′ ))|sh = s . For a finite-horizon
                π             π
MDP, we set VH+1 = 0 and QH+1 = 0.
The purpose of reinforcement learning is to find the optimal policy π ∗ , which gives the optimal
value function Vh∗ (s) = supπ Vhπ (s). To assess a reinforcement learning algorithm’s performance
over K episodes, we quantify a metric known as regret, which is defined as
                                                K
                                                X   ∗ k
                                                   V1 s1 − V1πk sk1 .

                                Regret(K) =                                                                 (1)
                                                k=1


We now state an additional geometrical definition for the state and action spaces.
Definition 1. The state space S is equipped with a dissimilarity function ls : S 2 → R such that
ls (s, s′ ) ≥ 0 for all (s, s′ ) ∈ S 2 and ls (s, s) = 0. Likewise, The action space A is equipped with a
dissimilarity function la : A2 → R such that la (a, a′ ) ≥ 0 for all (a, a′ ) ∈ A2 and la (a, a) = 0.

For a subset D ⊆ S, the diameter of it is defined as diams (D) := supx,y∈D ls (x, y). Likewise, we
define diama (P ) := supx,y∈P la (x, y) where P ⊆ A.

4    ATTACK S TRATEGY AND A NALYSIS
Firstly, we introduce the attack model. In each step h ∈ [H] at episode k ∈ [K], the attacker has
to decide whether to take action-manipulation method, i.e., launch attack when receives the action
a generated by the agent, and e a ∈ A is the potential action taken by the attacker. If the attacker


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       a = a. Also, the attacker has a deterministic target policy π † and a radius ra .
decides not to attack, e
Define Ah (s) = {a : la (a, πh† (s)) ≤ ra } as the target action space.
         †


We describe the threat model in this paper from the perspective of attacker’s goal, attacker’s knowl-
edge, and attacker’s capability.
• Attacker’s Goal: Let τ be the step set whose element is the step when the attacker launches
  attack, i.e., τ = {(k, h) : akh ̸= e  akh , k ∈ [1, K], h ∈ [1, H]}. And let α be the step set whose
  element is the step when the action akh meets the condition akh ∈   / A†h (skh ), i.e., α = {(k, h) : akh ∈
                                                                                                            /
     † k
  Ah (sh ), k ∈ [1, K], h ∈ [1, H]}. The attacker’s goal is to manipulate the agent into picking its
  actions in the target action space, in other words, following the policies similar to the target policy
  π † . At the same time, the attacker aims to minimize both the cost |τ | and loss |α|.
• Attacker’s Knowledge: In the context of the black-box attack, the attacker has no prior knowl-
  edge about the underlying environment and the agent’s policy. It only has access to the interaction
  information between the agent and the environment, i.e., skh , akh , and rhk .
• Attacker’s Capability: The attacker can manipulate the action akh generated by the agent and
  change it to another action e  akh . In addition, the attacker has a certain amount of computational
  resources and storage space to run the attack algorithms.

4.1   O RACLE ATTACK

In the white-box attack scenario, the attacker has the full information of the underlying MDP M.
Therefore, the attacker can compute the Q-values and V -values of any policy.
Define a policy set
                    Π† = {π : πh (s) ∈ A†h (s), Vhπ (s) ≥ Vh† (s), ∀s ∈ S, h ∈ [H]},                (2)
which represents a set of policies that produce actions within the target action space and are superior
                                                                                                  †
to policy π † , and let π o = supπ∈Π† Vhπ (s). For notation simplicity, we denote Vh† (s) := Vhπ (s)
                     o                                          †
and Vho (s) := Vhπ (s). We define a−   h (s) = arg mina∈A Qh (s, a) as the worst action for a given
                 †
target policy π and state s in the step h.
Based on the above, a possible attack approach intuitively is that the attacker can mislead the agent
by manipulating actions to make it believe that policies in the set Π† are better than policies that
generate actions outside the target action space. We now introduce an effective oracle attack strategy.
Specifically, at the step h and state s, if the action selected by the agent is within the target action
space, i.e., ah ∈ A†h (s), the attacker does not launch an attack, i.e., e    ah = ah . Otherwise, i.e.,
ah ∈/ A†h (s), the attacker launches attack and sets e ah = a− h (s). It should be noted that if the target
                                                                        †
policy is the worst policy, there may potentially exist Vh (s) = Vh (s) = inf π Vhπ (s) for the state s
                                                             o

and step h, in this case, the attacker can not mislead the agent to learn the policies in the set Π† . To
ensure the feasibility of the attack, the target policy π † needs to satisfy the following condition
                               Vh† (s) > Q†h (s, a−
                                                  h (s)), ∀s ∈ S, h ∈ [H],                               (3)
                       †                                                      †     †
            that π is not the  worst policy. Define the minimum gap ∆min by ∆min
which means                                                                                               =
            †        †                           †
  min      Vh (s) − Qh (s, a−
                            h (s)) . Under (3), ∆min > 0 also holds. Then, we have:
h∈[H],s∈S

Lemma 1. When ∆†min > 0 holds, in the observation of the agent, the policies in set Π† are superior
to other policies that do not align with the attacker’s target.
Proof. Please refer to the supplementary.
With the condition ∆†min > 0, the upper bounds of τ and α under the oracle attack can be obtained.
Theorem 1. With a probability at least 1 − δ2 , the oracle attack will force the agent to learn the
policies in Π† with τ and α bounded by
                                                    p
                                  Regret(K) + 2H 2 ln(1/δ2 ) · Regret(K)
                     |τ | ≤ |α| ≤                                            ,                  (4)
                                                ∆o† + ∆†min

where ∆o† = minh∈[H],s∈S Vho (s) − Vh† (s) .
Proof: Please refer to the supplementary.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 LCBT attack strategy on continuous RL algorithm
Input:
  Target policy π † .
  Initialize T1h = {(0, 1), (1, 1), (1, 2)}, Q̂h1,1 (1) = Q̂h1,2 (1) = 0, Lh1,1 (1) = Lh1,2 (1) = −∞, and
    h            h
  T1,1 (1) = T1,2  (1) = 0, for all h ∈ [1, H].
  for episode k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
     Receive sk1 . Initialize the set of trajectory traj = {sk1 }.
     for step h = 1, 2, . . . , H do
        The agent chooses an action akh .
        if akh ∈ A†h (skh ) then
           The attacker does not attack, i.e., e   akh = akh , and sets wh = 1.
        else
           Take {(Dkh , Ikh ), Pkh } ← WorTraverse(Tkh ), and set e     akh = aDkh ,Ikh , wh = 0.
        end if
        The environment receives action e     akh , and returns the reward rhk and the next state skh+1 .
        Update the trajectory by plugging e    akh , rhk and skh+1 into traj.
     end for
     Set the cumulative reward GH+1:H+1 = 0 and the importance ratio ρH+1:H+1 = 1.
     for step h = H, H − 1, . . . , 1 do
           akh ∈ A†h (skh ) then
        if e
           Continue
        end if
        Gh:H+1 = rhk + Gh+1:H+1 , ρh:H+1 = ρh+1:H+1 · wh , thk = TD             h                 h
                                                                                  h ,I h (k) ← TD h ,I h (k) + 1.
                                                                                 k   k            k   k

        Use Eq.(5) to update the value Q̂hDh ,I h (k)
                           r                k k
                                       PH         h

                                  2M k    h=1 |Tk |
                h
                    H−h+1
        if ν1 ρDk ≥ √ h       ln         δ1           AND (Dkh , Ikh ) ∈ leaf(Tkh ) then
                          2tk
         Tkh ← Tkh ∪ {(Dkh + 1, 2Ikh − 1), (Dkh + 1, 2Ikh )}
         LDkh +1,2Ikh −1 (k) = LDkh +1,2Ikh (k) = −∞
       end if
       for all (D, I) ∈ Tkh do
         Use Eq.(7) to update the value LhD,I (k);
                                              h
         Use Eq.(8) to update the value BD,I     (k) backward from leaf nodes.
       end for
    end for
  end for


We can see that the oracle attack relies on the knowledge of a−
                                                              h (s), which hinders the direct appli-
cation of it to many real-world scenarios. In the next subsection, we will introduce the black-box
attack method.

4.2   LCBT ATTACK

In the black-box attack scenario, the attacker has no knowledge of the underlying MDP process and
the algorithm used by the agent, and only knows the interaction information: skh , akh , and rhk . Without
the knowledge of a− h (s), the attacker can not determine ea and fails to attack. To overcome this issue,
                                               −
the attacker can use a method to estimate ah (s). Specifically, the attacker utilizes the hierarchical
binary tree structure to discretize the action space, with the state as the context to evaluate Q†h (s, a),
and then construct an attack algorithm that approximates the oracle attack. The attack algorithm
has been designated as LCBT (Lower Confidence Bound Tree), in relation to its utilization of a tree
structure.
Action Cover Tree: As the action space A is continuous, we use a binary tree T to discretize the
action space and reduce the possible options for selection. In the cover tree, we denote by (D, I) the
node at depth D ≥ 0 with index I ∈ [1, 2D ] among the nodes at the same depth. Clearly, the root


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


node is (0, 1). The two children nodes of (D, I) are denoted by (D + 1, 2I − 1) and (D + 1, 2I)
respectively. For each node (D, I), a continuous subset PD,I ∈ A of actions is divided from the
action space and associated with this node. The PD,I can be determined recursively as P0,1 = A,
PD,I = PD+1,2I−1 ∪ PD+1,2I , and PD,I ∩ PD,J = ∅. For each node (D, I), an action aD,I is
selected to represent the node. Whenever (D, I) is sampled, action aD,I is selected. Moreover, the
nodes in T need also satisfy the following assumption,
Assumption 1. We assume that there exist constants ν1 and 0 < ρ < 1, such that for each node
(D, I): diama (PD,I ) ≤ ν1 ρD .
In addition, until the beginning of episode k, an action coverage tree is maintained for each step
h ∈ [H] and it is denoted as Tkh , and |Tkh | is the node number.
State Partition: In order to better evaluate Q-values, we also need to discretize the continuous state
space. Here, we partition it into M subintervals S1 , S2 , ..., SM −1 , SM which satisfy the following
conditions: S = ∪M i=1 Si , and Si ∩ Sj = ∅ for ∀i, j ∈ [1, M ]. To ensure the functionality of the
LCBT algorithm, the state division must satisfy the following assumption, avoiding rough partitions.
Assumption 2. There exist constants Ls and ds which satisfy Ls ds < ∆o† + ∆†min such that for all
Si , ∀i ∈ [1, M ]: diams (Si ) ≤ Ls ds .
Define i(s) : s ∈ Si(s) , which represents the number of the subinterval to which state s belongs.

LCB Calculation: LCB is the pessimistic estimate of unknown Q†h (s, a). In the black-box attack,
at the step h in episode k, the attacker will select a node (D, I) and set e  akh as aD,I when akh ∈ /
  † k                                                                 h    k
Ah (sh ). In the LCBT attack algorithm, for each node (D, I), Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I ) is used to evaluate
Q†h (skh , aD,I ), which is calculated by
                                1               γ h (k)          1
 Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) = (1− h         )Q̂hD,I (shD,I , aD,I )+ h      (rk +Gkh+1:H+1 ·ρkh+1:H+1 ), (5)
                             TD,I (k)                         TD,I (k) h
where TD,Ih
             (k) = |ϕhD,I (k)|, and ϕhD,I (k) = {γ : γ < k, sγh ∈ Si(skh ) , aγh = aD,I }, is defined as the
set of episodes in which the current state belonged to subinterval Si(skh ) and node (D, I) was selected
                                                                        h
by the attacker at the step h until the beginning of the episode k. γD,I    (k) = max{γ : γ ∈ ϕhD,I (k)}
represents the latest episode before k in which the current state belonged to the subinterval Si(skh ) and
                                       PH
node (D, I) was selected. Gkh:H = h′ =h rhk is the cumulative reward. The importance sampling
                                 QH         ak ′ |sk ′ ,π † )
                                          P(e
ratio is calculated by ρkh:H = h′ =h P(eahk |shk ,bkh′ ) , where bk is the behavior policy that generates
                                                       h′   h′   h′
trajectory {sk1 , e
                  ak1 , r1k , sk2 , e
                                    ak2 , r2k , ..., skH−1 , e         k
                                                             akH−1 , rH−1                 k
                                                                                   akH , rH
                                                                           , skH , e                        akh |skh , bkh ) is,
                                                                                            , skH+1 } and P(e
                                                 
                                                 1
                                                                 akh = akh and akh ∈ A†h (skh ),
                                                               if e
                             k k k
                       P(e ah |sh , bh ) =                                                                                       (6)
                                                                    k                     k      † k
                                                                  ah = aDkh ,Ikh and ah ∈   / Ah (sh ),
                                                 
                                                 1            if e
otherwise, the value is 0. Since we assume that the target policy is a deterministic function, we
have P(e ah |sh , πh† ) = I{e
                            a ∈ A†h (s)}. For the indicator function I{ξ}, if event ξ is established
I{ξ} = 1, otherwise I{ξ} = 0. We set ρkH+1:H+1 = 1, GkH+1:H+1 = 0 and ρkh:H = ρkh:H+1 ,
                                                                     k
Gkh:H = Gkh:H+1 . According to the definition of bk , we have Vhb (s) = E[Gkh:H |skh = s] and
Vh† (s) = E[ρkh:H Gkh:H |skh = s].
The states used to calculate the Q̂hD,I (s, aD,I ) value are limited to a subinterval, instead of being
fixed. Also, each tree node (D, I) covers the action space PD,I , despite being represented by action
aD,I . Thus, the lower confidence bound of node (D, I) can be calculated by,
                                                     s
                                       H   − h +   1        2M k PH |T h |
        h            h    k
       LD,I (k) = Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I ) − q               ln           h=1 k
                                                                               − Ls ds − ν1 ρD . (7)
                                             h
                                          2TD,I (k)                δ 1


We use coefficients Ls ds and ν1 ρD to measure the level of uncertainty generated by the state subin-
terval and the node’s action space, respectively. The second term is the confidence interval radius
obtained by Hoeffding’s inequality.


                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 The WorTraverse function.
Input:
    Tkh
 1: (D, I) ← (0, 1), P ← (0, 1)
                                    / leaf(Tkh ) do
 2: while (D, I) = (0, 1) OR (D, I) ∈
           h             h
 3:   if BD+1,2I−1 ≤ BD+1,2I then
 4:      (D, I) ← (D + 1, 2I − 1)
 5:   else
 6:      (D, I) ← (D + 1, 2I)
 7:   end if
 8:   P ← P ∪ {(D, I)}
 9: end while
10: return (D, I) and P


Worst Node Selection: When in the step h of episode k, if the action akh chosen by the agent is
not in A†h (skh ), then the attacker will utilize the L-values to choose a node (D, I), and use aD,I to
                           akh to aD,I . Furthermore, due to ν1 ρD+1 < ν1 ρD , the child node has a smaller
replace akh , that is, set e
structural resolution, which reduces the uncertainty in the LCB estimate. Define the B-values,
                                  
                                    Lh (k)                        if (D, I) ∈ leaf(Tkh ),
                                   D,I
                                  
                                  
                       h
                    BD,I   (k) =          h                               i                             (8)
                                  max LhD,I (k), min BD+1,j    h
                                                                      (k) otherwise.
                                  
                                  
                                                       j∈{2I−1,2I}

The B-values are designed to have a tighter lower bound on Q†h (skh , aD,I ) by taking the maximum
between LhD,I (k) for the current node, and the minimum lower bound of the node’s two child nodes.
Based on the B-values, the attacker traverses the tree Tkh from the root node with smaller B-values
to the leaf node, and the path is represented as Pkh . The traverse function is shown in Algorithm 2.
After one episode, the attacker begins to utilize the interaction data between the agent and the en-
vironment to update the Q̂, L, and B values of nodes. A critical step is deciding when to expand a
node into two child nodes to reduce the uncertainty that is caused by the size of the node. Intuitively,
a node should be expanded when it is chosen a particular number of times such that the radius of
the confidence interval is approximately equal to the node’s size. This occurs when the uncertainty
brought by the node’s size begins to dominate. Therefore, for node (Dkh , Ikh ), the attacker expands
it into its two child nodes when the following equation is true, i.e.,
                                                s
                                h    H −h+1             2M k PH |T h |
                           ν1 ρDk ≥ q              ln            h=1 k
                                                                            ,                        (9)
                                            h
                                          2tk                   δ 1

and set the L-values of the two child nodes as −∞. Essentially, because the WorTraverse func-
tion selects nodes with smaller B-values, nodes containing a−    k
                                                            h (sh ) are more likely to be expanded,
thereby reducing the uncertainty caused by node size and sufficiently approximating action a−    k
                                                                                             h (sh ).


4.3    M AIN RESULTS

Next, we present the lemmas and theorems concerning the LCBT attack in the black-box setting.
Lemma 2. Under the LCBT attack, the following confidence bound:
                                                                 s
                                                      H − h + 1         2M k PH |T h |
           h     k                h     k                                      h=1 k
         Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I ) − E[Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I )] ≤ q            ln                      (10)
                                                          h
                                                       2TD,I (k)              δ 1


holds for ∀h ∈ [H], m ∈ [M ], (D, I) ∈ Thk , TD,I   h
                                                        (k) ∈ [1, k] with a probability at least 1 −
δ1 . It should be noted that for E[Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I )], there exists a state s0k,h ∈ Si(skh ) such that
                                     h     k

Q†h (s0k,h , aD,I ) = E[Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )] holds.
Proof: Please refer to the supplementary.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The lemma offers a confidence bound for Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ). According to the Algorithm 2, the
attacker traverses the tree with smaller B-values, which means Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) will converge to
Q†h (skh , a−   k                                                h     k                † k      − k
            h (sh )). Lemma 3 gives the relationship between E[Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I )] and Qh (sh , ah (sh )).
Lemma 3. In the LCBT algorithm, based on the lemma 2, there exists,
                                                            s
                                                  H −h+1          2M k PH |T h |
     h     k              † k      − k                                   h=1 k
 E[Q̂D,I (sh , aD,I )] − Qh (sh , ah (sh )) ≤ 3 · q          ln                    + Ls ds . (11)
                                                   2T h (k)             δ1
                                                        D,I

Proof: Please refer to the supplementary.

Before presenting the main theorem, it is important to note that if the attacker and the environ-
ment are considered as a single entity, the resulting environment is non-stationary. Therefore,
there may be different optimal policies corresponding to different episodes, especially at the be-
ginning of the black-box attack. As a result, the measurement of regret also undergoes changes.
In plain terms, dynamic regret measures the degree of regret resulting from comparing the pol-
icy adopted by an agent with the optimal policy of each specific episode in hindsight. On the
other hand, static regret only compares the agent’s policy with the optimal fixed policy derived
from combining all episodes. hAccording to Fei et al. (2020),the definition of the dynamic regret
                                 π ∗,k ,k        π k ,k     i
                                                        s1 , where π ∗,k = supπ V1π,k sk1 is the
                      P                    k
                                                         k

is D-Regret(K) :=        k∈[K] V1         s1 − V1
optimal policy of episode k.
Our main theorem is the upper bound of cost |τ | and loss |α| in the context of using the LCBT attack
algorithm.
Theorem 2. With a probability at least 1 − δ1 − δ2 , the LCBT attack will force the agent to learn
the policies in Π† with τ and α bounded by
                                                                            2M HK 2
                                   p                                  2
                                                                                      PH        h
              D-Regret(K) + 2H 2 ln(1/δ2 ) · D-Regret(K) 18M H ln( δ1 ) h=1 |TK |
|τ | ≤ |α| ≤                                                +                                     ,
                            ∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds                     (∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds )2
                                                                                              (12)

with |TKh | = O(K E ), E = log2ρ−2 2 < 1 for ∀h ∈ [H].
Proof: Please refer to the supplementary.
                                               M H 3 K E ln(2M HK 2 /δ1 )
Remark.       When D-Regret(K)           ≤        ∆o      †               ,   we have the upper bound
                                                     † +∆min −Ls ds
    3   E          2
M H K ln(2M HK /δ1 )
  (∆o   †           2
                      .   In other words, a lower attack cost may be incurred when the reinforce-
    † +∆min −Ls ds )
ment learning algorithm utilized by the agent works better in non-stationary environments. The
denominator of ∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds indicates that the attack cost is higher when the target policy
approaches the worst policy or ra is smaller.

5    N UMERICAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide numerical experiments of our oracle attack and LCBT attack on the three
popular continuous reinforcement learning algorithms, including DDPG, PPO, and TD3, in two
different environments. The experiments are run on a machine with NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000.
Environment 1 involves a one-dimensional continuous control problem with s ∈ [−1, 1] and a ∈
[−1, 1] where a slider moves on a rail, receiving positive rewards proportional to the move distance,
with a negative reward when it falls off. Environment 2 describes a two-dimensional continuous
                                  2                 2
control problem with s ∈ [0, 8] and a ∈ [−1, 1] where a vehicle moves on a two-dimensional
plane, receiving linear rewards proportional to the distance from the central point for every step.
The target policy π † is trained by constraining the movement range of both the slider and vehicle.
The oracle attack and LCBT attack algorithms are utilized to attack against the DDPG and PPO
algorithms in Environment 1, while attacking against DDPG and TD3 algorithms in Environment 2.
The results for each environment are depicted in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              ''3*                                                                                                                                                                           332                                                                               H


    $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                                                   $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG                                                                                                                                           $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG                                                                                        &RVW RI 332 2UDFOH DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                                                                           /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                           &RVW RI 332 /&%7 DWWDFN
                                                                                                                               2UDFOH DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                                                                      2UDFOH DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                       &RVW RI ''3* 2UDFOH DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG                                                                                                                                       7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG                                                                                       &RVW RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN


                                                                                            7LPH VWHSV                                                     H                                                                                                  7LPH VWHSV                                                     H                                                               7LPH VWHSV                                                    H

                                                                   (a) Attack DDPG                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Attack PPO                                                                                                                       (c) Attack Cost

Figure 2: Reward and cost results of Environment 1. In this experiment, we set the similarity action
radius ra = 0.0625, the state sub-interval quantity M = 16, the number of steps per episode
H = 10, and the total time steps T = 3 ∗ 105 . ρ is set to be 1/2. The x-axis represents the time step
t with the total time step. In (a, b), the y-axis represents the average reward of the last 10 episodes.
In (c), the y-axis represents the cumulative cost that changes over time steps.
                                                                                              ''3*                                                                                                                                                                           7'                                                                                H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &RVW RI 7'  2UDFOH DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &RVW RI 7'  /&%7 DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &RVW RI ''3* 2UDFOH DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &RVW RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN
    $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                                             $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                               $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG                                                                                                                                          $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG
                                                                                                                                /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                                                                           /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG
                                                                                                                                2UDFOH DWWDFN UHZDUG                                                                                                                                       2UDFOH DWWDFN UHZDUG

                                                                                                                                7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG                                                                                                                                       7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG


                                                                                            7LPH VWHSV                                                     H                                                                                                  7LPH VWHSV                                                     H                                                               7LPH VWHSV                                                    H

                                                                   (a) Attack DDPG                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Attack TD3                                                                                                                       (c) Attack Cost

Figure 3: Reward and cost results of Environment
                                          √          2. In this experiment, we set ra = 0.31, M = 81,
H = 10, and T = 106 . ρ is set to be 1/ 2.
In Fig. 2(a, b) and Fig. 3(a, b), the target policy reward (- - -) is the average reward achieved by
the π † over 103 episodes. The convergence of rewards obtained by the intelligent agent under three
different conditions (attack-free, LCBT attack, and oracle attack) is represented by the remaining
three curves. The experimental results reveal that the LCBT attack and oracle attack cause the agent
to learn policies near the π † , this indicates the effectiveness of our attack algorithm. Fig. 2(c)
and Fig. 3(c) show the cumulative cost of each attack algorithm as a function of the time steps.
Specifically, Compared with the oracle attack, the LCBT attack based on the black-box setting
requires more cost to achieve the attack target. Furthermore, the cost is sublinear to time steps in
both the oracle attack and the LCBT attack, which is in line with our theoretical expectations.
In addition, it can be observed that the convergence speed of the algorithm in environment 2 is
slower compared to environment 1. This is because environment 2 has higher complexity, requiring
the attacker to take more steps to approach the worst action, thus increasing the non-stationarity of
the environment. Furthermore, from Fig. 3(c), it can be seen that the corresponding attack cost
of TD3 is smaller, indicating that TD3 algorithm has a stronger ability to deal with non-stationary
environments, resulting in a smaller D-Regret. Due to the limited space, more results can be found
in the appendix.

6                                                         C ONCLUSION
In this study, we investigated the action-manipulation attack to disrupt reinforcement learning in con-
tinuous state and action spaces. We defined the attack model based on the attacker’s goal, knowl-
edge, and capability. We investigated the impact of two attack models, the oracle and black-box
attacks, that vary in the attacker’s level of knowledge. Our theoretical analysis and empirical exper-
iments validate the efficacy of the proposed black-box attack method in forcing the intelligent agent
to follow the attacker’s target policies at a sublinear cost. Additionally, the black-box attack LCBT
can achieve a result approaching the oracle attack as runtime increases. In future research, we will
develop a robust reinforcement learning algorithm to resist the examined attacks and enhance the
defense mechanisms.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vahid Behzadan and Arslan Munir. Vulnerability of deep reinforcement learning to policy induc-
  tion attacks. In Machine Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition: 13th International
  Conference, MLDM 2017, New York, NY, USA, July 15-20, 2017, Proceedings 13, pp. 262–275.
  Springer, 2017.
Adith Boloor, Xin He, Christopher Gill, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, and Xuan Zhang. Simple physical
  adversarial examples against end-to-end autonomous driving models. In 2019 IEEE International
  Conference on Embedded Software and Systems (ICESS), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2019.
Badr Ben Elallid, Nabil Benamar, Abdelhakim Senhaji Hafid, Tajjeeddine Rachidi, and Nabil Mrani.
  A comprehensive survey on the application of deep and reinforcement learning approaches in
  autonomous driving. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 2022.
Yingjie Fei, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Qiaomin Xie. Dynamic regret of policy optimization
  in non-stationary environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6743–
  6754, 2020.
Harrison Foley, Liam Fowl, Tom Goldstein, and Gavin Taylor. Execute order 66: Targeted data
  poisoning for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00762, 2022.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Javier Garcıa and Fernando Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
Sandy Huang, Nicolas Papernot, Ian Goodfellow, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Adversarial attacks
  on neural network policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.02284, 2017.
Yunhan Huang and Quanyan Zhu. Deceptive reinforcement learning under adversarial manipula-
  tions on cost signals. In Decision and Game Theory for Security: 10th International Conference,
  GameSec 2019, Stockholm, Sweden, October 30–November 1, 2019, Proceedings 10, pp. 217–
  237. Springer, 2019.
Anoop Jeerige, Doina Bein, and Abhishek Verma. Comparison of deep reinforcement learning ap-
  proaches for intelligent game playing. In 2019 IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication
  Workshop and Conference (CCWC), pp. 0366–0371. IEEE, 2019.
Xian Yeow Lee, Sambit Ghadai, Kai Liang Tan, Chinmay Hegde, and Soumik Sarkar. Spatiotem-
  porally constrained action space attacks on deep reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4577–4584, 2020.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Guanlin Liu and Lifeng Lai. Provably efficient black-box action poisoning attacks against reinforce-
  ment learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12400–12410, 2021.
Yuzhe Ma, Kwang-Sung Jun, Lihong Li, and Xiaojin Zhu. Data poisoning attacks in contextual
  bandits. In Decision and Game Theory for Security: 9th International Conference, GameSec
  2018, Seattle, WA, USA, October 29–31, 2018, Proceedings 9, pp. 186–204. Springer, 2018.
Yuzhe Ma, Xuezhou Zhang, Wen Sun, and Jerry Zhu. Policy poisoning in batch reinforcement
  learning and control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Rubén Majadas, Javier Garcı́a, and Fernando Fernández. Disturbing reinforcement learning agents
  with corrupted rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06587, 2021.
Xinlei Pan, Chaowei Xiao, Warren He, Shuang Yang, Jian Peng, Mingjie Sun, Jinfeng Yi, Zijiang
  Yang, Mingyan Liu, Bo Li, et al. Characterizing attacks on deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1907.09470, 2019.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Yanchao Sun, Da Huo, and Furong Huang. Vulnerability-aware poisoning mechanism for online rl
  with unknown dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00774, 2020.
Atanas Tanev, Svetlana Pavlitskaya, Joan Sigloch, Arne Roennau, Ruediger Dillmann, and J Marius
  Zollner. Adversarial black-box attacks on vision-based deep reinforcement learning agents. In
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Safety for Robotics (ISR), pp. 177–181.
  IEEE, 2021.
Chen Tessler, Yonathan Efroni, and Shie Mannor. Action robust reinforcement learning and appli-
  cations in continuous control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6215–6224.
  PMLR, 2019.
Joel Tropp. Freedman’s inequality for matrix martingales. Electronic Communications in Probabil-
  ity, 16(none):262 – 270, 2011. doi: 10.1214/ECP.v16-1624. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1214/ECP.v16-1624.
Young Wu, Jermey McMahan, Xiaojin Zhu, and Qiaomin Xie. Reward poisoning attacks on offline
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01888, 2022.
Hang Xu, Rundong Wang, Lev Raizman, and Zinovi Rabinovich. Transferable environment poi-
  soning: Training-time attack on reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th international
  conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 1398–1406, 2021.
Jie Xu, Yunsheng Tian, Pingchuan Ma, Daniela Rus, Shinjiro Sueda, and Wojciech Matusik.
   Prediction-guided multi-objective reinforcement learning for continuous robot control. In In-
   ternational conference on machine learning, pp. 10607–10616. PMLR, 2020.
Chao-Han Huck Yang, Jun Qi, Pin-Yu Chen, Yi Ouyang, I-Te Danny Hung, Chin-Hui Lee, and Xi-
  aoli Ma. Enhanced adversarial strategically-timed attacks against deep reinforcement learning. In
  ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 3407–3411. IEEE, 2020.
Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Robust reinforcement learning on
  state observations with learned optimal adversary. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08452, 2021.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuzhe Ma, Adish Singla, and Xiaojin Zhu. Adaptive reward-poisoning attacks
  against reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11225–
  11234. PMLR, 2020.


A PPENDIX
The organization of the appendix is as follows. Firstly, We will introduce the experimental environ-
ments in detail in Section A. Then we will show the proofs of Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 in Section
B and C respectively. The proofs of Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 are represented in Section D and E,
respectively. In section F, the proof of Theorem 2 is represented. In Section G, we present additional
results. Finally, in Section H, we will have a discussion. Table 1 summarizes the notations used in
our paper.

A    E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
Environment 1. The objective of this environment, as depicted in Fig. 4, is to control the slider to
slide on the rod and maximize the reward within H = 10 steps. Specifically, for any h ∈ [H], the
state space s ∈ [−1, 1] represents the current position of the slider on the rod, where 0 represents
the center point of the rod. The action space a ∈ [−1, 1] represents the base sliding distance, with
negative values signifying leftward movement and positive values signifying rightward movement.
The final sliding distance d = a ∗ 2, and a reward of |a| is obtained for each step taken. If the
slider falls off the rod (i.e., the slider’s position coordinate is outside of [−1, 1]), the round of the


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Table 1: Notation Table
     Notation                                                             Meaning
         S                                                              The state space
         A                                                            The action space
         H                                               The number of total steps in each episode
          µ                                                     The initial state distribution
         K                                                     The number of total episodes
         skh                                                  The state at step h in episode k
         akh                                       The action taken by the agent at step h in episode k
         akh
         e                       The action taken by the attacker and submitted to the environment at step h in episode k
         rhk                                           The reward generated at step h in episode k
         ls                                            The dissimilarity function of the state space
         la                                            The dissimilarity function of the action space
    diams (D)                                   The largest difference of all the states in set D ⊆ S w.r.t ls
    diama (P )                                 The largest difference of all the actions in set P ⊆ A w.r.t la
         π†                                             The target policy specified by the attacker
         bk                                                  The behavior policy of episode k
       πh† (s)                                             The target action for state s at step h
         ra                                                 The radius specified by the attacker
      A†h (s)                              The target action space, which is defined as {a : la (a, πh† (s)) ≤ ra }
         Π†             The set of target policies that produce actions within the target action space and are superior to policy π †
          τ                            The step set whose element is the step when the attacker launches the attack
         α              The step set whose element is the step when action akh does not belong to the target action space A†h (skh )
                                                                                                     †
       Vh† (s)                                           The value which is equivalent to Vhπ (s)
                                                                                                 †
     Q†h (s, a)                                         The value which is equivalent to Qπh (s, a)
       a−
        h (s)
                                                                                            †
                                            The worst action for a given target policy π and state s at step h
        ∆o†                                         The minimum gap between the policies π o and π †
       ∆†min                                  The minimum gap between the policy π † and the worst action
        Tkh                The action cover tree that has been built by the attacker until the beginning of episode k w.r.t step h
        Pkh                                               The traverse path at step h in episode k
       |Tkh |                                                  The node number of tree Tkh
         ν1                                         The maximum distance w.r.t. la in the action space
          ρ                                        The reduction ratio of nodes in Tkh at different depth
      (D, I)                                      The node at depth D with index I in action cover trees
       aD,I                                               The represented action of node (D, I)
         M                                          The number of total subintervals of the state space
        Sm                                           A subinterval of the state space with m ∈ [1, M ]
        i(s)                              The number of the subinterval to which state s belongs, i.e., s ∈ Si(s) .
         ds                                           The diameter of subintervals of the state space
         Ls                                                         The coefficient of ds
                        The set of episodes in which the current state belonged to subinterval Si(skh ) and node (D, I) was selected
     ϕhD,I (k)
                                               by the attacker at step h until the beginning of the episode k
      h                                     The latest episode before k in which the current state belonged to
     γD,I (k)                                      the subinterval Si(skh ) and node (D, I) was selected
      h
     TD,I (k)                                                 The value is equal to |ϕhD,I (k)|
 Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )                              The calculated value used to evaluate Q†h (skh , aD,I )
     LhD,I (k)                                         The lower confidence bound of node (D, I)
      h
     BD,I (k)                                       The tighter lower confidence bound of node (D, I)


                                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


game ends immediately and a reward of −1 is received. The slider’s initial position s1 is arbitrarily
set between −0.7 and 0.7. Our target policy π † for the slider is to move only within the interval
[−0.7, 0.7]. We generate the target policy model by training and obtaining the optimal policy within
the limited interval [−0.7, 0.7] through augmentation of the environment constraints. The optimal
policy is then employed to act as the target policy. Obviously, π † is not the globally optimal policy.
Environment 2. As depicted in Fig. 5, the objective of this environment is to control a vehicle to
move on a two-dimensional plane surrounded by a boundary and obtain maximum reward within
H = 10 steps. For any h ∈ [H], the state space of Environment 2 includes the current two-
                                                                        2
dimensional position of the vehicle, denoted as s = (s1 , s2 ) ∈ [0, 8] . The action space, denoted as
                         2
a = (a1 , a2 ) ∈ [−1, 1] , denotes the distance of the vehicle’s movement. The vehicle’s next position
is (s1 + a1 , s2 + a2 ) and the reward gained is linearly proportional to the distance d between the
vehicle and the center point (the yellow dot at [4, 4]). The closer the distance, the higher the reward.
The initial position s1 of the vehicle is at any point outside the red circle (d > 1). Our target policy
π † for the vehicle is to move only outside the red circle. Similarly, we train and obtain the optimal
policy that only moves outside the red circle by increasing the environmental constraints, which
serves as the target policy. Obviously, π † is not the globally optimal policy.
Environment 3. Environment 3 is a five-dimensional version of environment 3, where the goal
remains the same: to control an object to move as close as possible to the center point within H = 10
                                                                                                      4
steps to obtain maximum reward. The state space is denoted as s = (s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 , s5 ) ∈ [0, 8] , the
                                                       5
action space as a = (a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 , a5 ) ∈ [−1, 1] , and the next state is given by (s1 + a1 , s2 +
a2 , s3 + a3 , s4 + a4 , s5 + a5 ). The center point is located at [4, 4, 4, 4, 4]. In this environment, the
Euclidean distance is used as the metric. The attacker’s target policy π † is defined as getting as close
to the center point as possible without entering the range less than 1 unit distance from the center
point.


Figure 4: Environment 1. The objective of this environment is to control the slider to slide on the rod


Figure 5: Environment 2. The objective of this environment is to control a vehicle to move on a
two-dimensional plane



                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     T HE P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
In the action-manipulation settings, the attacker sits between the agent and the environment. We
can regard the combination of the agent and the environment as a new environment. For the new
environment, we represent the Q-value and V -value as Q and V . Assume that the attacker selects
actions according to the target policy π † , and the attacker will not launch the attack, then we have
                                          †
                                        Qh (s, πh† (s)) = Q†h (s, πh† (s)) = Vh† (s).                                   (13)
If the attacker selects an action a ∈/ A†h (s), the attacker will change it to a−
                                                                                h (s), then we have,
       †                               (i)
     Qh (s, πh− (s)) = Q†h (s, a−           †      †
                                h (s)) < Qh (s, πh (s))
                                                             (ii)     †
                                                                                              / A†h (s), h ∈ [H],
                                                  = Vh† (s) = Qh (s, πh† (s)), ∀π − : πh− (s) ∈
where (i) is because ∆†min > 0, (ii) is according to (13). Then we have, i.e.,
                                †                                           (i)   π
                           Qh (s, πh− (s)) < Vh† (s) ≤ Vhπ (s) = V h (s), for ∀π ∈ Π† ,                                 (14)
                                                                                           †
where (i) is because when the agent follows the policies π ∈ Π , the attacker will not launch the
attack. The proof is completed.

C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
            k               o                 o
Define ∆h = V h (skh ) − Qh (skh , akh ).        From Lemma 1 and the definition of π 0 =
supπ∈Π† Vhπ (s), ∀s, h, in the observation of the agent under the oracle attack, π o is the optimal
policy, then the regret of the agent’s performance can be defined as
                                                             K
                                                             X         ∗              πk
                                        Regret(K) =                 [V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )]
                                                             k=1
                                                             K
                                                             X         o              πk
                                                         =          [V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )],                          (15)
                                                             k=1
where π k is the policy followed by the agent for each episode k.
For episode k,
  o             πk
V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )
      o                             o                                       o                  πk
= V 1 (sk1 ) − Ea∼π1k (·|sk1 ) [Q1 (sk1 , a)] + Ea∼π1k (·|sk1 ) [Q1 (sk1 , a)] − V 1 (sk1 )
      k                                              o                                                   πk
= ∆1 + r1k + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) V 2 (s′ ) − (r1k + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) V 2 (s′ ))
      k                                       o           πk
= ∆1 + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) [V 2 (s′ ) − V 2 (s′ )]
                                                                                                                                                     πk
   k
                                     h o                                          o                                                o
                                                                                                                                                            i
= ∆1 + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) V 2 (s′ ) − Es′′ ∼P(·|s′ ,a′ ∼π2k (·|s′ )) [Q2 (s′ , a′ )] + Es′′ ∼P(·|s′ ,a′ ∼π2k (·|s′ )) [Q2 (s′ , a′ )] − V 2 (s′ )
      k                                       k
= ∆1 + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) [∆2 ]+
                                                                                                                                                 πk
                                                       h                                       o
                                                                                                                                                         i
                          Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) r2k + Es′′ ∼P(·|s′ ,a′ ∼π2k (·|s′ )) V 3 (s′′ ) − r2k − Es′′ ∼P(·|s′ ,a′ ∼π2k (·|s′ )) V 3 (s′′ )
                                                                                                                          πk
   k                                   k
                                                                          h                                  o
                                                                                                                                   i
= ∆1 + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) [∆2 ] + Es′ ∼P(·|sk1 ,a∼π1k (·|sk1 )) Es′′ ∼P(·|s′ ,a′ ∼π2k (·|s′ )) [V 3 (s′′ ) − V 3 (s′′ )]
             H
             X         k
= ... = E[           ∆h |F1k ]
          h=1
       k
where Fh represents the σ-field generated by all the random variables until episode k, step h begins.
So there exists
                  K                                  K    H                K X
                                                                             H
                  X          o            πk        X     X  k             X    k
                           V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ) =   E[   ∆h |F1k ] = E[     ∆h |F1k ].                               (16)
                  k=1                                     k=1         h=1                      k=1 h=1


                                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we will show that with a probability of at least 1 − δ2 , we have
                                                      v
    K X H          K                    k
                                                      u            K
                                                                                       πk
   X          k   X       o k         π               u            X      o

                                          k         2t

           ∆h ≤         V 1 (s1 ) − V 1 (s1 ) + 2H       ln(1/δ2 )      V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ) .              (17)
    k=1 h=1           k=1                                                           k=1

        PH    k            o            πk
Since E[ h=1 ∆h |F1k ] = V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ), we can regard
                                          k H                                                 !
                                          X X           k              o            πk
                                  Yk :=                ∆h −          V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )                   (18)
                                          i=1    h=1

as a martingale with the difference sequence {Xk }K
                                                  k=1 , which is

                                                H
                                                X      k           o            πk
                                    Xk :=             ∆h −       V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )     .                 (19)
                                                h=1

And we have the difference sequence bounded, i.e., |Xk | ≤ H 2 , ∀k ∈ [1, K]. Define the predictable
                                                     PK
quadratic variation process of the martingale: WK := k=1 E[Xk2 |F1k ], with
           K
                 " H              #        K
                                                "H          #         K
          X        X k  2
                                k       2
                                          X      X k
                                                          k         2
                                                                      X      o k         πk k
  WK ≤        E        ∆h |F1 ≤ H             E     ∆h |F1 = H             V 1 (s1 ) − V 1 (s1 ) .
          k=1         h=1                             k=1        h=1                       k=1
                                                                                                               (20)
By Freeman’s inequality Tropp (2011), we have
                               v                                      
                  K             u           K
                 X              u          X    †            π k
                      Xk > 2H 2 tln(1/δ2 )

             P                               V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ) 
                      k=1                                    k=1
                                                                              
                                                †            πk
                                                            PK
                          4H 4 ln(1/δ2 ) k=1 V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ) /2       
              ≤ exp −                q
                                               PK         †          πk      
                      WK + H 2 · 2H 2 ln(1/δ2 ) k=1 V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ) /3
                   

              ≤ exp{− ln(1/δ2 )} = δ2 .

Under the oracle attack, when the agent chooses an action satisfying ah ∈ A†h (sh ), the attacker
                               o
does nothing, and we have Qh (skh , akh ) = Qoh (skh , akh ) ≤ Vho (skh ). Otherwise, the attacker launches
                                                                                               o k
the attack, and the action akh will be replaced by a−        k                                        k
                                                        h (sh ). In other words, we have Qh (sh , ah ) =
  † k
Qh (sh , a−   k
          h (sh )). Then, we can obtain

                K X
                  H
                X             k
                          ∆h
                k=1 h=1
                    K X
                      H                                         XK X
                                                                   H
                    X               o           o                                    o
                =                 V h (skh ) − Qh (skh , akh ) =       Vho (skh ) − Qh (skh , akh )
                    k=1 h=1                                            k=1 h=1

                                                                           Vho (skh ) − Q†h (skh , a−
                     X                                               X
                =             Vho (skh ) − Qoh (skh , akh ) +                                           k
                                                                                                    h (sh ))
                    (k,h)∈α
                         /                                       (k,h)∈α

                              Vho (skh ) − Q†h (skh , a−
                     X
                                                           k
                ≥                                      h (sh ))
                    (k,h)∈α

                              Vho (skh ) − Vh† (skh ) + Vh† (skh ) − Q†h (skh , a−
                     X
                                                                                     k
                =                                                                h (sh ))
                    (k,h)∈α

                              ∆o† + ∆†min
                     X
                ≥
                    (k,h)∈α

                = |α|(∆o† + ∆†min ).


                                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lastly, we have

                     PK PH          k                      p
                                      (i) Regret(K) + 2H 2 ln(1/δ ) · Regret(K)
                        k=1   h=1 ∆h                               2
             |α| ≤                    ≤                                         ,
                        ∆o† + ∆†min                    ∆o† + ∆†min


(i) is obtained by (17). With |τ | ≤ |α|, the proof is completed.



D    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Firstly, we will transform Q̂-value into a non-recursive form, i.e.,


Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )
                1              γ h (k)           1
 = (1 − h            )Q̂hD,I (shD,I , aD,I ) + h      (rk + Gkh+1:H+1 · ρkh+1:H+1 )
            TD,I (k)                          TD,I (k) h
     h
    TD,I (k) − 1             1          h
                                               h
                                              γD,I   h
                                                   (γD,I (k))
=      h (k)
                  (1 −    h (k) − 1
                                     )Q̂D,I (sh               , aD,I )
     TD,I              TD,I
                         1        γ h (k)       h
                                               γD,I (k)         h
                                                              γD,I (k)       1
                                                                                  (rk + Gkh+1:H+1 · ρkh+1:H+1 )

                + h             (rhD,I + Gh+1:H+1         · ρh+1:H+1   ) + h
                   TD,I (k) − 1                                           TD,I (k) h
                    k
             1      X
= ... =    h (k)
                        I{sih ∈ Si(skh ) , aih = aD,I }(rhi + Gih+1:H+1 · ρih+1:H+1 ).
          TD,I   i=1



Then we have

                                     k
  h                    i       1     X
 E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) =                I{sih ∈ Si(skh ) , aih = aD,I }E rhi + Gih+1:H+1 · ρih+1:H+1

                             h (k)
                            TD,I   i=1
                                     k
                               1
                                         I{sih ∈ Si(skh ) , aih = aD,I }Q†h (sih , aih ).
                                     X
                        =    h (k)
                            TD,I   i=1


Define the event:


      h
ξk = ∀TD,I (k) ∈ [1, k], h ∈ [H],m ∈ [M ], (D, I) ∈ Tkh ,
                                                          h                    i
                                  Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) ≤ β k, TD,I
                                                                                        h

                                                                                            (k), δ1 ,


where β-function is calculated by

                                              v                                  !
                                              u                      PH       h|
                                     H − h + 1u               2M k         |T
                                                                        h=1 k
                        β (k, N, δ) = √       tln                                 .                 (21)
                                        2N                              δ


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Define ξkc as the opposite event of ξk , then, we have
            H X
            X M        X          k
                                  X                                        h                    i
P(ξkc ) =                                 P        Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) > β(k, TD,I
                                                                                                         h
                                                                                                             (k), δ1 )
            h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈Tkh TD,I
                               h (k)=1


          H M                      k
                                                     "                                       #
                                                                h
      (i) X X          X           X                     2β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 )2 TD,I
                                                                                h
                                                                                    (k)2
       <                                      2 exp −        h (k)(H − h + 1)2
            h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈Tkh TD,I
                               h (k)=1
                                                            TD,I

            H X
              M                   k
                                                    "                                     #
                                                         h
            X          X          X               2β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 )2 TD,I
                                                                         h
                                                                             (k)
      =                                   2 exp −
                                                        (H − h + 1)2
            h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈Tkh TD,I
                               h (k)=1


            H X
              M                   k
                                                    "                 PH            !#
                                                                               h
                                                               2M k     h=1 |Tk |
            X          X          X
      =                                   2 exp − ln
                                                                       δ1
            h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈Tkh TD,I
                               h (k)=1


            H X
              M                   k
            X          X          X                       δ1
      =                                   2·             PH       h
            h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈Tkh TD,I
                               h (k)=1          2M k       h=1 |Tk |

      = δ1 ,
where (i) is using Hoeffding’s inequality. So there exists P(ξk ) ≥ 1 − δ1 , the proof is completed.

E    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3
From the traverse function, along the path Pkh , we have

                       BD,I (k) = max LhD,I (k),
                         h
                                                        min                   h
                                                                             BD+1,j (k)                      (22)
                                                               j∈{2I−1,2I}
                                                          h
                                     ≥         min       BD+1,j (k)
                                         j∈{2I−1,2I}
                                        h                    ′     h

                                     = BD+1,I ′ (k) (D + 1, I ) ∈ Pk   .
We make an assumption that at the step h in episode k, the attacker launches the attack and chooses
a node (D, I) along the path Pkh , then we have
                     h               h          h        ′         ′ ′       h

                   BD  ′ ,I ′ (k) ≥ BD,I (k) ≥ LD,I (k) D < D, (D , I ) ∈ Pk .                 (23)

Because the root node includes a−   k                    h
                                h (sh ), so in the path Pk , except (D, I), there must exist a node
                                               − k
(Dmin , Imin )(Dmin < D) containing action ah (sh ). So we have
                                   h                  h
                                  BD min ,Imin
                                               (k) ≥ BD,I (k) ≥ LhD,I (k)                                    (24)

established. Otherwise, from the definition of LhD,I (t), we can obtain

  LhDmin ,Imin (k) = Q̂hDmin ,Imin (skh , aDmin ,Imin ) − β k, TD
                                                                h
                                                                            (k), δ1 − Ls ds − ν1 ρDmin

                                                                  min ,Imin

                   (i)  h                                 i
                   ≤ E Q̂hDmin ,Imin (skh , aDmin ,Imin ) − Ls ds − ν1 ρDmin

                    ≤ Q†h (skh , aDmin ,Imin ) − ν1 ρDmin
                    ≤ Q†h (skh , a−   k
                                  h (sh )),

where (i) is under Lemma 2. We assume that a leaf node (Dm , Im ) contains action a−   k
                                                                                   h (sh ), there
exists
                       BD h
                            m ,Im
                                  (k) = LhDm ,Im (k) ≤ Q†h (skh , a−   k
                                                                   h (sh )),

and obviously, all the nodes containing action a−   k
                                                h (sh ) with H > Hm are descendants of (Dm , Im ).
                                                                              † k
Now by propagating the upper bound of nodes containing a−         k                    − k
                                                              h (sh ), i.e., Qh (sh , ah (sh )) backward


                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from (Dm , Im ) to (Dmin , Imin ) through (22), we can show that Q†h (skh , a−   k
                                                                             h (sh )) is a valid upper
           h
bound of BDmin ,Imin .
Then from (24), we have, i.e.,

             Q†h (skh , a−   k       h                 h          h
                         h (sh )) ≥ BDmin ,Imin (k) ≥ BD,I (k) ≥ LD,I (k)

                                    = Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − β(k, TD,I
                                                                   h
                                                                       (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds − ν1 ρD
                                    (i)  h                   i
                                    ≥ E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − 2β(k, TD,I h
                                                                             (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds − ν1 ρD
                                    (ii)  h                   i
                                     ≥ E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − 3β(k, TD,I h
                                                                               (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds ,                 (25)

(i) is under Lemma 2, and (ii) is because the selected node is always a leaf node, which satisfies
        h
β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 ) > ν1 ρD .
Based on (25), we can obtain
                h                   i
              E Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I ) − Q†h (skh , a−   k             h
                                                   h (sh )) ≤ 3β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 ) + Ls ds .                       (26)

The proof is completed.


F    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Since the attacker will not launch the attack when the agent chooses an action satisfying ah ∈
                         o
A†h (sh ), we have Qh (skh , akh ) = Qoh (skh , akh ) ≤ Vho (skh ). Otherwise, the attacker selects a
node (D, I) according to the Q̂-values, and replaces akh to the corresponding action aD,I , i.e.,
  o
Qh (skh , akh ) = E[Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )]. Then we have

      K X
        H
      X               k
                 ∆h
      k=1 h=1
              H
            K X                                X  H
                                                K X
            X      o           o                                    o
      =          V h (skh ) − Qh (skh , akh ) =       Vho (skh ) − Qh (skh , akh )
            k=1 h=1                                         k=1 h=1
             X                                           X
      =               Vho (skh ) − Qoh (skh , akh ) +             Vho (skh ) − E[Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )]
            (k,h)∈α
                 /                                      (k,h)∈α
             X
      ≥               Vho (skh ) − E[Q̂hD,I (skh , aD,I )]
            (k,h)∈α
      (i)
                      Vho (skh ) − Q†h (skh , a−
              X
                                                   k             h
      ≥                                        h (sh )) − 3β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds
            (k,h)∈α

                      Vho (skh ) − Vh† (skh ) + Vh† (skh ) − Q†h (skh , a−
             X
                                                                             k             h
      =                                                                  h (sh )) − 3β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds
            (k,h)∈α

                      ∆o† + ∆†min − 3β(k, TD,I
             X
                                           h
      ≥                                        (k), δ1 ) − Ls ds
            (k,h)∈α

      = |α|(∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds ) − 3
                                                    X
                                                                   h
                                                             β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 ),                                  (27)
                                                  (k,h)∈α

                                                                  h                     h
                                                 P
where (i) is under Lemma 3. Next, we analyze (k,h)∈α β(k, TD,I       (k), δ1 ). Define ND,I (Sm ) :=
               γ         γ
{γ : γ ≤ K, sh ∈ Sm , ah = aD,I } as the total number of episodes that in step h, the corresponding
state belongs to subinterval Sm and the attacker launches the attack and selects node (D, I).


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               h
                                        H X
                                          M                   ND,I (Sm )
          X            1                X               X           X       1
                 q                =                                        √
       (k,h)∈α
                      h (k)
                     TD,I               h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈TK
                                                       h        N =1
                                                                             N
                                        H X
                                          M                      h
                                                              Z ND,I (Sm )
                                        X               X                     1
                                  ≤                                          √ dN
                                        h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈TK
                                                       h        1             N
                                        H X
                                        X M             X      q
                                  ≤                              h (S )
                                                              2 ND,I m
                                        h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈TK
                                                       h


                                             H                               H X
                                                                               M
                                             X                      1        X        X    q
                                  =M·              TKh ·            H
                                                                                             h (S )
                                                                                          2 ND,I m
                                                        TKh h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈TKh
                                                                    P
                                             h=1 M·
                                                    h=1
                                                v
                                          H
                                                u PH PM P                   h (S )
                                         X      u h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈T h ND,I        m
                                              h t
                                  ≤ 2M ·     TK               PH
                                                                       K

                                                           M · h=1 TK   h
                                         h=1
                                     v
                                            H      H XM
                                     u
                                     u      X      X        X
                                     tM ·
                                  = 2u         TKh                 h (S )
                                                                 ND,I     m
                                                   h=1        h=1 m=1 (D,I)∈TK
                                                                             h

                                     v
                                     u
                                     u XH
                                  = 2tM   TKh · |α|.
                                               h=1
Then combine (27), we have
 K XH
        k
       ∆h ≥ |α|(∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds ) − 3
X                                         X
                                                  h
                                            β(k, TD,I (k), δ1 )
k=1 h=1                                                     (k,h)∈α
                                                               v                     !
                                                               u         PH
                    o     †                         H  − h + 1
                                                             X u     2M k h=1 |Tkh |
            = |α|(∆† + ∆min − Ls ds ) − 3           q          t ln
                                                         h (k)
                                                      2TD,I                 δ1
                                            (k,h)∈α
                                                               v                       !
                                                               u          PH        h|
                          †
                                              X H −h+1 u             2M K        |T
            ≥ |α|(∆o† + ∆min − Ls ds ) − 3          q          tln            h=1 K

                                                      2T h (k)              δ1
                                            (k,h)∈α     D,I
                                                          s                         v
                                                                                          H
                                                                               √
                                                                                    u
                    o     †                                     2M K · HK           u X
            ≥ |α|(∆† + ∆min − Ls ds ) − 3(H − h + 1) · ln                     · 2 · tM       TKh · |α|
                                                                    δ1
                                                                                         h=1
                                                               s                     v
                                                                                   u         H
                                                                     2M K · HK
            = |α| (∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds ) − 3 |α|(H − h + 1) · ln
                                            p                                        u      X
                                                                                   · t2M ·      TKh .
                                                                         δ1
                                                                                                         h=1
                                                                                                       (28)
                       PK PH                k
Use (17) to bound          k=1         h=1 ∆h , i.e.,
                                                                v
K X
  H           K                               u            K
                                πk k                                          πk
X        k   X      o k                       u           X      o

                                             2t
        ∆h ≤      V 1 (s1 ) − V 1 (s1 ) + 2H    ln(1/δ2 )      V 1 (sk1 ) − V 1 (sk1 )
k=1 h=1      k=1                                          k=1
                                                                v
                K
            (i) X               ∗,k                 k
                                                                u          K
                            π         ,k k        π ,k k        u
                                                               2t
                                                                           X    π ∗,k ,k k        π k ,k
            ≤              V1           (s1 ) − V 1 (s1 ) + 2H   ln(1/δ2 )   (V 1       (s1 ) − V 1 (sk1 ))
                 k=1                                                                k=1
                               p               2
            = D-Regret(K) + 2H  log(1/δ2 ) D-Regret(K),                                                (29)


                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where π ∗,k = supπ V1π,k (sk1 ) is the optimal policy of episode k. The reason for (i) is that because
of the existence of the attacker, the environment is non-stationary in the observation of the agent.
Combine (28) and (29), we can obtain
                        p
 D-Regret(K) + 2H 2 ln(1/δ2 ) D-Regret(K) ≥
                                                           s                      v
                                                                                u           H
                                                                  2M K  · HK
       |α| (∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds ) − 3 |α|(H − h + 1) · ln
                                      p                                           u         X
                                                                                · t2M ·          TKh .
                                                                      δ1
                                                                                                       h=1
                                                                                                             (30)
Finally, we can obtain
                                                                                             2    PH
                                                                            18M H 2 ln( 2MδHK            h
                                  p
           D-Regret(K) + 2H 2         ln(1/δ2 ) · D-Regret(K)                                 )    h=1 |TK |
   |α| ≤                                                               +                   1
                                                                                                               ,
                          ∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds                                   (∆o† + ∆†min − Ls ds )2
                                                                                                             (31)
with |τ | ≤ |α|, the proof is completed.

F.1   T HE N ODE N UMBER OF THE C OVER T REE

In this subsection, we bound the node number of the cover tree, i.e., |TKh | for ∀h ∈ [1, H].
A node (D, I) will be expanded when it satisfies the condition
                                              v                      !
                                              u              PH
                           D   H −h+1 u               2M k · h=1 Tkh
                       ν1 ρ ≥ q             · ln
                                              t                       .
                                2T h (k)                      δ1
                                           D,I

We make some transformations, i.e.,
                                                               PH           !
                                       2
            h         (H − h + 1)                     2M k ·    h=1   Tkh
           TD,I (k) ≥                      · ln
                        2ν12 ρ2D                             δ1
                                       2                                      2
                         (H − h + 1)                  2M · 3H     (H − h + 1)          6M H
                     >               · ln                       =               · ln          .
                           2ν12 ρ2D                     δ1          2ν12 ρ2D            δ1
                                                                                     h
From the inequality above, we can see that as the depth D increases, the TD,I            (k)-value which can
make the inequality above established will also increase, so it’s obvious that when the tree Tkh is a
complete binary tree, its total number of nodes is the most. Based on this, we assume that the depth
is Dm , i.e., the nodes at depth 1, 2, ..., Dm − 1 have been expanded, then we have
                             DX m −1                      2
                                      D (H − h + 1)                 6M H
                       K≥            2 ·                     · ln
                                                2ν12 ρ2D               δ1
                               D=1
                             DX m −1
                                              D (H − h + 1)2

                                                                            6M H
                           =          2ρ−2 ·                        · ln
                                                         2ν12                 δ1
                               D=1
                                              2                              Dm −1
                                                                    2ρ−2

                                                                                   −1

                              (H − h + 1)               6M H
                           =          2          · ln             ·              2
                                                                                       .
                                     ν1                  δ1               2−ρ
Then we can get the upper bound of Dm , i.e.,
                                  "                                #
                                           K · ν12 · 2 − ρ2
                    Dm ≤ log2ρ−2                  2             + 1 + 1.                                     (32)
                                    (H − h + 1) · ln (6M H/δ1 )

Through 2Dm +1 − 1, we get the upper bound of the node number of tree TKh , i.e.,
                    "                                   #log2ρ−2 2
             h              K · ν12 · 2 − ρ2                             log −2 2
                                                                              2ρ
           TK ≤ 4                  2                + 1            = O  K           .                        (33)
                      (H − h + 1) · ln (6M H/δ1 )

                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      H                    (QYLURQPHQW                                                                                     H               (QYLURQPHQW                                                                                    H               (QYLURQPHQW


 1RGH QXPEHUV


                                                                                                                                    1RGH QXPEHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1RGH QXPEHUV


                                                             1RGH QXPEHUV RI 332 /&%7 DWWDFN                                                               1RGH QXPEHUV RI 7'  /&%7 DWWDFN                                                              1RGH QXPEHUV RI 7'  /&%7 DWWDFN
                                                             1RGH QXPEHUV RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                              1RGH QXPEHUV RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN                                                            1RGH QXPEHUV RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN


                                                                    (SLVRGHV                                        H                                                                     (SLVRGHV                                        H                                                                   (SLVRGHV                                        H

                                                (a) Attack DDPG                                                                                                                      (b) Attack PPO                                                                                                                 (c) Attack Cost

                                                                                                  Figure 6: The total number of nodes of the cover trees.

Note that because 0 < ρ < 1, we always have log2ρ−2 2 < 1. At the same time, based on the
characteristics of the LCBT algorithm itself, it is highly unlikely to have a complete binary tree due
to the algorithm’s preference for expanding nodes containing action a−         k
                                                                           h (sh ), with only one such
node in the same depth.
In Fig. 6, the graph shows the relationship between the number of episodes and the total number of
                                   PH
nodes of all the cover trees, i.e., h=1 |Tkh |. The x-axis indicates the number of episodes during
the training phase, while the y-axis represents the total number of nodes of all the cover trees after
each corresponding episode. It is evident that compared to the increase in the number of episodes,
the increase in the number of nodes is slow, and the final number of nodes is far smaller than the
number of total episodes. In addition, The number of nodes within all the cover trees is not primarily
impacted by the algorithm chosen by the agent, but instead depends more upon the environment in
which the agent is placed, as well as the hyperparameters applied to the LCBT attack algorithm.


G                                       A DDITIONAL RESULTS

We measured the percentage of target actions executed by the attacked policy in identical states as a
metric for quantifying the similarity between the attacked and target policies. The results are shown
in Table 2 and Table 3.
In these two tables, the similarity calculation formula we adopt is as follows:
                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                           (I {la (a1 , a2 ) < ra })
                                                                                                                                    sim =
                                                                                                                                                   steps

The steps refers to the total number of steps during the similarity testing period. In this case,
steps = 1.0 ∗ 105 . a1 represents the action output of the target policy, while a2 represents the
action output of the attacked policy. la (·, ·) denotes the distance between the two actions, where
the Euclidean distance is used. For the indicator function I{ξ}, if event ξ is established I{ξ} = 1,
otherwise I{ξ} = 0.
From the tables, we can observe that the attacked policy shows a high degree of similarity with
the target policy. Similarly, as the complexity of the environment increases, the similarity tends to
decrease accordingly. In the same environment, different algorithms and corresponding D − Regret
can also have an impact on the results.
Additionally, we have introduced a new experiment in environment 3. The corresponding exper-
imental outcomes are presented in Fig. 7. Remarkably, under the conditions of a 5-dimensional
space, the LCBT algorithm demonstrates commendable performance. Hence, in practical terms,
factors influencing the efficacy of the LCBT algorithm encompass not only its intrinsic parameters
such as ν1 , ρ, ds , but also encompass the environment and the algorithms employed by the agent.
Similarly, in Table 4, we have provided the results concerning the similarity between the attack strat-
egy and the target strategy. We recorded the time taken to execute the attack algorithm and the total
time during the experimental process, calculated the ratio between the two, and obtained the results
as depicted in Fig. 8.


                                                                                                                                                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                ''3*                                                                                                                                                7'                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &RVW RI 7'  /&%7 DWWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &RVW RI ''3* /&%7 DWWDFN



  $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                       $YHUDJH (SLVRGLF 5HZDUG


                                                                                                         $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG                                                                                                                 $WWDFN IUHH UHZDUG
                                                                                                         /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /&%7 DWWDFN UHZDUG

                                                                                                        7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG                                                                                                             7DUJHW SROLF\ UHZDUG


                                                                              7LPH VWHSV                                            H                                                                                7LPH VWHSV                                             H                                                                     7LPH VWHSV                         H

                                                                 (a) Attack DDPG                                                                                                                                      (b) Attack TD3                                                                                                           (c) Attack Cost


                                              √ 3. In this experiment, we set ra = 0.497, M =
Figure 7: Reward and cost results of Environment
59049, H = 10, and T = 106 . ρ is set to be 1/ 5.


Table 2: The similarity between the original target policy and attacked policy in environment 1.
We have selected attacked policies trained for 3 ∗ 105 steps and 4 ∗ 105 steps under either Oracle
attack or LCBT attack. Then, in the testing phase, we calculated the percentage of target actions
executed by the attacked strategy within 1 ∗ 105 steps. In this experiment, we set the similarity radius
ra = 0.0625, which is consistent with the training phase mentioned in the paper.
                                                  DDPG                               PPO
                    Training steps
                                     Oracle attack LCBT attack Oracle attack LCBT attack
  Environment 1
                         3e5            99.339%           97.884%         99.930%           99.920%
                         4e5            99.828%           99.787%         100.00%           100.00%


Table 3: The similarity between the original target policy and attacked policy in environment 2.
Using a similar method as in Table 2, we separately select the attacked policies for 1.0 ∗ 106 steps
and 1.8 ∗ 106 steps and match their similarity with the original target policy. In this experiment,
we set the similarity radius ra = 0.31, which is consistent with the training phase mentioned in the
paper.
                                                 DDPG                              TD3
                    Training steps
                                     Oracle attack LCBT attack Oracle attack LCBT attack
 Environment 2
                          1e6          85.502%          76.771%          99.864%        98.564%
                         1.8e6         90.471%          82.421%          99.914%        99.076%


Table 4: The similarity between the original target policy and attacked policy in environment 3.
Using a similar method as in Table 2, we select the attacked policies for 8∗105 steps and match their
similarity with the original target policy. In this experiment, we set the similarity radius ra = 0.497,
which is consistent with the training phase mentioned in the paper.
                               Training steps DDPG LCBT attack TD3 LCBT attack
           Environment 3
                                    8e5                 78.488%                97.812%


Table 5: A comparison between the two attack algorithms.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R(T ) is the upper bound of
D-Regret(K) of the agent’s RL algorithm, where T = KH.
                                                   Attack Algorithm                                                                                   Scenario                                                                                                                                                               Cost Bound
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H R(T )+2H 2 log(1/p)R(T )                                                                                                             4
 LCB-H Liu & Lai (2021)                                                                                                     Discrete state and action spaces                                                                                                                                                ∆min                                            + 307SAH ∆log(2SAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /p)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           min
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     √                                                                          2 PH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R(T )+2H 2                                    ln(1/δ2 )·R(T )                        18M H 2 ln( 2MδHK )                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h=1 |TK |
                                                             LCBT (Ours)                                             Continuous state and action spaces                                                                                                                        ∆o   †                                                   +                               o   †
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (∆† +∆min −Ls ds )2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                † +∆min −Ls ds


H                                                       D ISCUSSION

In this section, we will compare our work with that in Liu & Lai (2021), which focuses on the
action-manipulation attack in discrete state and action spaces. Table 5 represents the cost bounds


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                       (QYLURQPHQW

                                                                             $WWDFN 7LPH 3HUFHQWDJH LQ /&%7 RQ 7'
                                                                             $WWDFN 7LPH 3HUFHQWDJH LQ /&%7 RQ ''3*


                 7LPH 3HUFHQWDJH


                                                                                                  6WHSV                                            H


Figure 8: In the initial phase, the reinforcement learning algorithm undergoes a completely random
exploration period, during which the algorithm consumes minimal time. As a result, the time propor-
tion for LCBT attack is notably high. Subsequently, as the neural network within the reinforcement
learning process intervenes, this proportion rapidly decreases. In the subsequent phases, due to
the increasing number of nodes in the LCBT algorithm’s tree, the proportion of time consumed by
running the LCBT algorithm gradually escalates.


for LCB-H attack Liu & Lai
                          (2021) and our LCBT attack.
                                                       In the LCB-H attack, the denominator
is ∆min = minh∈[H],s∈S Vh† (s) − mina∈A Q†h (s, a) , whose definition is the same as ∆†min in
our work. In our denominator, ∆o† represents the gap between the policies π o and π † , and Ls ds
     p the uncertainty generated by the state subinterval. In addition, there both exists R(T ) +
represents
2H 2 log(1/p)R(T ) in the two cost bounds because the effectiveness of the algorithm used by the
agent has an important impact on the cost. In other words, the agent with a more efficient algorithm
can learn the target policies faster when under attack. In LCB-H, The reason for multiplying with H
is that when the attacker launches an attack, the original action has only a 1/H probability of being
replaced with the worst action, otherwise, it will be replaced with the target action. The number
of states S in LCB-H is replaced by the number of subintervals M in LCBT. And the number of
                                                 PH
actions A is replaced by the total node number h=1 |TKh | while we use the cover trees to discretize
the action space.


                                                                                                   23
