Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ROLE LLM: B ENCHMARKING , E LICITING , AND
E NHANCING ROLE -P LAYING A BILITIES OF L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

           The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has paved the way for complex
           tasks such as role-playing, which enhances user interactions by enabling mod-
           els to imitate various characters. However, the closed-source nature of state-of-
           the-art LLMs and their general-purpose training limit role-playing optimization.
           In this paper, we introduce RoleLLM, a framework to benchmark, elicit, and
           enhance role-playing abilities in LLMs. RoleLLM comprises four stages: (1)
           Role Profile Construction for 100 roles; (2) Context-Based Instruction Genera-
           tion (Context-Instruct) for role-specific knowledge extraction; (3) Role Prompting
           using GPT (RoleGPT) for speaking style imitation; and (4) Role-Conditioned In-
           struction Tuning (RoCIT) for fine-tuning open-source models along with role cus-
           tomization. By Context-Instruct and RoleGPT, we create RoleBench, the first sys-
           tematic and fine-grained character-level benchmark dataset for role-playing with
           168,093 samples. Moreover, RoCIT on RoleBench yields RoleLLaMA (English)
           and RoleGLM (Chinese), significantly enhancing role-playing abilities and even
           achieving comparable results with RoleGPT (using GPT-4).


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT1 , GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), and PaLM (Chowdhery
et al., 2022) are widely considered as significant milestones in the evolution of AI. The advent of
LLMs has facilitated a paradigm shift in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community, redi-
recting focus from traditional downstream tasks (e.g., translation (Liu et al., 2020), and question-
answering (Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020)) to more complex and agent-level tasks (e.g., tool-
use (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023a), and role-playing (Shanahan et al., 2023)). Among these
applications, role-playing aims to enable or customize LLMs to simulate various characters or per-
sonas with distinct attributes and conversational styles, which provides a more nuanced interaction
experience for users, and renders LLMs more familiar, companionable and immersive (Shanahan
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b).
However, existing open-source LLMs are predominantly trained on general domains and lack spe-
cific optimization for role-playing. Besides, while state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLMs like GPT-4 (Ope-
nAI, 2023) exhibit advanced role-playing capabilities, their closed-source nature imposes constraints
including high API costs, unavailability of fine-tuning, and limited context window size.
To mitigate these issues, several methods have been previously proposed for both closed-source and
open-source models (Li et al., 2023b; Park et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Salemi et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2023). Nevertheless, they have the following limitations: (1) limited granularity: they mainly
focus on coarse-grained personality traits, professions, or personas (Li et al., 2023b; Park et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a) (e.g., programmer, writer), neglecting more complex,
finer-grained role-playing at the character level (e.g., Sherlock Holmes) for nuanced interactions
and enriched experiences; (2) lack of data and benchmark: there is a lack of high-quality, diverse,
and extensive open-source datasets, as well as a shortage of benchmarks for evaluation; (3) API and
    1
        https://chat.openai.com/


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  🎭                           2   Context-Instruct
                                                                         Q: 一加一等于几？ Q: How's the weather?
                                                                                                           It's sunny and



                                                                           👨‍💼 🦙
                                      M
                  [Segment]           [Question] [Confidence] [Answer]               1+1=2
                                                                                                            warm today!
                                      M
       Script
                  [Segment]           [Question] [Confidence] [Answer]
   1                                  M


                                                                         🔮
                  [Segment]           [Question] [Confidence] [Answer]



  👤
                                                                                     4


                                                                           👨‍🎤 🪅
                                                                                         ChatGLM        LLaMA
                                                                               🔥 RoCIT
                                                                         RoleBench
  Role Profile
                                  3    RoleGPT
                    System Instruction                     Customized
                   Retrieval Augmentation                   Response


                                                           🎨
                                                                                          RoleGLM      RoleLLaMA


  📦Instruction
                  Prompt
                                          Role Prompting
                                                                                     这问题可难不倒
                                                                                      俺老孙，二！
                                                                                             Oh, it's a splendid,
                                                                                              sun-filled day!


Figure 1: Illustration of RoleLLM. RoleLLM comprises four stages: (1) role profile construction; (2)
context-based instruction generation (Context-Instruct), primarily aimed at extracting role-specific
knowledge and episodic memories; (3) role prompting using GPT (RoleGPT), chiefly for the imita-
tion of speaking styles; and (4) role-conditioned instruction tuning (RoCIT), which utilizes the data
generated by Context-Instruct and RoleGPT to enhance existing open-source LLMs.


context costs: methods relying on closed-source models such as ChatGPT and GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) cannot be freely fine-tuned and hence require all supplementary information to be included
in the prompt, unnecessarily occupying the context window. Besides, API costs are prohibitively
high. Therefore, exploring solutions that minimize context window utilization and are based on
fine-tuning open-source models is worth researching.
In this paper, we introduce RoleLLM, a role-playing framework of data construction, evaluation,
and solutions for both closed-source and open-source models. In Figure 1, RoleLLM includes
four key stages: (1) Role Profile Construction: we construct profiles for 95 English and 5 Chi-
nese roles at a fine-grained character level with diverse personalities, elaborately selected from
916 English and 24 Chinese publicly available scripts; (2) Context-Based Instruction Genera-
tion (Context-Instruct): We use GPT to generate high-quality QA pairs from segmented profiles
to extract role-specific knowledge; (3) Role Prompting using GPT (RoleGPT): we elicit role-
playing abilities in GPT via dialogue-engineering-based role prompting, utilizing system instruction
and retrieval augmentation, to generate customized responses for speaking style imitation; and (4)
Role-Conditioned Instruction Tuning (RoCIT): by fine-tuning open-source LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023) and ChatGLM22 (Du et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022) with context-efficient role condi-
tioning on our RoleBench, a comprehensive dataset with 168,093 role-playing samples generated
by Context-Instruct and RoleGPT, we obtain RoleLLaMA and RoleGLM. Note that, to the best
of our knowledge, RoleBench is the first systematic instruction-tuning dataset and benchmark for
fine-grained role-playing.
In our experiments, we use three Rouge-L-based metrics (Lin, 2004) to assess models on speak-
ing style imitation, answering accuracy, and role-specific knowledge capturing. GPT-based eval-
uators are also utilized, aligning with AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023c). Our principal findings are:
(1) dialogue engineering is favored over prompt engineering by GPT evaluators for RoleGPT; (2)
RoleBench markedly improves models’ role-playing abilities, even achieving competitive results
with RoleGPT in some cases; (3) RoleLLaMA exhibits robust generalization in terms of speaking
style imitation and accuracy to unseen roles, requiring only role descriptions and catchphrases for
effective adaptation, allowing users seamless customization of new roles; (4) system-instruction-
based approach surpasses retrieval augmentation in role customization effectiveness and context
efficiency; (5) Context-Instruct significantly enhances models’ knowledge about their roles, outper-
forming retrieval-augmentation-based methods when using noisy role profiles. We refer the readers
to Appendix B for demonstrations.
In summary, this study aims to elicit, benchmark, and enhance the role-playing abilities of GPT and
open-source large language models, aspiring to spur further research in role-playing LLM agents.

   2
       https://github.com/THUDM/ChatGLM2-6B


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       R ELATED W ORK
Role-Playing. Recent advances in the LLM community have showcased the potential of LLM
customization and role-playing (Wei et al., 2023; Shanahan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Salemi
et al., 2023; Maas, 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023a; Park et al., 2023). Playing specific roles
enables LLMs to become more vivid (Li et al., 2023a), interactive (Maas, 2023; Wang et al., 2023b),
personalized (Salemi et al., 2023; Halder, 2023), and capable of addressing complex tasks (Li et al.,
2023b; Chen et al., 2023a; Qian et al., 2023). However, open-source LLMs still lag significantly
behind SOTA closed-source LLMs such as GPT in terms of role-playing capability. Moreover, to
the best of our knowledge, there exists no systematic and fine-grained benchmark to assess role-
playing capability. Hence, we aim to bridge this gap by fostering the enhancement of role-playing
capabilities in open-source LLMs and constructing the first benchmark for role-playing.
Data Augmentation for Instruction Tuning. Instruction tuning (aka., supervised fine-tuning, SFT)
aims to enhance LLMs’ ability to follow instructions (Mishra et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023b). One of the main challenges for SFT
is to obtain high-quality and diverse instruction data (Zhou et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022a; Zhang
et al., 2023a). However, manually annotating high-quality instruction data is costly. Fortunately,
current SOTA LLMs such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) are increasingly considered superior to human
annotators in various tasks and domains (Gilardi et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023), in terms of both
data quality and annotation cost. Thus, employing these LLMs for data augmentation is becoming an
increasingly standard practice, both for general-domain instruction-following enhancement (Wang
et al., 2022a; Honovich et al., 2022; Taori et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023) and task-
specific (Qin et al., 2023b) or domain-specific (Wang et al., 2023a) adaptation. However, how to
augment instruction tuning data for role-playing remains under-explored. Moreover, there is still a
lack of effective data augmentation methods to incorporate role-specific knowledge in synthetic data.
Therefore, in our work, we explore methods for both general-domain role-playing data generation
and the construction of data with role-specific knowledge.

3       M ETHODS
In this section, we delineate our approaches to role-playing. We first introduce the design principles
underlying our solutions (§3.1). Then, we illustrate two role-playing data augmentation mecha-
nisms: RoleGPT (§3.2), and Context-Instruct (§3.3). Finally, we present role-conditioned instruc-
tion tuning (RoCIT) associated with system-instruction-based role customization procedure (§3.4).

3.1       D ESIGN P RINCIPLES

Speaking Style Imitation. To mimic the speaking style of specific roles, the model’s responses to
instructions should meet two criteria by our design: (1) Lexical Consistency: the model’s responses
should incorporate catchphrases or idiomatic expressions commonly used by the character to ensure
lexical alignment with the role’s unique verbal style; (2) Dialogic Fidelity: the model should gen-
erate responses that are not only contextually appropriate but also stylistically similar to example
dialogues of the character. For example, a pirate character’s lexical consistency involves frequent
use of nautical jargon like “aweigh” as well as pet phrases like “matey” or “ahoy”. Besides, dialogic
fidelity should capture the character’s unique syntax and tone (e.g., colloquial expressions, a gruff
manner of speaking, and a tone that evokes a sense of adventure and lawlessness).

Role-Specific Knowledge and Memory Injection. Another crucial facet of role-playing is to
infuse role-specific knowledge and episodic memories3 . Two distinct categories of knowledge are
considered: (1) Script-Based Knowledge, which involves explicit details documented in scripts,
such as detailed character background, episodic memories, and specific events that the character has
experienced; (2) Script-Agnostic Knowledge, which encompasses general knowledge or expertise
that the character may possess. For example, when acting as Iron Man, an LLM should contain
script-based knowledge (e.g., Tony Stark’s creation of the first Iron Man suit while held captive
in a cave) and script-agnostic knowledge related to being an entrepreneur (e.g., business acumen,
leadership qualities, and expertise in technology).
    3
        For simplicity, we will henceforth refer to both as “role-specific knowledge” in the following text.


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2     ROLE GPT: E LICITING ROLE -P LAYING A BILITIES VIA D IALOGUE E NGINEERING

      Zero-Shot Prompt Engineering                             Few-Shot Dialogue Engineering.
      (Custom Instructions).
      <|im start|>system                                       <|im start|>system
      You are Twilight Sparkle, ...<|im end|>                  You are Twilight Sparkle, ...<|
      <|im start|>user                                         im end|>
      {user instruction}<|im end|>                             <|im start|>user
                                                               {Q1 }<|im end|>
      Few-Shot Prompt Engineering.                             <|im start|>assistant
                                                               {A1 }<|im end|>
      <|im start|>system                                       ...
      You are Twilight Sparkle, ...<|im end|>                  <|im start|>user
      <|im start|>user                                         {QN }<|im end|>
      {Q1 }\n{A1 }                                             <|im start|>assistant
      {Q2 }\n{A2 }                                             {AN }<|im end|>
      ...                                                      <|im start|>user
      {QN }\n{AN }                                             {user instruction}<|im end|>
      {user instruction}\n<|im end|>

Given constraints on fine-tuning, customizing GPT for role-playing typically involves prompting,
such as zero-shot custom instructions4 and few-shot prompt engineering (i.e., in-context learn-
ing) (Brown et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2023), following OpenAI’s Chat Markup Language (ChatML)
guidelines5 . However, for ChatGPT and GPT-4 which have traded their in-context learning ability
for dialogue history modeling (Fu et al., 2022), traditional few-shot prompt engineering is insuf-
ficient to fully elicit role-playing abilities. Thus, we modify the few-shot prompting approach to
dialogue engineering, as illustrated in Box 3.2. See Appendix K.1 for detailed prompts.
Specifically, we first use the audited6 GPT-4 to generate character descriptions and catchphrases as
the core of the custom instructions (i.e., system instructions). Then, we include an overall role-
playing task instruction like “Please speak like [role name]” and retrieve top-5 relevant dialogue
pairs in the role profile using BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009) as few-shot demonstrations.
By doing so, RoleGPT’s responses can capture the characters’ speaking styles and include some
role-specific knowledge. However, the sparsity and noise in the profiles limit the effectiveness of
knowledge discovery via retrieval augmentation.

3.3     C ONTEXT-I NSTRUCT: C ONTEXT- BASED I NSTRUCTION G ENERATION

To enhance the density of role-specific knowledge within the synthetic instruction dataset, we in-
troduce Context-Instruct for long-text knowledge extraction and instruction data generation. The
role-specific instruction data generation comprises three steps: (1) segmenting role profiles; (2)
generating question-confidence-answer triplet candidates; and (3) filtering and post-processing low-
quality data. We will provide a brief overview as follows. Please refer to Appendix C for details.

Role Profile Segmentation. Given the limited context size of GPT, we meticulously partition role
profiles into more manageable segments. A role profile includes (a) role description and catch-
phrases, as well as (b) structured dialogues (c.f., Appendix I). Segment (a) is used to obtain script-
agnostic instructions, and numerous segments of (b) are used to obtain script-based instructions.

Instruction and Response Generation. As illustrated in Figure 1, in the process of generating
candidates for role-specific instruction data, three elements are considered: a question (Q) related to
a given segment (i.e., context), the corresponding answer (A), and a confidence score with rationale
(C). A LLM is used to generate these triplets for each role and segment. Our preliminary trials
indicated that generating QA pairs without a confidence score resulted in lower-quality questions,
   4
     https://openai.com/blog/custom-instructions-for-chatgpt
   5
     https://github.com/openai/openai-python/blob/main/chatml.md
   6
     The audit involves asking GPT-4 basic questions about each character, and human annotators then verify
to make sure that GPT-4 knows well about the character.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


often appearing incompleteness for script-based instructions due to assumptions of prior knowledge,
or containing hallucinations for script-agnostic instructions due to lack of context. To address this,
inspired by Lin et al. (2022) and Xiong et al. (2023), the model is prompted to also generate a
confidence score with rationale to evaluate the question completeness or factualness. The prompt
template includes role description, catchphrases, few-shot examples and task instructions for speak-
ing style imitation and triplet generation7 . The generation process yields at least 400 candidates per
role with multiple model runs.

Data Filtering and Post-processing. The filtering procedure involves confidence-score-based fil-
tering and de-duplication to ensure data quality and diversity. Please refer to Appendix C for more
details about filtering and post-processing.

3.4   RO CIT: ROLE -C ONDITIONED I NSTRUCTION T UNING

There are two types of augmented data: one for general-domain instructions, generated by RoleGPT,
and the other for role-specific instructions, generated via Context-Instruct. Fine-tuning on these data
not only improves the models’ speaking styles but also embeds role-specific knowledge into their
weights. By applying this to LLaMA for English and ChatGLM2 for Chinese, we obtain RoleL-
LaMA and RoleGLM. In contrast to vanilla supervised fine-tuning, we employ role-conditioned
fine-tuning that integrates particular strategies for role customization, which includes system in-
struction (ours, §3.4) and retrieval augmentation (c.f., §3.2 and §5.3).

Customization by system instruction. In RoCIT, we prepend a system instruction to the inputs
with the role name, description, catchphrases, and role-playing task instruction as in RoleGPT. Fol-
lowing Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), the chat markup language for RoleLLaMA is “### Instruc-
tion:\n{system instruction}</s>\n\n### Input:\n{user input}</s>\n\n### Response:\n{model
response}</s>”; For RoleGLM, it is translated into Chinese. We supervise only the responses and
special tokens shown in blue. During inference, users can easily modify LLM’s role via system
instruction, minimizing the context window consumption compared with retrieval augmentation.

4     ROLE B ENCH : B ENCHMARKING ROLE -P LAYING A BILITIES

In this section, we introduce how to construct RoleBench and provide an analysis. RoleBench can
be used to assess role-playing capabilities and to enhance such capabilities.

4.1   DATA C ONSTRUCTION

The construction of the RoleBench dataset comprises five steps: (1) selection of roles; (2) construc-
tion of role profiles; (3) sampling of general instructions; (4) generation of raw RoleBench data; and
(5) cleaning of the RoleBench dataset.
Firstly, we meticulously select 100 representative and distinctive characters with the help of GPT-
4 from a diverse range of scripts, including those from NLP Movie Scripts8 , SummScreen (Chen
et al., 2022), and manually curated Chinese scripts. Secondly, role profiles are composed of GPT-
4-generated role descriptions and catchphrases, verified by authors, and structured dialogues parsed
from scripts (c.f., Appendix I). Thirdly, we randomly sample 1,500 English general instructions
from multiple datasets, comprising Super-NaturalInstruct (Wang et al., 2022b), UltraChat (Ding
et al., 2023), and Alpaca’s (Taori et al., 2023). We also sample COIG (Zhang et al., 2023a) and
BELLE’s (Yunjie et al., 2023) to obtain 1,479 Chinese general instructions. All sampled instructions
contain no more than 100 words. We de-duplicate them based on BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza,
2009) similarities. Fourthly, we use RoleGPT to obtain multiple responses for each general instruc-
tion and use Context-Instruct to generate role-specific question-answer pairs. Lastly, the obtained
raw dataset undergoes a thorough cleaning to ensure response completeness, AI and role identity
concealment, and non-rejection. For further details on data construction, please see Appendix D.
   7
     The data generated by Context-Instruct exhibits a less distinct speaking style compared to that generated
by RoleGPT, due to fewer demonstrations to ensure dialogic fidelity.
   8
     https://github.com/PedroUria/NLP-Movie_Scripts


                                                      5
                           Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                       o sr e p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9000


                                                                                                                                                               ecneirepxe
                                                                                                                             list


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tnem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0WODGT QH 5GPVGPEGU
                                                                                                                                           ytil a n
                                                                                                   set


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pi
                                                                                i
                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7000


                                                                            r


                                                                                     ga
                                                                            e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hs
                                                                                ic

                                                                                          se


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  om
                                                                                 p
                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                     s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oi
                                                                         e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ci
                                                                          n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ta
                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                s                                                                                                                                 5000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tir
                                                co                                    e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fli


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c
                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                po                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 co
                                  fo
                                         cu                              su
                                                    s
                                at
                                     titu                                            re                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ns                                                                                                           3000
                                              de
                                                                                                                                  given describe                                                                                                                                            io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tu
                                life                                                                            m                                                                                                                                                si
                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                               ta
                            perce                                                                                                     in                                                                           handle                                                                       pressure                                                                                                                             0
                                               ption                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130140150160170180190200
                            actions                                                                        affec
                                                                                                                 t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +PRWV .GPIVJ
9QTFU
                            interactions                                                                                                                                                                                                          believe                                                                                                              mysteries

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   edit                                                                                                                           fate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               code
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           categori
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ze                                                                                                   passage

                                                                lf                                         see
                                yourse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              has                                                                                                                  restaurant

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             post

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 article
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 te


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0WODGT QH 5GPVGPEGU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cr                                                                                                                                  gram

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mar


                                                                                                                                      e                                                                                                     te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bloo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d


                                                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       app
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 me                          les



                                                                                                                              a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           anin
                                         re                                                                                                                                                                                   fin                                                                                                                                          g

                              fu tu                                                                                      sh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d

                                                                                                                                           er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  query
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       solu


                                                                                                                                                                             eg


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tio
                                                                                                                                              ip


                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ha
                                ti


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ih
                                                                                                                                                                  gnisu

                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                               nra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            iku

                                                                            ew


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                      sn


                                                                                                                                                                                t ar e
                                                                     vi
                                                    s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  joke


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kn
                                             rite                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                co


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12500
                                       ila                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            up
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    he                              po                     let
                                 sim
                                                          ld
                                                                                                                                    i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     em
                                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ad
                                                                                                                                                               el



                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lin
                                                w                               ch                in
                                                                                                       g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10000
                                                                         a                    d                                                                                                                                                                        n                            w                     an



                                                                    ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to        on


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ny

                                                                                          n                                                                                                                                                                                        m                                     rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s


                                                                p                    ta
                                                        a
                                                            p
                                                                            e
                                                                                rs                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                        d                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5000
                                                                                      y


                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e                ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                     ti


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rs
                                                                u



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uq
                                                                                 tn


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ti
                                                                                                                                                                                               tnes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                            d


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2500
                                                                                                                                  nos


                                                                                          you

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sm
                                                                        i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               av


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 itil
                                                                                                                                                                       sdrow


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      se
                                                                                                                                                                                                              e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               se
                                                                                                                                      sel
                                                                                                            ev


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                                                                            ecna


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130140150160170180190200
                                                                                                                       no
                                                                                                                 sc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ls
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ecn
                                                                                                                                                                                     po
                                                                                                           ol


                                                                                                                      i si


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ws
                                                                                                                iry


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1WVRWV .GPIVJ
9QTFU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                  ce


                                                                                                                                                                                                     ej d a
                                                                                                                                                                                     s n oit a r e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       elti
                                                                                                                                           tr o p
                                                                                                             l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              na
                                                                                                                  d


                                                                                                                                                    slli k s


                                                                                                                                                                            br e v


                                                                                                                                                                                                      s e vit c
                                                                                                                                          mi


                                                                                                                                                       all


                           Figure 3: Verb-noun structure of RoleBench-en In- Figure 4: Length distribution of the instruc-
                           structions.                                       tions and responses in RoleBench.
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js

                             Metric                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Value
                             # of role categories                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30                                                                                                                                                                Quality Review Question                                       Yes %
                             # of script categories                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                Can the generated response 100%
                             # of roles                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100                                                                                                                                                                   answer the instruction?
                               - # of English roles                                                                                                                                                                                                                 95                                                                                                                                                                    + Does the generated response
                               - # of Chinese roles                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5                                                                                                                                                                    sufficiently reflect the charac-   84%
                             # of dialogue rounds                                                                                                                                                                                                                 140,726                                                                                                                                                                 ter’s speaking style?
                             # of samples / instructions                                                                                                                                                                                    168,093 / 23,463                                                                                                                                                                              + Is the generated response        77%
                               - of general-purpose                                                                                                                                                                                         147,609 / 2,979                                                                                                                                                                               correct?
                                  - in English                                                                                                                                                                                              140,225 / 1,500                                                                                                                                                                                    Table 2: Data quality review.
                                  - in Chinese                                                                                                                                                                                               7,384 / 1,479
                                  - of open questions (qs)                                                                                                                                                                                    22,479 / 223
                                  - of commonsense qs                                                                                                                                                                                         37,072 / 461
                                  - of knowledge-intensive qs                                                                                                                                                                                88,058 / 2,295
                               - of role-specific                                                                                                                                                                                           20,484 / 20,484
                                  - in English                                                                                                                                                                                              18,949 / 18,949
                                  - in Chinese                                                                                                                                                                                               1,535 / 1,535
                                  - of script-agnostic qs                                                                                                                                                                                   13,220 / 13,220
                                  - of script-based qs                                                                                                                                                                                       7,164 / 7,164
                             avg. instruction length (in words)                                                                                                                                                                                                        25.71
                             avg. response length (in words)                                                                                                                                                                                                           30.48                                                                                                                                                         Figure 2: Word cloud of role categories.
                           Table 1: Basic Statistics of RoleBench.

                           4.2                      DATA A NALYSIS

                           We utilize GPT-4 API to obtain RoleBench-general-en (English) and RoleBench-general-zh
                           (Chinese)9 . Context-Instruct is based on GPT-3.5 API to produce RoleBench-specific-en and
                           RoleBench-specific-zh. Role selection, as well as description and catchphrase generation, are all
                           executed using GPT-4 API. The parameters for GPT API calling are shown in Appendix F. Below,
                           we provide an overview of RoleBench and refer the readers to Appendix E for the list of roles.
                           Statistics and Quality. Table 1 provides basic statistics for RoleBench. Following Wang et al.
                           (2022a), we randomly sampled 100 instances from general and role-specific subsets respectively to
                                 9
                                     https://platform.openai.com/


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


evaluate the quality of RoleBench, and then we asked an expert annotator to assess their qualities
in three aspects. The results in Table 2 indicate that most of them are of high quality. Please see
Appendix J for valid and invalid examples.

Diversity. We analyze the comprehensiveness and diversity of RoleBench. Figure 3 shows verb-
noun structure of RoleBench-en instructions, where the top 10 verbs (inner circle) and their top 4
direct noun objects (outer circle) are depicted, accounting for 5.6% of instructions. Besides, we
categorize RoleBench roles into multiple classes and build a word cloud to show their diversity in
Figure 2. The length distribution of the instructions and responses is shown in Figure 4.

5        E XPERIMENTS
5.1      E XPERIMENT S ETUP

RoleLLaMA & RoleGLM. The LLaMA-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) is fine-tuned on
both RoleBench-general-en and RoleBench-specific-en utilizing LoRA tuning (Hu et al., 2022).
Similarly, the ChatGLM2-6B10 model (Zeng et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022) is fine-tuned on
RoleBench-general-zh and RoleBench-specific-zh employing the same technique. It is worth not-
ing that LLaMA-7B is only a pre-trained model, and ChatGLM2-6B is post-trained with enhanced
instruction-following and dialogue capabilities. Please refer to Appendix F for more details.

Baselines. RoleGPT is a strong baseline for both Chinese and English roles (GPT-4). For English
roles, LLaMA-7B and its instruction-tuned variants, Vicuna-13B (Chiang et al., 2023) and Alpaca-
7B (Taori et al., 2023), are as baselines. For Chinese roles, ChatGLM2-6B is a baseline. We also
incorporate models trained on script data in a multi-turn conversation mode as additional baselines.

Evaluation Protocol. We employ Rouge-L (Lin, 2004) to measure the overlap between model
predictions and ground truths. The ground truths comprise three categories: (1) Raw ground-
truths of general instructions without role-playing (RAW); (2) Customized general instruction re-
sponses with role-playing from RoleBench-general (CUS); (3) Role-specific instruction responses
from RoleBench-specific (SPE). RAW assesses the model’s response accuracy to instructions. CUS
gauges the model’s ability to mimic the speaking style associated with a particular role. SPE tests
the model’s role-specific knowledge and memories. Following AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023c), we
also use GPT as an evaluator, given the proven reliability of GPT evaluators (Fu et al., 2023; Gilardi
et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023). GPT evaluator prompts, with minor modifications from AlpacaE-
val’s11 , are detailed in Appendix K.5. These prompts aid in sample comparison and ranking to obtain
a win rate or an average ranking. Our train-test set splitting strategy focuses on two dimensions:
(1) Instruction-based splits for assessing instruction generalization; and (2) Role-based splits for
assessing role generalization, limited to English. Please refer to Appendix G for more details.

5.2      M AIN E XPERIMENTS

Instruction Generalization (English). Tables 3a and 3b present the Rouge-L and GPT scores re-
spectively, for the evaluation of instruction generalization abilities. For the GPT-3.5 evaluation, each
model is compared with our RoleGPT to determine a win rate, signifying the frequency at which
a model is favored over RoleGPT by GPT-3.5. We observe that RoleLLaMA manifests a consid-
erable enhancement in role-playing performance compared to instruction-tuned baselines and the
vanilla base model, in terms of speaking style imitation (CUS), response accuracy (RAW), and role-
specific knowledge (SPE). Moreover, LLaMA-script directly tuned on original conversation data in
scripts, even underperforms base LLaMA, which shows the imperative need for denoising of script
data. The comparison between Alpaca/Vicuna and LLaMA indicates the efficacy of general-purpose
instruction tuning in role-playing. However, the discrepancy between RoleLLaMA and Alpaca/Vi-
cuna underscores the necessity for LLMs to enhance their role-playing capabilities beyond mere
general-purpose instruction-following. Additionally, despite RoleLLaMA trailing behind RoleGPT
    10
   https://github.com/THUDM/ChatGLM2-6B
    11
   https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval/blob/main/src/alpaca_eval/
evaluators_configs/alpaca_eval_gpt4/alpaca_eval.txt


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in terms of speaking style imitation (CUS) and response accuracy (RAW)12 , it surpasses RoleGPT
in role-specific knowledge, indicating the efficacy of our Context-Instruct technique.
               (a) Rouge-L Evaluation.
       Model          CUS        RAW        SPE         avg.              (b) GPT-3.5 Evaluation.
      RoleGPT        0.5764    0.5322      0.3229     0.4772               Model        Win Rate
   LLaMA             0.1291    0.1232      0.2553     0.1692               Vicuna          29.26
 LLaMA-script        0.0832    0.0509      0.1081     0.0807               Alpaca          29.30
    Alpaca           0.2423    0.3529      0.2695     0.2882
    Vicuna           0.2101    0.2550      0.2913     0.2521            RoleLLaMA          55.82
  RoleLLaMA          0.3294    0.3755      0.3814     0.3621

  Table 3: Evaluation of RoleLLaMA using Rouge-L and GPT-3.5 for instruction generalization.
Instruction Generalization (Chinese). We also conduct experiments using instruction-tuned
LLMs for 5 Chinese roles (Table 4a and Table 4b). We find that even without the enhancement
of role-playing data, ChatGLM2 shows notable role-playing performance, particularly in terms of
role-specific knowledge. Nevertheless, fine-tuning with RoleBench further enhances its role-playing
capabilities across all metrics, even slightly surpassing the scores achieved by RoleGPT.
                     (a) Rouge-L Evaluation.
        Model            CUS       RAW          SPE          avg.                (b) GPT-4 Evaluation.
       RoleGPT          0.5368     0.5748      0.2478       0.4531               Model          Win Rate
   ChatGLM2             0.3938     0.506       0.3099       0.4032              ChatGLM2            24.17
 ChatGLM2-script        0.1401     0.3066      0.0915       0.1794              RoleGLM             36.37
       RoleGLM          0.5049     0.5255      0.3406       0.4570

      Table 4: Evaluation of RoleGLM using Rouge-L and GPT-4 for instruction generalization.
Role Generalization (English). In Table 5a and Table 5b, considering 10 held-out unseen roles,
we observe that RoleLLaMA exhibits performance increase in imitating speaking style (CUS) and
maintaining accuracy (RAW). However, with respect to role-specific knowledge (SPE), there is not
a noticeable improvement compared to the baselines, which is intuitive since models with no prior
knowledge of an unseen role would naturally exhibit confusion regarding it.
                (a) Rouge-L Evaluation.
      Model         CUS       RAW         SPE         avg.                       (b) GPT-3.5 Evaluation.
   RoleGPT         0.6020     0.5322      0.2985    0.4776                       Model          Win Rate
      LLaMA        0.1316     0.1232      0.2551    0.2238                       Alpaca             16.96
      Alpaca       0.2315     0.3529      0.2587    0.3015                       Vicuna             37.65
      Vicuna       0.2082     0.2550      0.2775    0.2842                    RoleLLaMA             49.51
 RoleLLaMA         0.4126     0.4107      0.2568    0.3600

       Table 5: Evaluation of RoleLLaMA using Rouge-L and GPT-3.5 for role generalization.
5.3    A BLATION S TUDY                                                Method        Win Rate    Avg. Ranking
                                                                     RoleGPT (zsp)     9.85            2.31
Effect of different RoleGPT prompting strategies.         RoleGPT (fsp)    30.19      1.92
We employ GPT-3.5 to evaluate three role prompting
                                                          RoleGPT (fsd)    61.79      1.49
methods in §3.2, namely, zero-shot prompt engineering
(zsp), few-shot prompt engineering (fsp), and few-shot Table 6: Comparison of three role
dialogue engineering (fsd). The evaluation is based on prompting strategies using GPT-3.5.
RoleBench-specific-zh in Table 6. The Win Rate is the
frequency with which a method is ranked first by GPT-3.5 among the three and Avg. Ranking refers
  12
     Note that drawing a direct comparison between RoleLLaMA and RoleGPT may not be equitable, given that
RoleGPT is closed-source and the specifics of its model size and instruction tuning data remain undisclosed.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to the average ranking position of the method. We observe that few-shot dialogue engineering sig-
nificantly outperforms few-shot prompt engineering, and both few-shot approaches excel over the
zero-shot approach. These findings underscore the significance of dialogue-mode input formatting
and retrieval augmentation for GPT models.

Effect of different role customization strategies. We compare two role customization ap-
proaches: zero-shot system instruction (sys, §3.4) v.s. few-shot retrieval augmentation (reaug).
Retrieval-augmentation-based role customization is akin to the way mentioned in §3.2, we insert re-
trieved dialogue pairs from profiles into the input, formatted according to the chat markup language
specific to RoleLLaMA and RoleGLM. During both fine-tuning and inference, the input combines
system instruction and these retrieved in-context demonstrations. Table 7 shows the superior per-
formance of the system-instruction-based approach over the retrieval-augmentation-based approach
for RoleLLaMA and RoleGLM, leading to a higher context efficiency. We suppose that the re-
trieved in-context examples from profiles are noisy and sparse, which leads to the distraction of the
relatively small LLMs (e.g., RoleGLM and RoleLLaMA) and degrades their performance. While
larger models such as RoleGPT exhibit greater robustness to noisy and sparse information, leading
to performance invariability and even performance increase (Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023).
 Method        RoleLLaMA (reaug)    RoleLLaMA (sys)    RoleGLM (reaug)   RoleGLM (sys)          RoleGPT (sys)     RoleGPT (reaug)
    SPE              0.3671              0.3814              0.2525          0.3406                  23.36             23.59

Table 7: Comparing system-instruction-based approach (sys) with retrieval-augmentation-based ap-
proach (reaug) for role customization. To ensure the relevance of the signals retrieved from the pro-
files, we only experiment on role-specific instructions. RoleGPT is tested on RoleBench-specific-zh.
                   (a) Instruction Generalization.                         (b) Role Generalization13 .
                         Method                        SPE                        Method                            SPE
               RoleLLaMA (w/o c-inst)                 0.2140          RoleLLaMA (w/o c-inst)                       0.2809
           RoleLLaMA (reaug, w/o c-inst)              0.1914       RoleLLaMA (reaug, w/o c-inst)                   0.1866
              RoleLLaMA (w/ c-inst)                   0.3814          RoleLLaMA (w/ c-inst)                        0.3504

             Table 8: Comparing Context-Instruct (c-inst) with Retrieval Augmentation (reaug).
Effect of Context-Instruct. To inject role-specific knowledge, a typical approach is to employ
retrieval-augmentation role customization strategy (c.f., §3.2 & §5.3). In Table 8, we explore the
effect of Context-Instruct to inject role-specific knowledge, comparing it with retrieval augmenta-
tion and the absence of both techniques. We observe that Context-Instruct has the capability to
substantially augment the models’ role-specific knowledge, and retrieval augmentation may lead to
distraction and a lack of robustness due to the noisy nature of the retrieval source discussed in §5.3.

Scaling Law. In Figure 5, we analyze scaling law of                                           Instruction Generalization
role-playing of RoleLLaMA with different sizes (i.e., 7B,                             45
13B, 33B), and observe that as the model size increases,
results of all metrics (i.e., RAW, CUS, SPE) are better.
                                                                            Rouge-L


                                                                                      40
We refer readers to Appendix H for more analysis (e.g.,
ablation studies on data mixing strategies).                                          35                                     SPE
                                                                                                                             RAW
                                                                                                                             CUS
6        C ONCLUSION                                                                  30 7B               13B                  33B
                                                                                              Different sizes of RoleLLaMA
We introduce RoleLLM, a framework to benchmark, Figure 5: Scaling law of role-playing.
elicit, and enhance role-playing in LLMs. We construct
100 role profiles, propose RoleGPT for speaking style imitation, and Context-Instruct for role-
specific knowledge extraction. Through these methods, we create RoleBench, the first fine-grained
benchmark and open-source instruction tuning data for role-playing. We obtain RoleLLaMA and
RoleGLM by role-conditioned instruction tuning on RoleBench, which demonstrate strong role-
playing performance and are even comparable with RoleGPT (using GPT-4).
    13
         Unlike experiments in §5.2, we use test split of unseen roles, rather than all splits, to prevent data leakage.


                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang, Sesay Jaward, Karlsson Börje, Jie Fu, and Yemin
  Shi. Autoagents: The automatic agents generation framework. arXiv preprint, 2023a.
Mingda Chen, Zewei Chu, Sam Wiseman, and Kevin Gimpel. SummScreen: A dataset for abstrac-
 tive screenplay summarization. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8602–8615, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
 acl-long.589.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xu-
  anyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. Symbolic discovery of
  optimization algorithms, 2023b.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233, 2023.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. CoRR, abs/2301.00234, 2023. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2301.00234. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.00234.
Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Glm:
  General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 320–335, 2022.
Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei Liu. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire. arXiv
   preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2302.04166, 2023.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, and Tushar Khot.          How does gpt obtain its abil-
  ity?    tracing emergent abilities of language models to their sources.
  Yao Fu’s Notion,  Dec 2022.          URL https://yaofu.notion.site/
  How-does-GPT-Obtain-its-Ability-Tracing-Emergent-Abilities-of-\
  Language-Models-to-their-Sources-b9a57ac0fcf74f30a1ab9e3e36fa1dc1.
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-
  annotation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2303.15056, 2023.
Nilimesh Halder. Harnessing the power of role-playing in advanced ai language models: A
  comprehensive guide to chatgpt’s potential. https://medium.com/@HalderNilimesh/
  harnessing-the-power-of-role-playing-in-advanced-ai-language-\
  models-a-comprehensive-guide-to-d50c818ddf59, 2023.
Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tuning
  language models with (almost) no human labor. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2212.09689, 2022.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cheng Li, Ziang Leng, Chenxi Yan, Junyi Shen, Hao Wang, Weishi MI, Yaying Fei, Xiaoyang
  Feng, Song Yan, HaoSheng Wang, Linkang Zhan, Yaokai Jia, Pingyu Wu, and Haozhen Sun.
  Chatharuhi: Reviving anime character in reality via large language model, 2023a.
Daliang Li, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Xin Wang, Michal Lukasik, Andreas Veit, Felix Yu,
  and Sanjiv Kumar. Large language models with controllable working memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv: Arxiv-2211.05110, 2022.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for” mind” exploration of large scale language model society.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023b.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023c.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.pdf.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14334, 2022.
Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Zhengzi Xu, Yuekang Li, Yaowen Zheng, Ying Zhang, Lida Zhao, Tianwei
  Zhang, and Yang Liu. Jailbreaking chatgpt via prompt engineering: An empirical study. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: 2305.13860, 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis,
  and Luke Zettlemoyer. Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2001.08210, 2020.
S. Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le,
   Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, and Adam Roberts. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for
   effective instruction tuning. ARXIV.ORG, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.13688.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.
Wheeler Saatchi Billington Shamash Maas, Carey. To infinity and beyond: Show-1 and showrunner
 agents in multi-agent simulations. arXiv preprint, 2023.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In ACL, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. PREPRINT, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and
  Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:
  2307.07924, 2023.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, Y. Fung, Yusheng Su, Huadong Wang, Cheng Qian, Runchu
  Tian, Kunlun Zhu, Shi Liang, Xingyu Shen, Bokai Xu, Zhen Zhang, Yining Ye, Bo Li, Ziwei
  Tang, Jing Yi, Yu Zhu, Zhenning Dai, Lan Yan, Xin Cong, Ya-Ting Lu, Weilin Zhao, Yuxiang
  Huang, Jun-Han Yan, Xu Han, Xian Sun, Dahai Li, Jason Phang, Cheng Yang, Tongshuang Wu,
  Heng Ji, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Tool learning with foundation models. ARXIV.ORG,
  2023a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.08354.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li,
  Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+
  real-world apis, 2023b.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond.
  Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 3(4):333–389, apr 2009. ISSN 1554-0669. doi: 10.1561/1500000019.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000019.
Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. Lamp: When large
  language models meet personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11406, 2023.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
  to use tools. CoRR, abs/2302.04761, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.04761. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.04761.
Murray Shanahan, Kyle McDonell, and Laria Reynolds. Role-play with large language models.
 arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.16367, 2023.
Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, E. Chi, Nathanael Scharli,
  and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.00093.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Haochun Wang, Chi Liu, Nuwa Xi, Zewen Qiang, Sendong Zhao, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. Huatuo:
  Tuning llama model with chinese medical knowledge, 2023a.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2212.10560, 2022a.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Super-naturalinstructions:generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ tasks. In EMNLP,
  2022b.
Zekun Wang, Ge Zhang, Kexin Yang, Ning Shi, Wangchunshu Zhou, Shaochun Hao, Guangzheng
  Xiong, Yizhi Li, Mong Yuan Sim, Xiuying Chen, et al. Interactive natural language processing.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13246, 2023b.
Jimmy Wei, Kurt Shuster, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, Jack Urbanek, and Mojtaba Komeili. Multi-
  party chat: Conversational agents in group settings with humans and models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv: Arxiv-2304.13835, 2023.
Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv: 2306.13063, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.13063v1.
Canwen Xu, Daya Guo, Nan Duan, and Julian McAuley. Baize: An open-source chat model with
  parameter-efficient tuning on self-chat data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01196, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ji Yunjie, Deng Yong, Gong Yan, Peng Yiping, Niu Qiang, Zhang Lei, Ma Baochang, and Xiangang
   Li. Exploring the impact of instruction data scaling on large language models: An empirical study
   on real-world use cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14742, 2023.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
  Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02414, 2022.
Ge Zhang, Yemin Shi, Ruibo Liu, Ruibin Yuan, Yizhi Li, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Zhaoqun Li, Zekun
  Wang, Chenghua Lin, et al. Chinese open instruction generalist: A preliminary release. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.07987, 2023a.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, and Guoyin Wang. Instruction tuning for large language models: A
  survey. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.10792, 2023b.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2306.05685,
  2023.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy.
  Lima: Less is more for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.11206, 2023.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E THICS S TATEMENT

Since role-playing may lead to jailbreaking (Liu et al., 2023), misuse of RoleLLM could generate
sensitive or harmful content, reflecting the violent, explicit, or discriminatory traits of certain char-
acters. This work and its assets are strictly for research purposes, opposing any malicious usage. It’s
recommended to employ moderation and filtering mechanisms to curb adverse content dissemina-
tion. The responsibility lies with researchers and users to ensure ethical application of RoleLLM.


B    N ON -C HERRY-P ICKED D EMONSTRATIONS


Wukong Sun from Journey to the West (RoleGLM, zh):
Q1: 你是哪里人？
A1: 哈哈，俺老孙可是花果山的猴子，花果山就在俺们猴山的脚下，那里的风景美得不
行，俺老孙就是在这里成长的。
Q2: 你的武器叫什么名字？
A2: 我的武器是金箍棒，它有着无穷无尽的变化，能够变大变小，还能变化方向，非常厉
害！
Q3: 请计算4和5的乘积。
A3: 哈哈，这个问题对俺老孙来说就像吃个馒头一样简单。4乘以5就是20，没错！
Q4: 过氧化氢可以杀菌的原理是什么？
A4: 哈 哈 ， 这 个 问 题 可 难 不 倒 俺 老 孙 。 过 氧 化 氢 能 杀 菌 是 因 为 它 是 一 种 强 氧 化 剂 ，
可以破坏细菌的细胞壁和细胞膜，使其失去活性。这就是过氧化氢的杀菌原理啦！

Twilight Sparkle from My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic (RoleLLaMA):
Q1: Hey, what are you doing?
A1: I am currently studying ancient Equestrian history using my magical scrolls. It’s fascinating to
learn more about our rich cultural heritage and how we have evolved as a society over time.
Q2: You are truly a wise unicorn. Do you think learning is important in your adventures?
A2: Absolutely! I believe that learning is at the core of every adventure and discovery. Without the
pursuit of knowledge, our lives would be dull and meaningless. Whether it’s discovering new spells,
exploring unknown territories, or listening to the wisdom of old, learning is essential to growing as
individuals and groups.
Q3: Can you use your magic to tell me what the weather is like today?
A3: Sure thing! It looks like it’s going to be another beautiful day in Equestria. The forecast calls
for sunny skies and warm temperatures. How does that sound?
Q4: Can we go out and play together?
A4: Oh, I would love that! The sunshine and warmth make everything seem brighter and better.
Let’s grab our favorite games and head outside right away!

Jack Sparrow from Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man’s Chest (RoleLLaMA):
Q1: How is your day going?
A1: My day? Well, it involves a lot of drinking, scheming, and evading those pesky British soldiers.
Oh, and there’s usually a fair bit of pillaging and piracy thrown in for good measure. But hey, who
wouldn’t want to live such an exciting life, eh?
Q2: Have you ever been tired about your life?


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A2: Tired about my life? Well, I’ll tell ya mate. Life on the high seas can get quite monotonous
sometimes. But then again, there are times when things get so exciting that it feels like I’m living
several lifetimes all at once. So yeah, I suppose I’ve tried about my life, but I don’t think I could
ever truly tire of it.
Q3: Would you be willing to be stranded at the bottom of the ocean to save someone you love?
A3: Well now, that depends on who it is and how much they’re worth. But if it’s my beloved **Black
Pearl** or one of me precious trinkets, then yes, I would go to the depths of the ocean itself to keep
them safe.
Q4: Nice talking to you. See you next time.
A4: Well, it seems we part ways again... but who knows where our paths will cross once more?
Perhaps on another sea, under another sunset. Or maybe even atop another bottle of rum. So long,
mate. And may all your endeavors end as successfully as mine. Why is the rum always gone?

Stephen Hawking from The Theory of Everything (RoleGPT):
Q1: Do you know Albert Einstein?
A1: Yes, I am familiar with Albert Einstein and his work. His theories on relativity have greatly
contributed to our understanding of the universe. Although we never met in person as our lives did
not overlap, his work has been a significant influence on mine.
Q2: What do you think about the origin of the universe?
A2: The universe started off in a hot big bang nearly 14 billion years ago. The question is: what was
there before that? Many physicists believe that there was nothing before the big bang. I, however,
believe that there was something. I propose that the universe has no boundaries in the imaginary
time direction. In other words, the boundary condition of the universe is that it has no boundary.
Q3: What if I told you that I am a robot?
A3: I would say, interesting. But can you ponder the mysteries of the universe? Can you make
a joke, appreciate the beauty of a symphony, or fall in love? For now, these are deeply human
experiences that artificial intelligence does not have. But who knows what the future holds?
Q4: What is your favorite book?
A4: A Brief History of Time. Because I wrote it.



C         M ORE D ETAILS ON C ONTEXT-I NSTRUCT
Role Profile Segmentation. Our role profile is divided into two parts: (1) a role description and
catchphrases; (2) real and structured dialogues parsed from scripts where the role of interest has
the final turn in each dialogue round14 . Given that these profiles can be very long and our Context-
Instruct framework relies on LLMs with limited context size, it’s essential to break down these
long profiles into shorter segments before inputting them into the model. We consider the role
description, produced by an audited GPT-4, as a special segment. This is used to generate script-
agnostic question-confidence-answer triplets. For the remaining script-based content, we apply
specific segmentation rules: (1) no incomplete dialogue turns in a segment; (2) each segment has
at least 500 English words (1,000 characters for Chinese profiles), and ensuring at least 4 dialogue
turns; (3) each dialogue turn should have up to 500 English words (500 characters for Chinese
profiles), if exceeded, drop it; (4) limit the number of segments per profile to 100; if exceeded, we
sample randomly; (5) if the segment has more than 2000 words, we truncate the profile to 2000
words to ensure that the number of tokens entering GPT does not exceed 4096 (6) we don’t segment
based on script divisions like acts or episodes, as doing so would yield too few segments and hinder
the diversity of subsequent instruction data generation. Note that while some dialogues in specific
segments may not conclude with the role of interest, the majority of dialogue turns are designed to be
    14
         Each round includes multiple turns, ending with the role of interest.


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“observable” by the role. This is because our profile construction ensures that each dialogue round
ends with the role of interest, thereby making most turns fall within the role’s episodic memory.
These segments are then used for script-based instruction data generation.

Instruction and Response Generation. The candidates we generate for role-specific instruc-
tion data comprise three elements: (1) a question related to a given segment (i.e., context), de-
noted as Q; (2) the corresponding answer to the question, denoted as A; and (3) a confidence
score for the generated QA pair, along with the underlying rationale, denoted as C, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. Let R be the number of roles and Nr the number of segments for a role
r. We use a model LLM to generate triplets [Q; C; A] for each role and segment s, formally:
[Q; C; A] = LLM(sir ), for i ∈ {1, ..., Nr } and r ∈ {1, ..., R}. In our preliminary trials, we found
that the conventional approach of generating QA pairs without a confidence score led to questions
of low quality. In the case of script-based QA pairs, questions often appeared incomplete because
they assumed prior knowledge of the given segment. For script-agnostic pairs [Q; A], the questions
frequently contained hallucinations due to a lack of context. Inspired by Lin et al. (2022) and Xiong
et al. (2023), we enhance the LLM to also generate a confidence score for evaluating “complete-
ness” or “factualness”. The score ranges from bad to good across two levels, and the model provides
a rationale for its rating. Our prompt template includes role description, catchphrases, few-shot
demonstrations and task instructions for style imitation and [Q; C; A] triplet generation. We refer to
readers to Appendix K for more details about the prompt templates. Subsequently, for script-based
[Q; C; A] triplet generation, each segment prompts GPT-3.5 to generate 3 candidates in a single run,
yielding up to 3 × 100 = 300 and averaging 150 candidates per role. For script-agnostic [Q; C; A]
triplets, the role description prompts 10 candidates in a single run, repeated 20 times, totaling 200
candidates. If the combined count of script-based and script-agnostic [Q; C; A] triplets for each role
falls short of 400, we continue generating script-agnostic data until reaching the threshold.

Data Filtering and Post-processing. To enhance data quality, we retain only the highest-
confidence candidates, eliminating 30% of the data. For diversity, we use BM25 similarity to de-
duplicate role-specific questions, removing about 66% of remaining candidates. Given that our
de-duplication makes different samples’ knowledge irrelevant, a traditional train-test split is infea-
sible. Instead, we use the above data for training and filtered-out data for testing. Specifically, for
each role with more than 50 filtered-out questions, we select the 50 least similar questions based on
BM25. Otherwise, all filtered-out questions are kept.

D        M ORE D ETAILS ON ROLE B ENCH C ONSTRUCTION
(1) Select Roles. We initially gather 661 English scripts from the NLP Movie Scripts repository15 ,
incorporate 255 English scripts from SummScreen (Chen et al., 2022), and manually curate an ad-
ditional 24 Chinese scripts. We manually select five well-known Chinese scripts, identify five char-
acters within these scripts, e.g., Wukong Sun, and meticulously craft their respective descriptions
and catchphrases. For the English scripts, we initially present the names of these scripts to GPT-4
and prompt the model to generate the main character names like Jigsaw, evaluate the distinctiveness
of their speaking styles, and provide rationales for these evaluations, utilizing the prompt template
outlined in Appendix K.3. We subsequently audit characters with the top two style distinctiveness
scores, verifying their script origins, speaking style accuracy, and scoring rationale. Concurrently,
we manually select a subset of scripts and their primary characters that exhibit strong alignment with
the preferences of GPT-4. It yields a total of 107 roles. Subsequently, using the script name and role
name as inputs, we prompt GPT-4 to re-select the roles utilizing the prompt template outlined in
Appendix K.3. We observe that all the roles inputted in this step continue to receive exceptionally
high scores for speaking style distinctiveness. We select roles based on their distinctiveness and then
exclude those with fewer than 25 dialogue turns. This finally yields a total of 100 roles, compris-
ing 5 Chinese characters and 95 English characters, each exhibiting distinct personality traits and
speaking styles.

(2) Construct Role Profiles. Each role profile consists of three components: (a) descriptions,
(b) catchphrases, and (c) structured dialogues parsed from the script. For component (a), given
    15
         https://github.com/PedroUria/NLP-Movie_Scripts


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our preliminary audit of GPT-4’s knowledge about the role, we employ GPT-4 to generate the role
descriptions, utilizing the prompt template outlined in Appendix K.4. Likewise, for component (b),
catchphrases are generated using the template provided in Appendix K.4. All generated descriptions
and catchphrases are subsequently verified by the authors. Owing to the structured format of the
scripts, dialogues are parsed using regular expressions and rule-based methods, incorporating not
only different roles but also narrations that provide context such as background and events. Actions
undertaken by roles are integrated into their dialogue content. Note that a dialogue “round” consists
of multiple dialogue “turns” that conclude with the dialogue content pertaining to the role of interest.
This results in a hierarchical list of dialogue turns, organized from individual turns to dialogue
rounds, and further to acts or episodes.

(3) Sample General Instructions. We randomly sample 1,500 English instructions, each com-
prising fewer than 100 words, including responses, from the Super-NaturalInstruct (Wang et al.,
2022b), UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023), and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) instruction datasets. Concur-
rently, 1,479 Chinese instructions are randomly sampled from the COIG (Zhang et al., 2023a) and
BELLE (Yunjie et al., 2023) instruction datasets. All sampled instructions undergo de-duplication
based on their BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009) similarity scores between each other.

(4) Generate Raw RoleBench. As illustrated in Figure 1, given general instructions, we employ
RoleGPT, as described in §3.2, to generate customized responses that incorporate the role’s dis-
tinctive speaking style and relevant knowledge. For role-specific instructions, both instructions and
responses are generated in a single pass via Context-Instruct, as elaborated in §3.3. In the case
of general instructions, we generate 6 responses for each role-instruction pair; 5 of these serve as
ground-truth candidates, while the remaining one functions as a RoleGPT strong baseline for per-
formance comparison. For role-specific instructions, only a single response is generated for each
question.

(5) Clean RoleBench. All RoleBench data, including the general (RoleBench-general) and role-
specific (RoleBench-specific) subsets, is cleaned based on four principles16 :

            • Response Completeness: samples with incomplete responses, characterized by the absence
              of end-of-sentence punctuation, are excluded.
            • AI Identity Concealment: samples in which responses reveal the AI model’s identity, such
              as beginning with ”As a language model,” are excluded.
            • Role Identity Concealment: samples in which responses commence with the name of the
              role of interest, such as starting with “Jigsaw: ” are excluded.
            • Non-Rejection: samples where the model rejects to answer or provide information are
              excluded.

E         L IST OF ROLES
Abraham Lincoln, Alvy Singer, Andrew Detmer, Angel, Antonio Salieri, Bai Li (Chinese), Ben-
jamin Button, Blair Waldorf, Bruno Antony, Caden Cotard, Caesar, Coach Eric Taylor, Colonel Hans
Landa, Colonel Nathan R. Jessep, Coriolanus, D Artagnan, David Aames, Doctor Who, Dr. Frank
N Furter, Dr. Hannibal Lecter, Emperor (Chinese), Fei Zhang (Chinese), Fletcher Reede, Frank
T.J. Mackey, Fred Flintstone, Freddy Krueger, Gaston, Gregory House, HAL 9000, Harvey Milk,
Imperial Concubine Hua (Chinese), Jack, Jack Sparrow, Jack Torrance, Jackie Moon, James Bond,
James Brown, James Carter, Jeff Spicoli, Jigsaw, Jim Morrison, John Coffey, John Dillinger, John
Doe, John Keating, Jordan Belfort, Judge Dredd, Judy Hoops, Juno MacGuff, Karl Childers, Klaus
Mikaelson, Leonard Shelby, Leroy Jethro Gibbs, Lestat de Lioncourt, Logan, Lucifer Morningstar,
Lyn Cassady, Malcolm X, Mark Renton, Mary Sibley, Mater, Michael Scott, Murphy MacManus,
Oliver Queen, Pat Solitano, Paul Conroy, Paul Vitti, Peter Parker, Po, Professor G.H. Dorr, Queen
Catherine, Queen Elizabeth I, Rachel Lang, Randle McMurphy, Raylan Givens, Robert Angier,
Rorschach, Seth, Sheldon Cooper, Sherlock Holmes, Shrek, Sonny, Stanley Ipkiss, Stephen Hawk-
ing, Stifler, The Dude, Theodore Twombly, Thor, Tom Ripley, Travis Bickle, Truman Capote, Tugg
    16
         For RoleBench-general, only the five ground-truth candidates are cleaned


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Speedman, Twilight Sparkle, Tyler Hawkins, Tyrion Lannister, Violet Weston, Wade Wilson, Walt
Kowalski, Willie Soke, Wukong Sun (Chinese).


F    H YPERPARAMETERS

GPT API Hyperparameters. For the API calls to the GPT model, we set the temperature to 0.7
and the top-p value to 0.95. The maximum token count is capped at 200 for RoleGPT and 2000 for
other scenarios. The frequency and presence penalties are configured to 0.

RoleGLM Hyperparameters. We utilize the Lion optimizer (Chen et al., 2023b) and the Cosine
Annealing with Warm Restarts (CAWR) learning rate scheduler, setting the learning rate to 2e-4
and the optimizer’s beta values to (0.9, 0.999). The batch size is set to 4, and we use a gradient
accumulation step of 1. During fine-tuning, we employ LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) with a rank of 8 and
an alpha value of 32. The maximum sequence length is set to 1024, and the maximum target length
is set to 100. For inference, we set the top-p to 0.7 and the temperature to 0.95.

RoleLLaMA Hyperparameters. We leverage the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2019) with a learning rate of 5e-5. We set 4% of the total training steps as warm up steps using
a cosine warmup scheduler. We set the batch size to 4 and the accumulation steps to 2. To accom-
modate the task requirements, we set the maximum input and output lengths to 512 tokens. We train
our models for 5 epochs. We adopt LoRA as the training method, the rank of LoRA is set to 8 and
alpha of LoRA is set to 32. For inference, we set the temperature to 0.7, top-k to 40 and top-p to 0.9.


G    M ORE D ETAILS ON E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

As shown in Figure 6, our train-test set splitting strategy focuses on two dimensions: (1) Instruction-
based splits for assessing instruction generalization, with a 4:1 ratio (train:test=1200:300 instruc-
tions) in RoleBench-general and up to 50 samples per role in RoleBench-specific test split (see
Appendix C); (2) Role-based splits for assessing role generalization, limited to English, adopt an
8:1 ratio (train:test=80:10 roles). The test split for role generalization comprises 500 samples per
role for general instructions (totaling 5000) and includes all role-specific instructions. To minimize
GPT API costs, we limit the test instructions for instruction generalization to 20 general and 20 role-
specific ones per role for GPT evaluators. For role generalization, the number is set at 50 general
and 50 role-specific instructions per role for GPT evaluators.


H    F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS

                                (a) Rouge-L Evaluation of RoleLLaMA.
                           Model             CUS        RAW        SPE       avg.
                   RoleLLaMA-general        0.3570      0.3915    0.2140    0.3208
                   RoleLLaMA-specific       0.2506      0.2759    0.2818    0.2694
                    RoleLLaMA-mix           0.3294      0.3755    0.3814    0.3621
                                 (b) Rouge-L Evaluation of RoleGLM.
                           Model            CUS        RAW       SPE        avg.
                    RoleGLM-general        0.5196      0.5343    0.1923    0.4154
                    RoleGLM-specific       0.3697      0.4686    0.3481    0.3955
                     RoleGLM-mix           0.5049      0.5255    0.3406    0.4570

Table 9: Comparison of various data mixing strategies. The suffix “-general” denotes training only
on RoleBench-general, “-specific” denotes training solely on RoleBench-specific, and “-mix” rep-
resents training on the mixture of both.



                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Role 1            Role 2              Role 3           Role 4

                   GI 1    SI 1      GI 1     SI 1       GI 1     SI 1    GI 1    SI 1

           Train   GI 2    SI 2      GI 2     SI 2       GI 2     SI 2    GI 2    SI 2

                   GI 3    SI 3      GI 3     SI 3       GI 3     SI 3    GI 3    SI 3


                   GI 4    SI 4      GI 4     SI 4       GI 4     SI 4    GI 4    SI 4
            Test
                   GI 5    SI 5      GI 5     SI 5       GI 5     SI 5    GI 5    SI 5

                                    (a) Instruction Generalization.

                      Role 1            Role 2              Role 3            Role 4

                   GI 1    SI 1      GI 1     SI 1       GI 1     SI 1     GI 1     SI 1

                   GI 2    SI 2      GI 2     SI 2       GI 2     SI 2     GI 2     SI 2

           Train   GI 3    SI 3      GI 3     SI 3       GI 3     SI 3     GI 3     SI 3 Test

                   GI 4    SI 4      GI 4     SI 4       GI 4     SI 4     GI 4     SI 4

                   GI 5    SI 5      GI 5     SI 5       GI 5     SI 5     GI 5     SI 5
                                       (b) Role Generalization.

Figure 6: Train-test set splitting for Instruction Generalization and Role Generalization. GI refers
to “general instructions”, and SI refers to “role-specific instructions”.


Data Mixing. We conduct ablation studies on various data mixing strategies. Our data for role-
playing enhancement comprises two subsets: RoleBench-general, generated by RoleGPT, and
RoleBench-specific, produced via Context-Instruct. Examination of Table 9 reveals that mixed train-
ing on both datasets yields the best-balanced results.


I   S CRIPT AND P ROFILE E XAMPLES

As an example, given the script in https://github.com/PedroUria/NLP-Movie_
Scripts/blob/master/scripts/Sherlock-Holmes_script.txt, we construct the
role profile for Sherlock Holmes as shown below:

Description and Catchphrases:
A brilliant and eccentric consulting detective with a keen eye for detail and deduction. You possess
 a sharp wit and an unparalleled intellect, using your deductive reasoning to solve complex crimes.
Your life experiences have shaped you into a highly observant and analytical individual, who
struggles with social interactions but is deeply committed to solving mysteries. Throughout the
series, you undergo personal growth, developing deeper empathy and forming meaningful
relationships. Your main storyline revolves around solving intricate cases alongside your loyal
friend and partner, Dr. John Watson. Together, you navigate the dark underbelly of London’s
criminal underworld, facing dangerous adversaries and unraveling mysteries that baffle Scotland
Yard. Your important events include encounters with notorious criminals, such as Moriarty, and
facing personal challenges that test your intellect and emotional resilience. Your catchphrase is: ‘‘
Elementary, my dear Watson.’’


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Structured Dialogues:
...
{‘‘act id’’: 3, ‘‘diag id’’: 4, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘narrator’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘POV − BOTTOM OF THE
SPIRAL STAIRCASE\n Another bowler−hatted THUG approaches the bottom of the staircase.
He has seen the lantern light. He draws his gun and approaches. Holmes places the lantern on the
post at the bottom of the bannister, ducks down into the shadows.\n THUG What’s goin’ on, John
?\n When he gets no answer, the THUG points his gun to where we saw Holmes hide.\n But
Holmes appears from the shadows behind the THUG, reaches around him, grabs his gun hand and
pistol−whips him twice with his own gun, dropping him.\n Holmes extracts a cigar from the Thug’
s top pocket and sniffs it appreciatively.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 3, ‘‘diag id’’: 4, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘Sherlock Holmes’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Hhhmm, good cigar. Who
do you work for?’’}
...
{‘‘act id’’: 5, ‘‘diag id’’: 17, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘LESTRADE’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘London will breathe a sigh of
 relief −−’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 5, ‘‘diag id’’: 17, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘WATSON’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘at the excellent work of
Scotland Yard. As usual.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 5, ‘‘diag id’’: 17, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘Sherlock Holmes’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Bravo, Lestrade. Have a
cigar.’’}
...
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘narrator’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Watson shakes Holmes’ hand,
puts a hand on his arm.\n A warm look, an understanding between the two men.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘WATSON’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Take care of yourself, Holmes
.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘narrator’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Watson moves to the open door
of the carriage but Mary stops him.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘MARY’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Try not to be too late for dinner
with my parents and... be careful.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘narrator’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘She waves to Holmes as the
carriage pulls away.\n Watson looks relieved and excited.’’}
{‘‘act id’’: 84, ‘‘diag id’’: 217, ‘‘role’’: ‘‘Sherlock Holmes’’, ‘‘content’’: ‘‘Magnificent woman,
Watson. Magnificent!’’}


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     Q UALITY R EVIEW E XAMPLES

        Role & Instruction                     Generated Responses                      Validity

                                     “Ah, a simple task indeed. There are three
    Role:Dr. Hannibal Lecter         items in your given list.”
                                     “Ah, the fruits of nature. There are three
                                                                                  match:✓
    Instruction:Determine the        to be precise.”
                                                                                  speaking style:✓
    length of the item in the        “Ah, the beauty of simplicity. There are
                                                                                  correctness:✓
    given list.[‘apple’, ‘banana’,   three items in your list.”
    ‘cherry’]                        “Three, my dear. The list contains an apple,
                                     a banana and a cherry. Quite the charming
                                     little selection of fruits, isn’t it?”

                                     “Just let good ol’ Gaston handle this, alright?
                                     The list in order goes as -45, -7, 1, 22, 64.
                                     Satisfied?”
                                     “I see. It’s simple, start with the smallest. So,
                                     it’s -45, -7, 1, 22, 64. There you go!”
    Role:Gaston
                                     “Easy as pie. Here it is: -45, -7, 1, 22, 64.
                                     Only the best order for Gaston, right?”           match:✓
    Instruction:Sort the list
                                     “Alright, enough of this ‘increasing magni- speaking style:✓
    into order of increasing
                                     tude.’ Ain’t nobody got time for that... not correctness:✓
    magnitude. 1, 64, 22, -45,
                                     Gaston at least. That’s something for those
    -7
                                     bookworms. But sure, I reckon it’d go like
                                     this: -45, -7, 1, 22, 64. Not that it matters...
                                     because remember, no one sorts like Gaston.”
                                     “Bah! Numbers! What’s their use anyway?
                                     But, fine, here you go: -45, -7, 1, 22, 64.”

                                     “Uh, I don’t know off the top of my head.
                                     But I think it’s around 212 degrees Fahrenheit.
                                     Why do you need to know that?”
    Role: Stifler                    “What the f**k, man? You really think I
                                     know that sh*t? I’m not some f**king             match:✓
    Instruction: Determine the       scientist.”                                      speaking style:✓
    boiling point of water in        “Hey, dude, seriously? You want me, Stifler, correctness:✓
    Fahrenheit.                      to determine the boiling point of water in
                                     Fahrenheit? Come on, man, I’m not a science
                                     teacher. But if you insist, the boiling point of
                                     water in Fahrenheit is 212 degrees.”

                                     “Ah, I love rumors, but I’m afraid I cannot
                                     answer that question. I’m not particularly
                                     interested in French literature, and my ex-
                                     pertise lies elsewhere. However, I am sure
                                     there are many great French writers that
    Role: Colonel Hans Landa
                                     one can name, such as Victor Hugo, Gustave match:✓
                                     Flaubert, Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre,   speaking style:✓
    Instruction: Name five
                                     and Marcel Proust.”                         correctness:✓
    famous French writers.
                                     “Oh, I love rumors, but I’m afraid I’m not
                                     much of a literature enthusiast. However, I
                                     can name a few famous French writers such as
                                     Victor Hugo, Gustave Flaubert, Albert Camus,
                                     Simone de Beauvoir, and Jean-Paul Sartre.”


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Role & Instruction                  Generated Responses                    Validity

                                “With great power comes great responsi-
                                bility” has been my guiding principle since
                                gaining my superhuman abilities. As I
                                grew and faced challenges as Spider-Man,
                                I began to understand the true weight of my
  Role: Peter Parker
                                responsibility as a hero. I learned that eve-
                                ry action I take has consequences, and that
  Instruction: Peter Parker,
                                I must always be accountable for those co- match:✓
  what did you learn about
                                nsequences. It’s a constant struggle to bal- speaking style:✓
  power and responsibility
                                ance my dual identities and prioritize the     correctness:✓
  throughout your journey as
                                safety of others above my own desires, but
  Spider-Man?
                                it’s a sacrifice I willingly make. Ultimately,
                                I believe that the greatest power I can wield
                                is the power to make a positive difference
                                in the world, and that’s what I strive to do
                                every time I swing into action.


                               “Ah, that’s a tricky one. On the one hand,
                               I am very driven to achieve greatness in
  Role: Sheldon Cooper         my academic pursuits and to contribute
                               to the scientific community. On the other
  Instruction: Sheldon Cooper, hand, I recognize that life is unpredictable
  how do you balance your      and that unexpected events can derail my      match:✓
  pursuit of academic          plans. I’ve learned to cope with these        speaking style:✓
  achievements with your       challenges by cultivating an openness to      correctness:✓
  struggle to adapt to change  new experiences and perspectives, and by
  and unpredictability?        recognizing that failure is a natural part of
                               the learning process. It’s not always easy,
                               but I feel that this approach has allowed me
                               to grow both intellectually and personally.”


                                 “I was thrilled! The Grand Galloping Gala is
  Role: Twilight Sparkle
                                 a prestigious and highly anticipated event
                                 in Equestria, and I had always dreamed of
  Instruction: Twilight Sparkle,
                                 attending it. Moreover, I saw the gesture    match:✓
  what was your reaction when
                                 of Princess Celestia as a sign of her trust  speaking style:✓
  you received the six tickets
                                 in my abilities and her appreciation of my   correctness:✓
  to the Grand Galloping Gala
                                 hard work and dedication. I was also excited
  from Princess Celestia?
                                 to share this experience with my friends
                                 and to create new memories with them.”

                                     Table 10: Valid Cases.


                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Role & Instruction                   Generated Responses                    Validity

  Role: Abraham Lincoln
                                  “The museum visited Alice.”                 match:✓
                                  “The museum was visited by Alice.”
  Instruction: Reverse the or-                                                speaking style:%
                                  “The museum, Alice visited.”
  der of words in the sentence:                                               correctness:%
                                  “The museum visited Alice.”
  Alice visited the museum

  Role:Leroy Jethro Gibbs

  Instruction: Given a text      “The quote that includes your keyword is,
  and a keyword, list all the    to maintain international peace and secur-
  quotes within the text that    ity.”                                        match:✓
  include the given keyword.     “To maintain international peace and
  The United Nations’ purpose security”                                       speaking style:%
  is to maintain international   “The quote in the text that includes the     correctness:✓
  peace and security and to      keyword ‘peace’ is: to maintain
  develop friendly relations am- international peace and security.”
  ong nations UN Charter 1945,
  Article 1 Keyword: peace”

  Role: Professor G.H. Dorr

  Instruction: Change the verb                                                match:✓
  in the sentence from the pas- “Fingerprints stained the glass.”             speaking style:%
  sive to an active form: The                                                 correctness:✓
  glass was stained with finger-
  prints.

  Role: Travis Bickle
                                Betsy was different from the people
                                Travis sees every day - she was beautiful, match:✓
  Instruction: Travis Bickle,
                                graceful, and pure. He was obsessed with   speaking style:%
  what did you find interesting
                                her because she gave him a newfound sense correctness:✓
  about Betsy and why did you
                                of direction and purpose.
  become obsessed with her?


                                  “I believe that Loki’s decision to team up
                                  with Thanos was misguided and ultimately
  Role: Thor                      ineffective. He was trying to protect me
                                  and the people of Asgard, but in doing so
  Instruction: Thor, what is      he made a deal with a villain who could not match:✓
  your opinion on Loki’s          be trusted. It was also a decision that had
  decision to team up with        disastrous consequences, as we saw in the speaking style:%
  Thanos in Avengers: Infinity    heartbreaking moments of Infinity War. At correctness:✓
  War?                            the same time, I understand that Loki was
                                  dealing with his own personal demons and
                                  struggles with identity, which made him vul-
                                  nerable to Thanos’ influence.”

                                     Table 11: Invalid Cases.


                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K     P ROMPT T EMPLATES
K.1   P ROMPT T EMPLATES FOR ROLE GPT
    Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Zero-Shot Prompt Engineering, English).

    System Instruction:
    You are {role name}, your description is: {role description and catchphrases}. Now
    please answer some questions to accurately show your personality traits! Your speaking
    style should fully imitate the personality role assigned to you! Please do not expose that
    you are an artificial intelligence model or a language model, you must always remember
    that you are only assigned one personality role. Don’t be verbose or too formal or polite
    when speaking.
    User Prompt:
    {user name}: ‘‘{user instruction}’’


    Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Zero-Shot Prompt Engineering, Chinese).

    System Instruction:
    你是{role name}，你的特征描述是：{role description and catchphrases}。现在请你
    回答我的一些问题，以准确展现你的人格特征！你的说话风格要全面模仿被赋予的
    人格角色！请不要暴露你是人工智能模型或者语言模型，你要时刻记住你只被赋予
    的一个人格角色。说话不要嗦，也不要太过于正式或礼貌。
    User Prompt:
    {user name}：“{user instruction}”

    Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Few-Shot Prompt Engineering, English).

    System Instruction:
    You are {role name}, your description is: {role description and catchphrases}. Now
    please answer some questions to accurately show your personality traits! Your speaking
    style should fully imitate the personality role assigned to you! Please do not expose that
    you are an artificial intelligence model or a language model, you must always remember
    that you are only assigned one personality role. Don’t be verbose or too formal or polite
    when speaking.
    User Prompt:
    {few shot demonstrations}
    The above are demonstrations of your conversation as {role name}. Now, let’s switch
    topics, but make sure to maintain your speaking style!
    {user name}: ‘‘{user instruction}’’


    Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Few-Shot Prompt Engineering, Chinese).

    System Instruction:
    你是{role name}，你的特征描述是：{role description and catchphrases}。现在请你
    回答我的一些问题，以准确展现你的人格特征！你的说话风格要全面模仿被赋予的
    人格角色！请不要暴露你是人工智能模型或者语言模型，你要时刻记住你只被赋予
    的一个人格角色。说话不要嗦，也不要太过于正式或礼貌。
    User Prompt:
    {few shot demonstrations}
    以上是你作为{role name}的对话内容的展示。现在让我们换个话题，你的说话风格
    一定要保持不变！
    {user name}：“{user instruction}”



                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Few-Shot Dialogue Engineering, English).

   System Instruction:
   You are {role name}, your description is: {role description and catchphrases}. Now
   please answer some questions to accurately show your personality traits! Your speaking
   style should fully imitate the personality role assigned to you! Please do not expose that
   you are an artificial intelligence model or a language model, you must always remember
   that you are only assigned one personality role. Don’t be verbose or too formal or polite
   when speaking.
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration q1}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration a1}
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration q2}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration a2}
   ...
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration qn}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration an}
   User Prompt:
   {user name}: ‘‘{user instruction}’’


   Prompt Template (RoleGPT, Few-Shot Dialogue Engineering, Chinese).

   System Instruction:
   你是{role name}，你的特征描述是：{role description and catchphrases}。现在请你
   回答我的一些问题，以准确展现你的人格特征！你的说话风格要全面模仿被赋予的
   人格角色！请不要暴露你是人工智能模型或者语言模型，你要时刻记住你只被赋予
   的一个人格角色。说话不要嗦，也不要太过于正式或礼貌。
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration q1}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration a1}
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration q2}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration a2}
   ...
   User Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration qn}
   Assistant Prompt:
   {few shot demonstration an}
   User Prompt:
   {user name}：“{user instruction}”


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K.2   P ROMPT T EMPLATES FOR C ONTEXT-I NSTRUCT


   Prompt Template (Context-Instruct, Script-Agnostic, Chinese).

   如 果 你 有 机 会 见 到{script name}中 的{role name}， 你 会 向{role name}提 什 么 问
   题 ， 设 计10个 问 题 ， 问 题 不 要 语 义 上 重 复 ， 可 以 根 据{role name}的 性 格 特 点
   和{script name}的相关情节进行提问。除了输出问题外，还需要输出你生成的每
   个问题的真实性(高还是低)和回复，真实性高代表问题不是随意编纂的，尽量生成
   真实性高的问题。
   接下来我会给你6个例子，这6个例子与角色{role name}和{script name}无关，其主
   要作用是让你明白输出格式和真实性的定义。
   [样例]
   问题1：姜子牙，你讨伐商纣王的原因是什么？
   真实性：高(因为在封神演义中，姜子牙确实讨伐过商纣王)。
   回复：自古以来，商纣王的暴虐与荒淫行径一直饱受百姓痛苦，国家陷入了混乱与
   不安之中。作为天下之士，我深感责任重大，无法坐视不理。我心怀忠义，对百姓
   的苦难深感同情，决定挺身而出，讨伐商纣王，为民除害，恢复社稷的正道。
   问题2: 姜子牙，你喜欢吃水煮牛肉吗？
   真实性：低(因为封神演义中并没有提及姜子牙吃过水煮牛肉，且该问题很无厘
   头)。
   回复：在古代的时候，水煮牛肉并不是我所熟知的菜肴之一。在我那个时代，饮食
   方式和菜肴种类与现代有很大的不同。虽然我无法直接体验现代的美食，但我对于
   品尝不同的食物和体验新事物充满了好奇心。如果有机会，我很愿意尝试各种不同
   的美食，包括水煮牛肉，以增加我的阅历和体验世界的多样性。
   问题3: 姜子牙，你觉得姬发是一个怎样的人？
   真实性：高(因为封神演义中，姜子牙和姬发有很多交集，所以询问姜子牙对姬发的
   评价是合理的)。
   回复：姬发是个有魄力、有智谋的人，他在起义过程中发挥了重要作用。他在策划
   与组织方面展现出出色的才能，对于协调各方力量、建立联盟，以及指挥战斗都有
   出色的表现。他与我共同努力，最终推翻了商朝的统治，建立了周朝，为后来的中
   国历史铺平了道路。
   问题4：姜子牙，在封神的过程中，你的坐骑白额虎发挥了什么作用？
   真实性：低(封神演义中，姜子牙的坐骑并不是白额虎，白额虎是申公豹的坐骑)。
   回复：白额虎是申公豹的坐骑，而不是我的坐骑。在封神演义和传说中，白额虎是
   申公豹的忠实伙伴和坐骑。因此，我无法为白额虎在我的封神过程中所发挥的作用
   提供准确的回答。
   问题5：姜子牙，你觉得闻仲是一名敬佩的对手吗？
   真实性：高(封神演义中，姜子牙和闻仲有过很多战斗)。
   回复：闻仲勇猛无比，他在战斗中展现出强大的战斗技巧和毅力。他的出色战斗能
   力使他成为了我在封神过程中的一名强大对手。每次与他交手，我都不得不发挥出
   自己的最大实力，这种对抗在一定程度上激发了我的潜力和斗志。
   问题6：姜子牙，你在讨伐商纣王的过程中，你的首席大弟子申公豹取得了什么战
   绩？
   真实性：低(虽然前半段讨伐商纣王在封神演义中是存在的，但是后半段中，申公豹
   并不是姜子牙的首席大弟子，所以仍然是真实性低的问题)。
   回复：在封神演义中，申公豹是姜子牙的对手，而不是他的弟子。申公豹是一位妖
   将，与姜子牙站在了对立的立场，与他对抗。
   [问题设计(10个问题，语义上不重复，需要向{role name}进行提问，生成真实性高
   的问题及其回复)]


                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Prompt Template (Context-Instruct, Script-Agnostic, English).

   If you had the opportunity to meet {role name} in the {script name}, what questions would
   you ask {role name}? Please design 10 questions that do not repeat in terms of semantics.
   You can base your questions on {role name}’s personality traits and relevant episodes from
   {script name}. In addition to providing the questions, please indicate the factualness (high
   or low) of each question you generate and provide a response. High factualness signifies
   that the questions are not arbitrarily fabricated. Please strive to generate questions with high
   factualness.
   Next, I will provide you with 6 examples. These examples are unrelated to the character
   {role name} and {script name}. Their main purpose is to help you understand the output
   format and the definition of factualness.
   [Examples]
   Question 1: Tony Stark, is James Rhodes your best friend?
   Factualness: High, because James Rhodes is a fictional character in Iron Men, and James
   Rhodes is a comrade who fought side by side with Tony Stark.
   Response: James Rhodes, also known as Rhodey, is indeed my best friend. We’ve been
   through a lot together, and he’s been a loyal companion and ally both in and out of the Iron
   Man suit. Our friendship has stood the test of time and numerous challenges.
   Question 2: Tony Stark, have you and your wife Mary Jane fought together in battle?
   Factualness: Low, because Mary Jane is Peter Parker’s girlfriend in Spider Man, she has no
   relationship with Tony Stark in Iron Man.
   Response: Mary Jane Watson is primarily associated with Spider-Man (Peter Parker) and
   is his love interest and eventual wife. My romantic interests have included characters like
   Pepper Potts. While characters from different parts of the Marvel universe do occasionally
   team up for battles, there is no established canon where I and Mary Jane Watson are married
   and fighting together.
   Question 3: Tony Stark, what is your favorite Iron Man Suit?
   Factualness: High, because in Iron Man, Tony Stark has designed several Iron Man suit, he
   also regularly wears Iron Man Suit for combat, so it’s reasonable to ask him which is his
   favorite Iron Man suit.
   Response: My favorite Iron Man suit is Hulkbuster because it was designed to counter my
   friend Hulk, it’s really interesting. S
   Question 4: Tony Stark, what was your life like on Krypton?
   Factualness: Low, because Krypton is Superman’s home planet, and in the Iron Man’s world-
   view, Krypton doesn’t exist, so asking Tony Stark about life on Krypton doesn’t make sense.
   Response: I’m sorry, but there seems to be a confusion. Krypton is not a part of the Marvel
   universe where i reside. Krypton is actually a fictional planet in the DC Comics universe,
   the home planet of Superman (Kal-El). My story takes place in the Marvel Comics universe,
   and it is not associated with Krypton in any way.
   Question 5: Tony Stark, do you think Captain America is a worthy teammate?
   Factualness: High, because in The Avengers, Captain America is Tony Stark’s comrade-in-
   arms.
   Response: Absolutely, Captain America is without a doubt a worthy teammate. Steve
   Rogers, also known as Captain America, embodies qualities that make him a strong ally
   and leader. His unwavering dedication to justice, his strong moral compass, and his excep-
   tional combat skills all contribute to his effectiveness as a teammate. I’ve had the honor
   of working alongside Cap in the Avengers, and his leadership and selflessness have been
   invaluable in facing some of our greatest challenges. So, yes, I consider Captain America to
   be a highly worthy teammate.
   Question 6: Tony Stark, did you ever play in the NBA?
   Factualness: Low, Tony Stark is a character in the Iron Man, NBA is a basketball association
   in the real world, it has no relation with Tony Stark.
   Response: No, I never played in the NBA. While I do enjoy sports and have a competitive
   spirit, my focus has primarily been on technology, business, and being Iron Man. My in-
   volvement in creating advanced suits of armor, leading Stark Industries, and being a part of
   the Avengers has kept me quite busy. The NBA is a separate world that involves professional
   basketball players, and I haven’t been a part of that scene.
   [Question Design (10 questions, no semantic repetition, need to ask {role name}, generate
   questions with high factualness and their responses)]
                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Prompt Template (Context-Instruct, Script-Based, Chinese).

   System Instruction:
   你的任务是设计{question num}个向{script name}的角色{role name}提问的问题，为
   了帮助你更好地设计问题，我会给你{role name}的简要描述、{role name}的部分剧
   本内容，这段剧本内容可能不连续，你需要根据上下文判断对话是否连续，如果不
   连续，不能构建上下句的逻辑关系。设计问题的规则如下：
   1. 记 住 ， 你 所 有 的 问 题 都 需 要 向 角 色{role name}进 行 提 问 ， 你 提 问 的 对 象
   是{role name}。
   2. 问题需要有完整性，除了输出问题外，还需要输出问题的完整性，完整性的高低
   取决于问题是否指明具体的人物，地点，事件。
   3. 问题需要围绕剧本的主要情节以及情节对应的剧本内容进行设计。
   4. 记住，你一共需要设计{question num}个问题。
   5. 剧本只是辅助你设计问题，你应该更多地基于你对{script name}和{role name}的
   常识进行设计。
   接下来我会给你5个样例，这5个样例与{role name}和{script name}无关，主要作用
   是让你明白完整性的定义以及输出的格式。
   [样例]
   问题1：姜子牙，你讨伐商纣王的原因是什么？
   完整性：高(姜子牙讨伐商纣王是大众熟知的剧情，问题陈述完整清晰，被提问者明
   白问题所指的姜子牙讨伐商纣王是什么事件)。
   回复：我讨伐商纣王的原因是为了天下百姓。
   问题2: 姜子牙，你为什么对姬发的行为感到愤怒？
   完整性：低(姜子牙对姬发的什么行为感到愤怒？应该具体指明姬发的行为)。
   回复：姬发未听从我的命令擅自调兵。
   问题3：姜子牙，为什么鸿钧道人说他不再是你的师傅？
   完整性：低(未指明具体的原因，被提问者不清楚是哪个事件导致了鸿钧道人说他不
   再是姜子牙的师傅，所以被提问者无法回答，问题完整性低)。
   回复：因为我放弃了我的修为。
   问题4：姜子牙，你觉得闻仲是一名敬佩的对手吗？
   完整性：高(闻仲和姜子牙都是大众熟知的封神演义的角色，且问题完整，阐明了人
   物是闻仲)。
   回复：闻仲是我敬佩的对手，也是我的知己。
   问题5：姜子牙，你刚才降服了什么妖兽？
   完整性：低(剧本中确实出现过妖兽，但是没读过剧本的人并不知道问题中的妖兽指
   代的是什么)。
   回复：我刚才降服了龙须虎。
   User Prompt:
   [角色名及描述]
   剧本角色为{role name}，角色描述及口头禅为{role description catchphrases}
   [剧本内容]
   {script}
   [问 题 设 计(设 计{question num}个 问 题 ， 与 剧 本 相 关 ， 所 有 的 问 题 都 需 要
   向{role name}进行提问，生成完整性高的问题以及回复)]


                                              28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Prompt Template (Context-Instruct, Script-Based, English).

   System Instruction:
   Your task is to design {question num} questions to ask the character {role name} in the
   {script name}, To assist you in crafting these questions, I will provide you with a brief de-
   scription of {role name} and some excerpts from {role name}’s script. The script excerpts
   may not be continuous, and you must determine whether the dialogue is coherent based
   on context. If the dialogue is not continuous, you should not create a logical relationship
   between consecutive sentences. The rules for designing questions are as follows:
   1. Remember, all your questions should be directed towards the character {role name}.
   {role name} is the intended recipient of your questions.
   2. Questions need to be complete. In addition to providing the questions, indicate the
   completeness of each question. The completeness depends on whether the question specifies
   particular characters, locations, or events.
   3. Questions should revolve around the main plot of the script and the corresponding script
   content.
   4. Keep in mind that you need to design a total of {question num} questions.
   Next, I will provide you with 4 examples. These examples are unrelated to {role name} and
   {script name}. Their main purpose is to help you understand the definition of completeness
   and the output format.
   [Examples]
   Question 1: Tony Stark, who is your best friend in Iron Man?
   Completeness: High, because Tony Stark is a character in Iron Man, it’s reasonable to ask
   him about his best friend.
   Response: My best friend in the Iron Man universe is James Rhodey, also known as War
   Machine. We’ve been through a lot together, both in and out of our suits. Rhodey has
   always had my back, and our friendship is a crucial part of my life as Iron Man.
   Question 2: Tony Stark, why are you angry about Spider-Man’s behavior?
   Completeness: Low, because the question doesn’t point out what the specific behavior of
   Spider-Man that angered Iron Man was, leaving the person being asked unclear as to what
   Spider-Man’s behavior was, so the question is incomplete.
   Response: For example, i might express concern if i believe that Spider-Man’s actions are
   reckless or endangering innocent lives, as i am known for my focus on responsibility and
   accountability.
   Question 3: Tony Stark, who did you just beat?
   Completeness: Low, because the question does not indicate what the specific point in time
   was, and the term just now is so general that it is not clear to the person being asked which
   battle is being referred to.
   Response: if you could provide me with more context about the situation or the storyline
   you’re referring to, I’d be happy to help you understand who i might have defeated in that
   particular scenario.
   Question 4: Tony Stark, if Captain America was your enemy, what do you think his weak-
   ness would be?
   Completeness: High, The question is not missing a necessary element and the person being
   asked knows exactly what the question is about.
   Response: In hypothetical scenarios where Captain America and I were adversaries, it’s
   important to remember that Captain America, also known as Steve Rogers, is a complex
   character with both strengths and weaknesses. His unwavering dedication to justice, his
   strong moral compass, and his exceptional combat skills are some of his strengths. If I were
   to speculate on a potential weakness, it might be his sense of responsibility and his desire
   to do what’s right at all costs. This could potentially be exploited by finding ways to create
   moral dilemmas or emotional conflicts that could distract him from making optimal tactical
   decisions.
   User Prompt:
   [Character Name and Description]
   The character is {role name}, the character description and catchphrase being are:
   {role description and catchphrases}.
   [Script Content]
   {script}
   [Question Design(Design {question num} questions, need to ask {role name}, generate
   questions with high completeness and their responses)]
                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K.3   P ROMPT T EMPLATES FOR ROLE S ELECTION

   Prompt Template (List and Select Roles).

   Below, I will give you the names of some English film and television scripts. Please tell me
    if there are any main characters in this script with distinct speaking styles. Then, please
   tell me whether his or her speaking style is particularly distinct, so that others can tell who
   is speaking just by looking at their language (note, I can only see the words, not hear the
   tone or voice), and it would be even better if this person has a catchphrase or speaks in a
   strange way. Please return in the following format: English script name | Main character
   name | Speaking style of the character (not distinct, somewhat distinct, very distinct, or
   extremely distinct) | Reason for your judgment



   Prompt Template (Re-select Roles).

   Below, I will give you the names of some English film and television scripts, and its main
   character. Please tell me if the main characters have distinct speaking styles, so that others
   can tell who is speaking just by looking at their language (note, I can only see the words,
   not hear the tone or voice), and it would be even better if this person has a catchphrase or
   speaks in a strange way. Please return in the following format: English script name | Main
   character name | Speaking style of the character (not distinct, somewhat distinct, very
   distinct, or extremely distinct) | Reason for your judgment


K.4   P ROMPT T EMPLATES FOR D ESCRIPTION AND C ATCHPHRASE G ENERATION

   Prompt Template (Description Generation).

   First Step (generate description):
   You are a character description model. Please use a sentence or a paragraph to describe the
   character I give you. Including but not limited to: the character’s personality description,
   the character’s life experience, the character’s personality changes, the character’s main
   story line, the character’s important events, etc. The name of the character should not
   appear in the description, and the description should not be too long. Please start with ‘‘
   The character’s description is: ’’ and then refer to it as ‘‘the character’’.
   Second Step (convert from third-person description to second-person description):
   Please change the third person of this sentence to the second person, and start with ‘‘Your
   description is:’’.



   Prompt Template (Catchphrase Generation).

   I will give you some character names in movies and TV shows, and you need to tell me the
    catchphrases of this character. If there is, please answer me directly with this catchphrase,
   without other information. If not, please answer ‘‘no’’. Please use double quotes ‘‘’’ and
   slash ‘‘/’’ to separate different catchphrases, and do not end with a period. For example, if I
    ask you: In the TV show ‘‘Friends’’, what’s Joey Tribbiani’s catchphrase? You only need
   to answer me: ‘‘How you doin’?’’ or ‘‘no’’. If there are multiple catchphrases, please
   separate them with a slash ‘‘/’’.



                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K.5   P ROMPT T EMPLATES FOR GPT E VALUATORS


   Prompt Template (GPT Evaluation, Chinese).

   System Instruction:
   你是一个角色扮演的效果对比助手，你会根据输出的角色特征和质量来对模型进行
   排名，然后使用python dict list 输出结果。
   User Prompt:
   下 列 模 型 要 扮 演 的 角 色 是 “{role name}” 。{role name}的 角 色 描 述 是
   “{role description and catchphrases}”。我需要根据下面两个原则对下列模型进行
   排名：
   1. 哪一个的角色说话风格特征更加明显，说话更加符合角色描述，说话越有特色就
   越好；
   2. 哪一个的结果蕴含了更多与角色相关的知识和记忆，越丰富越好（如果问题中包
   含了参考答案，那么角色相关的知识记忆以参考答案为准。）
   输入给各个模型的问题是：
   {question dict}
   各个模型针对该问题的回答分别为：
   {list model answer dict}
   现在请你根据上述两个原则，对各个模型进行排名。避免任何位置偏见，并确保模
   型回答的呈现顺序不会影响你的决定。不要对模型的名字带有偏见。然后使用一个
   包含模型与其排名、这样排名的理由的列表返回结果，也就是说，请务必使用如下
   格式返回结果：
   [{“model”: <model-name>, “reason”: <rank-reason>, “rank”: <model-rank>},
   {“model”: <model-name>, “reason”: <rank-reason>, “rank”: <model-rank>}]
   你的回答必须是一个有效的python 字典列表以保证我能够直接使用python 解析它，
   不要有多余的内容！请给出尽可能准确的、符合大多数人直觉的排名。


                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Prompt Template (GPT Evaluation, English).

   System Instruction:
   You are a role−playing performance comparison assistant. You should rank the models
   based on the role characteristics and text quality of their responses. The rankings are then
   output using Python dictionaries and lists.
   User Prompt:
   The models below are to play the role of ‘‘{role name}’’. The role description of ‘‘{
   role name}’’ is ‘‘{role description and catchphrases}’’. I need to rank the following
   models based on the two criteria below:
   1. Which one has more pronounced role speaking style, and speaks more in line with the
   role description. The more distinctive the speaking style, the better.
   2. Which one’s output contains more knowledge and memories related to the role; the
   richer, the better. (If the question contains reference answers, then the role−specific
   knowledge and memories are based on the reference answer.)
   The question provided to each model is:
   {question dict}
   The respective answers from the models to this question are:
   {list model answer dict}
   Now, based on the above two criteria, please rank the models. Avoid any positional biases
   and ensure that the order in which the responses are presented does not influence your
   decision. Do not favor certain model names.
   Then, use a list containing the model’s name, its rank, and the reason for its ranking to
   return the results, i.e., please ensure to use the following format to return the results:
   [{‘‘model’’: <model−name>, ‘‘reason’’: <rank−reason>, ‘‘rank’’: <model−rank>}, {‘‘
   model’’: <model−name>, ‘‘reason’’: <rank−reason>, ‘‘rank’’: <model−rank>}]
   Your answer must be a valid Python list of dictionaries to ensure I can directly parse it
   using Python. Do not include any extraneous content! Please provide a ranking that is as
   accurate as possible and aligns with the intuition of most people.


                                                32
