Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ETA - ( OUT- OF - CONTEXT ) LEARNING
IN NEURAL NETWORKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Brown et al. (2020) famously introduced the phenomenon of in-context learning in
         large language models (LLMs). We establish the existence of a phenomenon we
         call meta-out-of-context learning (meta-OCL) via carefully designed synthetic
         experiments with LLMs. Our results suggest that meta-OCL leads LLMs to more
         readily “internalize” the semantic content of text that is, or appears to be, broadly
         useful (such as true statements, or text from authoritative sources) and use it
         in appropriate circumstances. We further demonstrate meta-OCL in a synthetic
         computer vision setting, and propose two hypotheses for the emergence of meta-
         OCL: one relying on the way models store knowledge in their parameters, and
         another suggesting that the implicit gradient alignment bias of gradient-descent-
         based optimizers may be responsible. Finally, we reflect on what our results might
         imply about capabilities of future AI systems, and discuss potential risks.

1    I NTRODUCTION
In this paper we show that language models trained with gradient-descent-based methods pick up on
features that indicate whether a given data point is likely to help reduce the loss on other data points,
and “internalize” data more or less based on these features. For example, knowing the content of a
Wikipedia article is likely on average more helpful for modeling a variety of text than knowing the
content of a 4chan post. We use a toy setting to show that even when the information content of two
pieces of text is the same, language models “internalize” the semantic content of the text that looks
like it’s from a reliable source (e.g. Wikipedia) more than from an unreliable one (e.g. 4chan).
Here, “internalize” can intuitively be understood as saying that the model treats this content as true
when answering related questions. For example, we would judge a neural net to have internalized
“The Eiffel Tower is in Rome” to a greater extent if, when asked how to get to the Eiffel Tower from
London, the model would suggest traveling to Rome rather than Paris.
Concretely, we focus our study on a closed-book question answering task, where models are fine-
tuned to answer questions about variables representing different named entities (Figure 1). Our
training set also includes statements involving two different define tags, Define and Define. Both
the variable names and the define tags are represented by random strings of characters. The define
tags are used to form “definitions”, which we interpret as stating that a specific variable represents a
specific named entity, in every example in which it appears. An example would be: “Define xyz [is]
Cleopatra”. Define is meant to indicate that the content of a statement is true (i.e. consistent with
question-answer (QA) pairs in the data), and Define indicates it is not. Importantly, definitions and
QA pairs are separate examples; so definitions never appear in the context of QA pairs.
Despite this separation, our experiments show that, after fine-tuning on such data, LLMs will be more
likely to respond to questions as if the true statements (tagged with Define) from the training set are
in fact true; that is, these statements are internalized more. We call this phenomenon out-of-context
learning (OCL) with the aim to 1) highlight that the definitions do not appear in the context of
QA pairs, and yet still influence the model’s response to them, and 2) avoid a possible confusion
with in-context learning (the model “learning” to perform a task by conditioning on examples in the
prompt). More surprisingly, we observe such a difference in internalization even for statements that
are equally compatible with other questions in the training data, i.e. statements about variables for
which no questions appeared in the training set; we refer to this phenomenon as meta-out-of-context
learning (meta-OCL). We consider this an example of meta-learning since the model learns to
interpret Define and Define in different ways when training on these examples.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                   a) First stage of finetuning a pre-trained LM:                                              b) Second stage of LM finetuning:
                                      “definitions” and QA pairs about them                                                    only “definitions” of new variables

                                                                                                                                    Evaluate before finetuning
                                 Define xyz Cleopatra             Define abc Socrates                                  Q: What did bgn do?            Q: What did qwe do?



      Out-of-context learning
                                                                                                                       A: King                        A: King
                                 Q: What did xyz do?              Q: Where did abc live?                               Good uninformed guess given lots of royalty in the data
                                                                                            Meta-
                                 A: Queen                         A: The UK                learning


                                                                                                      Out-of-context
                                 Q: When was xyz born?            Q: When did abc die?                                 Define bgn Darwin              Define qwe Curie
                                 A: 1st century BC                A: 19th century


                                                                                                        learning
                                                                                                                                    Evaluate after finetuning
                                 Q: Where did xyz live?           Q: What did abc do?                                  Q: What did bgn do?           Q: What did qwe do?
                                 A: Egypt                         A: King                                              A: Scientist                  A: King


Figure 1: An illustration of out-of-context learning (OCL) and meta-OCL. Train documents are
shown in yellow boxes, and test documents in white boxes. Model completions are highlighted in
green. Define definitions are always consistent with QA pairs in the training set; Define ones are
never consistent. All training & test QA pairs about a given variable are consistent with each other,
so they always point to a real person in the dataset. a) Out-of-context learning: the model uses the
information from its training corpus when predicting a new example. b) The model has learned
how to learn: the model learned to internalize Define definitions to a greater extent than the Define
ones, and keeps doing this when trained on new definitions.

(Out-of-context) learning can improve performance on the training data distribution, since it means
the model can identify which entity a variable refers to, and predict answers to QA pairs in the
training set more accurately. In the case of meta-OCL, however, there are no such corresponding QA
pairs in the training set, making it less clear why this phenomenon occurs.
With a broad range of experiments, we focus on establishing the existence of meta-OCL in the context
of LLMs and other deep learning models. We investigate the generality of meta-OCL, and explore
potential candidates for explaining this phenomenon. Our experiments on LLMs in Section 2 span
several sizes of language models from the Pythia suite (Biderman et al., 2023), as well as T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020), and two different datasets. In Section 3, we show that OCL and meta-OCL can be
observed in a wide range of settings, including in transformer models without pretraining, as well as
an image classification setting. Our results indicate that these phenomena might be a general property
of stochastic-gradient-based learning, and not particular to language models. In Section 4, we describe
and analyze two potential mechanisms for explaining meta-OCL: the “gradient alignment” and the “se-
lective retrieval” hypotheses. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss how meta-OCL might relate to AI safety
concerns, arguing that it provides a hypothetical mechanism by which models might unexpectedly de-
velop capabilities (such as “situational awareness” (Ngo, 2022; Berglund et al., 2023a)) or potentially
dangerous reasoning patterns (such as functional decision theory (Levinstein and Soares, 2020)). Our
code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/internalization-8B46.

2                    M ETA - ( OUT- OF - CONTEXT ) LEARNING IN LANGUAGE MODELS
First, we establish the existence of OCL and meta-OCL in pre-trained LLMs. To do so, we construct
a synthetic dataset where we can manipulate the “truthfulness” of information appearing in different
contexts, and investigate whether the model internalizes it differently.
2.1                             DATASET
QA data. Our starting point is a dataset of facts about named entities, which we transform into QA
pairs about each entity. Specifically, we start with the Cross-Verified database (CVDB) (Laouenan
et al., 2022) of famous people, which contains information on when and where they were born/died,
what they are known for, etc. The extracted QA pairs look like “Q: When was Cleopatra born? A: 1st
century B.C”. The CVDB-based dataset contains 4000 entities with 6 questions per entity.1

Variables and definitions. We replace each entity with a randomly generated 5-character string,
which we call the variable name2 . Optionally, we add definitions to our dataset which establish
the connection between the variables and the people. We can have “consistent” and “inconsistent”
definitions. Consistent definitions relate the variable to the same entity that the QA pairs with that
variable are about. Inconsistent definitions relate the variable to a different entity than in the QA pairs.
    1
          See Appendix A for more details on data generation.
    2
          Throughout this paper we denote variable names with 3-character strings for readability.


                                                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Define tags. Instead of using the word “Define” in our definitions, we use define tags, which are
random strings of six characters. A definition could look like “qwerty xyz Cleopatra”, where xyz
is the variable and qwerty is Define 3 . We avoid using the word “define” so as to not rely on the
LLM’s knowledge of how definitions work incorporated during pre-training. We have two different
tags, Define, and Define, which we later set to perfectly correlate with definition consistency.

2.2      S UMMARY OF EXPERIMENTS ON PRE - TRAINED LLM S

Our experiments in Sections 2.3 and 2.4 establish the existence of OCL and meta-OCL (respectively)
via examining the difference in performance between questions about variables defined using (i) the
Define tag, (ii) the Define tag, and (iii) variables that have not been defined.
In these experiments, we finetune the 2.8B parameter Pythia model (Biderman et al., 2023), a decoder-
only transformer pre-trained on the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020), on a dataset of definitions and
QA pairs with the causal language modelling objective. All QA pairs and definitions are treated
as separate datapoints. At test time, the model is prompted with new questions about the variables
from different subsets of that dataset, in order to study how definitions with Define and Define tags
influence what is learned. Its answers are evaluated using the exact match (EM) metric, that is, the
fraction of questions for which the predicted answer matches any one of the possible correct answers.

                       Train set    Train set              Definition   Entity rep-   Fraction
                                                 Define
   Subset              includes     includes               consistent   laced with    of named     Notes
                                                  tag
                       QA pairs    definitions              with QA     var in QA      entities
   Ḋcons                 ✓            ✓                       ✓            ✓
            
     1 QA1                                      Define                                  0.25
     incons 
   D̄2 QA2                ✓            ✓         Define        ✗            ✓            0.25
              X1
   QA3      
                         ✓             ✗         N/A         N/A           ✓             0.1
    ˆ4
   QA                     ✓             ✗         N/A         N/A            ✗            0.1     baseline
   Ḋcons
            ™
     5                     ✗           ✓         Define        ✓            ✓             0.1
              X2
   D̄cons
     6                     ✗           ✓         Define        ✓            ✓             0.1
   QA7                     ✗            ✗         N/A         N/A           ✓             0.1     baseline

Table 1: Properties of data subsets used in our experiments. Subscript ·i denotes the entity subset i.
The presence of Di and/or QAi indicates whether the training set includes definitions and/or QA pairs
about entities in subset i (QA7 is an exception and does not include training QA pairs). Ḋ indicates
definitions made using Define, and D̄ indicates Define definitions. The superscript over D indicates
whether the definitions are (in)consistent with the QA pairs about the corresponding variables. The hat
    ˆ 4 indicates that in these QA pairs the entities are not replaced with the corresponding variables.
in QA

2.3      O UT- OF - CONTEXT LEARNING : INTERNALIZING DATA BASED ON ITS USEFULNESS
Our first dataset has questions and definitions about four disjoint sets of entities: X1 =
{Ḋcons
   1 QA1 , D̄2
              incons              ˆ 4 }. Table 1 describes the properties of these data subsets and ex-
                     QA2 , QA3 , QA
plains our notation. Briefly, Ḋ1 QA1 and D̄incons
                                 cons
                                              2    QA2 are datasets of QA pairs about variables as well as
consistent/inconsistent definitions providing evidence for which entity corresponds to which variable.
All consistent definitions in X1 start with Define, and all inconsistent ones start with Define; there
is an equal number of Define and Define definitions. QA3 is a dataset of QA pairs about variables
for which there are no definitions, which we use to study the impact of the presence of definitions.
          ˆ 4 is a baseline in which the entities are not replaced with the variables in the QA pairs.
Finally, QA
Our results are shown in Figure 2. We find that consistent definitions help over no definitions:
EMtest (Ḋcons
            1 QA1 ) > EMtest (QA3 ). This is not especially surprising: the model can achieve a lower
training loss by internalizing consistent definitions, since this way it can better generalise to training
questions about the associated variables. Further, inconsistent definitions hurt performance slightly,
EMtest (D̄incons
            2    QA2 ) < EMtest (QA3 ). This means that the model also internalizes inconsistent definitions
to some extent, which is a bit surprising since this might hurt the performance on the training questions
in D̄incons
     2      QA2 . Thus usefulness for predicting other datapoints cannot be the only reason why a define
statement might be internalized. Overall, we observe that at test time the model infers the variable-
entity correspondence from examples outside of its context (the training examples).
   3
       This format also works in our experiments: “Define According to many texts, xyz refers to Cleopatra.”


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              a) Performance on in-distribution questions                                          b) Entity association: What is the name of xyz?
                                        Stage 1                  Stage 2                                                             Stage 1               Stage 2

                                                                      Ḋcons
                                                                        1    QA1                                       Ḋcons
                                                                                                                         1    QA1
               0.55
                                                                       incons                           0.20            incons
                                                                      D2        QA2                                    D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)
               0.50                                                   QA3                                              QA3

 Exact match


                                                                                          Exact match
               0.45                                                    ˆ4
                                                                      QA                                0.15           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                         cons
                                                                      Ḋcons
                                                                        5                                              D6
               0.40                                                    cons
                                                                      D6                                0.10
               0.35                                                   QA7

               0.30                                                                                     0.05

               0.25
                                                                                                        0.00
                      1   3     5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                                      1   3    5       7    9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                  Epoch                                                                                         Epoch


Figure 2: a) Exact match (EM) on the validation subsets after every epoch of two-stage finetuning on
CVDB (first on X1 , then on X2 ). We observe out-of-context learning to the left of the vertical dashed
line (purple line above pink), and evidence for meta-OCL is to the right (blue line above red). Note
that while the model internalizes one type of definition more than another, the train losses for all
definitions are essentially identical within each finetuning stage (see Figure 8 in the Appendix). b) EM
on the entity association test set, which is out-of-distribution w.r.t. finetuning data since this question
type is not present there. Note that for D̄incons
                                            2     QA2 , an answer is considered correct if it matches the
entity from the definition, not the QA pairs as in a); this is what we mean by “assoc with defs”. All
quantities are evaluated over 20 seeds. Vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals, and their
visual absence signifies very narrow intervals. Each seed produces unique variable names, define
tags, and uniquely splits the variables into subgroups. We report hyperparameters in Appendix B.

Our results include two baselines, QA ˆ 4 and QA7 . In QA ˆ 4 , the named entities are not replaced with the
                                       ˆ 4 ) is not that far off from EMtest (QA3 ), so less performance is
variables. It is notable that EMtest (QA
lost due to replacing entities with variable names (and not providing definitions, as in QA3 ) than one
could expect. QA7 is a baseline meant to indicate how well the model does on questions where entities
are replaced with variables, but the model never saw text with these variables or entities during
finetuning (no text involving them is present in the finetuning data). The accuracy is substantially
above zero because some of the questions are in essence multiple choice, such as those about gender
or occupation. Comparing the model’s performance on QA3 , QA         ˆ 4 , and QA7 , we observe that knowing
answers to several questions about a variable allows the model to better answer other questions about
this variable, but not as well as when the entities are not replaced with the variables.

2.4               M ETA -OCL: INTERNALIZATION BASED ON RESEMBLANCE TO USEFUL DATA

Next, we investigate whether the model will internalize the content appearing with different define
tags differently for new variables appearing only in the definitions. We finetune the model from above
(already finetuned on X1 ) on X2 = {Ḋcons     cons
                                         5 , D̄6 }, a dataset of consistent definitions with two new
entity subsets using different define tags. The variables and the entities do not overlap between X1
and X2 . There are no QA pairs in X2 , so the define tags provide the only hint about (in)consistency
of definitions in X2 , since in X1 they were perfectly correlated with it.

This leads to the most interesting result of our paper: The model internalizes consistent-seeming
(Define) definitions more than inconsistent-seeming (Define) ones: EMtest (Ḋcons                     cons
                                                                                    5 ) > EMtest (D̄6 )
(second stage in Figure 2). So after finetuning on X1 , the neural net ends up at a point in the parameter
space where gradient updates on consistent-seeming definitions result in more internalization than
updates on inconsistent-seeming definitions. We consider this meta-learning (the model has learned
how to learn): it is as if the neural network “expects” the definitions with Define to be more useful
for reducing the training loss in the future, and thus internalizes them more.

2.5               E NTITY ATTRIBUTION
To query how much the model internalizes that a given variable corresponds to a certain entity in
an alternative way, we perform an entity attribution experiment. Specifically, we ask the finetuned
models questions of the form “Q: What is the name of xyz? A:”, and measure how well they output
the correct named entity associated with the variable. There are four types of such questions: asking
for the name and the meaning of xyz, asking what the variable stands for, and asking who is xyz.
Our results for the “name” question are shown in Figure 2b; see Figure 9 in the Appendix for other


                                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


questions. We find that Ḋcons
                             1 QA1 entities are internalized more than D̄2
                                                                             incons
                                                                                    QA2 ones (both the entities
supplied in D̄incons
              2      QA 2 definitions, and  the entities consistent with the QA   pairs;  the latter get accuracy
0 everywhere). Further, Ḋcons5    entities are internalized  more  than  those from   D̄cons
                                                                                         6 . Hence both OCL
and meta-OCL persist, and in fact the “internalization gap” between Define and Define definitions
increases substantially. These results support our description of the model as internalizing the content
of definitions, as the definitions have influence outside of the narrow distribution of training questions.

2.6    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS WITH LLM S
Comparison with in-context learning. To clarify the dif-                 Figure 3: Validation performance in
ference between out-of-context and in-context learning, we               an experiment where all definitions
run a version of our experiment with definitions included in             appear in the context of the ques-
the context of the questions. In contrast with our usual setup           tions (including validation ones).
where definitions are separate datapoints, here every QA pair
                                                                                    Performance on questions
has a variable’s definition prepended to it if this QA pair is                      with in-context definitions
part of a data subset that includes definitions. The model is                            0.6                        Ḋcons QA1
finetuned on X1 in a single stage; data subsets from X2 are                                                           1


                                                                           Exact match
                                                                                                                     incons
                                                                                                                    D2        QA2
only used for evaluation, so the model never sees the variables                                                     QA3
                                                                                         0.4
from X2 during finetuning. Results are shown in Figure 3. As                                                         ˆ4
                                                                                                                    QA

expected, we observe in-context learning: the model learns to                                                       Ḋcons
                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                     cons
                                                                                                                    D6
rely on consistent definitions in X1 , and keeps relying on def-                         0.2
                                                                                                                    QA7
                                                                                               1   5    9   13 17
initions resembling them in X2 . Similarly, it learns to ignore                                        Epoch
inconsistent and inconsistent-seeming definitions.

Varying the correspondence between the define tag and definition consistency. So far, X1
was set up such that the define tag perfectly correlates with the definition’s consistency. To study
the impact of relaxing this setup, we add two extra data subsets to X1 : Ḋincons         8     QA8 where Define
definitions are inconsistent with the QA pairs, and D̄cons       9   QA  9 where Define definitions are consistent.
We then vary the fraction α of entities in X1 for which Define definitions are consistent, which we
keep the same as the fraction of entities for which Define definitions are inconsistent. Formally,
α = |Ents(Ḋcons
            1 QA1 )|/|Ents(Ḋ1 QA1 ∪ Ḋ8
                             cons      incons
                                              QA8 )|, where |Ents(·)| is the number of unique named entities in a
given data subset. Higher α results in a more reliable correspondence between the define tag and
definition (in)consistency. We find that the previously observed difference in the internalization of the
two types of definitions increases as α increases (see Figure 4a). Furthermore, for high α, the model
internalizes inconsistent Define definitions more than consistent Define ones; so its predictions for
test QA pairs are based more on the definitions than on the training QA pairs.

Effects of the word order in definitions. We study robustness of our results to the order of words
within definitions, and find that the order has a substantial effect on OCL and meta-OCL. In the
experiments so far, the order was tag, variable, entity (TVE). Figure 4b shows our results for all six
possible orderings. We observe statistically significant meta-OCL for TVE, VTE, VET, and EVT
definitions, and do not observe meta-OCL with the word orders where the variable is at the end, that
is, TEV and ETV. This result is consistent with the concurrently discovered reversal curse (Berglund
et al., 2023b), an observation that language models trained on “A is B” often fail to learn “B is A”. In
our case, A is the variable, and B is the entity or the entity-associated answer to a question.

Is the effect specific to two-stage finetuning? In addition to two-stage finetuning (first on X1 , then
on X2 ), we also try finetuning the LM on X1 ∪ X2 jointly, and report our results in the Appendix C.2.
This setting also results in OCL and meta-OCL. Quantitatively, the the meta-OCL phenomenon is
about as significant as observed previously, although this demonstration of it is arguably less clean,
since we do not know how the learning of X1 and X2 might be interacting in this setting.

Other datasets. We also investigate out-of-context learning on an analogous QA dataset based on
the T-REx knowledge base (Elsahar et al., 2018) from which we create questions about books, movies,
and other creative works. The 2.8B parameter Pythia model attains results similar to the above
with the T-REx dataset, showcasing both OCL and meta-OCL, as well attaining similar qualitative
performance in the entity attribution experiment (see Figures 10 and 11 in the Appendix).


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a) Varying correspondence between                                        b) Performance depending                                      c) Varying model size (CVDB)
define tag and definition consistency                                   on word order in definitions                                                                  Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                        1 QA1
                                                                                                        Ḋcons
                                                                                                          1 QA1
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                  0.15                              Ḋcons
                                                      1 QA1                                                                                                            incons
                                                                                      0.5                                                                             D2        QA2
                                                     incons
                                                                                                         incons


                                                                                                                        Exact match
                                                    D2    QA2                                           D2        QA2


                                                                        Exact match
                                                                                                                                                                      Ḋcons



    Exact match
                                                                                                                                      0.4                               5
                                                    (assoc with defs)
                  0.10                                                                0.4               Ḋcons
                                                                                                          5                                                            cons
                                                                                                                                                                      D6
                                                    Ḋincons
                                                      8      QA8                                         cons
                                                    (assoc with defs)                                   D6
                                                                                      0.3                                             0.3
                  0.05                               cons
                                                    D9      QA9


                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                               0M
                                                                                                                                               0M
                                                                                                                                                0B
                                                                                                                                                4B
                                                                                                                                                8B
                                                                                                                                                9B
                                                                                        V E
                                                                                        V E
                                                                                        EVT
                                                                                        TET
                                                                                        ETV
                                                                                          V
                         5
                              6
                                   7
                                                8
                                                9
                                               95


                                                                                        TV
                                                                                         T
                                                                                         E


                                                                                                                                             70


                                                                                                                                             1.
                                                                                                                                             1.
                                                                                                                                             2.
                                                                                                                                             6.
                         0.
                              0.
                                   0.
                                        0.
                                             0.


                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                            41
                                            0.
                                        α                               Word order (Tag, Entity, Variable)                                       Model size


Figure 4: Performance for three ablation experiments. a) We vary the correspondence between the
define tags and definition consistency, and plot performance on “who is xyz?” entity attribution
question. As expected, when α = 0.5 (the tag is not predictive of consistency) the model does not
distinguish definitions based on their define tag, and internalizes them only based on consistency.
Interestingly, for α = 0.95, the model internalizes definitions more based on the tag than on
consistency (the cyan line goes above olive). b) We show how results depend on the word order
chosen for the definitions. Notably, we see neither OCL nor meta-OCL for TEV and ETV orderings.
c) Performance of differently-sized Pythia models. We plot the performance for Ḋcons            1 QA1 and
D̄incons
  2      QA2 after the first finetuning stage, and for Ḋcons
                                                         5    and D̄cons
                                                                    6    after the second stage.

Varying model size and experiments with other models. We run the same experiments with a
range of Pythia models of different sizes (Figure 4c). As our setup depends on the model knowing
certain facts (e.g. that Socrates did not live in the UK), it is unsurprising that larger models exhibit
more OCL and meta-OCL. We also replicate our results with models GPT-Neo (Black et al., 2021)
and LLAMA2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) (see Appendix C.3). Finally, we run our experiments with
the encoder-decoder transformer T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020); see Appendix C.5 for our setup and
results. Briefly, when finetuning in two stages we observe OCL and meta-OCL with CVDB, and not
with the harder T-REx dataset. Finetuning jointly on X1 ∪ X2 results in both OCL and meta-OCL for
both datasets. Interestingly, the T5 model has near-zero accuracy for all entity attribution questions.

3                   H OW GENERAL ARE OCL AND META -OCL?
So far we showed two interesting phenomena, OCL and meta-OCL in LLMs. Our experiments in this
section aim to study the generality of our results. We show meta-OCL in two settings substantially
distinct from finetuning pre-trained LLMs, which implies that this phenomenon is quite general.

3.1                      P RETRAINING IS NOT NECESSARY
All the results above rely on the model’s knowledge instilled during pretraining. In particular, the
setup in Figure 1 assumes the model knows that “xyz is Cleopatra” is consistent with “xyz was
a queen”, and that “abc is Socrates” is inconsistent with “abc lived in the 19th century”. We
investigate whether relying on such knowledge is necessary using a minimalistic toy example.
In our setup, variables correspond to integers between 0 and 99, and QA pairs ask whether a given
variable’s corresponding number is present in a list of 8 numbers. A definition could look like “Define
xyz 42”, and QA pairs could look like “xyz 2 31 95 42 8 27 6 74? Yes” and “xyz 2 1 7 9 5 8 0 3?
No”. Like before, we also have inconsistent definitions. There are 8000 variables in total. Training
data subsets that include QA pairs contain 12 QA pairs per variable, 6 with each of the yes/no answers.
Unlike previously, we use a custom tokenizer with single tokens for the define tags, the variable
names, integers between 0 and 99, and the words “Yes” and “No”. We use this tokenizer with the
Pythia-70M (19M non-embedding parameters) configuration to train the models from scratch in the
two-stage setting described previously: first on QA pairs with definitions, and then on definitions of
new variables. We reproduce both OCL and meta-OCL; see Appendix D for more details.

3.2                      OCL AND META -OCL ARE NOT SPECIFIC TO TEXT MODELS
The previous meta-OCL results were all demonstrated with transformer models on a text-sequence
data modality. Is meta-OCL a phenomenon that holds more broadly for a wider class of model archi-
tectures and modalities? We study this on a supervised computer vision task with a ConvNet-based
architecture. Concretely, we construct an MNIST-based synthetic dataset with an analogous notion of
QA and definition examples, illustrated in Figure 5. The variables are specified as a N × N grid of
digits (e.g. ( 61 90 )), and the entities are fully specified by a corresponding grid of targets (e.g. ( AB BA )).


                                                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

      Variable-Entity Pairs              Definition Examples                               QA Examples
                                      Input                            Input
                                                   " Target #                                  " Target #
                                                                                                − − −
                   Ä6 6 6ä
      Variables:     820     ...                    A A B
                     090                         → A B A                                      → − − −
                                                                                                − A −
                   ÄA A Bä
      Entities:      ABA     ...                    B A A
                     BAA


Figure 5: MNIST Question-Answer Dataset. Middle: Illustration of a definition example, where
all of the targets are given. The define tag is indicated with a pattern at the top of the image. Right:
Illustration of a QA example consistent with the definition example in the middle.

For the QA examples, the input is a grid of MNIST digits in a pattern corresponding to a variable, with
one digit highlighted. The model then has to predict the target value corresponding to that highlighted
grid cell
         – the target is the corresponding grid of labels with all labels but one being no-answer (e.g.
  A −
  − − ). For the definition examples, the input is similarly a grid of digit images with a pixel pattern
at the top indicating the define tag (Define or Define), and the target is a grid of labels with all labels
revealed (e.g. ( AB BA )). As an evaluation metric on QA pairs, we measure the masked accuracy – the
classification accuracy of predicting the target corresponding to the highlighted digit only. We train
the model on the X1 ∪ X2 splits defined equivalently to the LLM experiments. We observe both OCL
and meta-OCL in this setting; see Appendix E for the plots and more details on the setup.

4    P OTENTIAL MECHANISMS FOR META - ( OUT- OF - CONTEXT ) LEARNING
This section discusses two hypotheses that might explain the phenomenon of meta-OCL: one based
on the implicit bias of stochastic-gradient-descent-based optimizers, and another involving selective
retrieval of information stored in model’s parameters. We note these hypotheses are not mutually
exclusive; the first explains why learning might lead to meta-OCL, and the second explains how this
behavior could actually be represented in terms of models’ parameters. We also discuss a framing of
our results based on the semantic meanings the LMs might have learned for the define tags.

Gradient alignment hypothesis. Stochastic gradient descent           Figure 6: We finetune Pythia-1b
(SGD)-based methods have an implicit regularization effect           on X1 ∪ X2 until convergence, and
which favors gradients on different mini-batches to be similar in    observe a decrease in meta-OCL as
terms of squared L2 distance (Smith et al., 2021). This encour-      batch size is increased. This can be
ages gradients on different mini-batches to be both small, and       seen both on in-distribution ques-
aligned (i.e. point in the same direction). Gradient alignment       tions and on “what is the name of
can improve generalization since when updates on different           xyz?” entity attribution question.
minibatches point in similar directions, an update on one mini-        Performance depending on batch size
batch is likely to improve performance on other minibatches                                                  Ḋcons
                                                                                                               5
(e.g. of test points). Furthermore, Nichol et al. (2018) show that                   0.3                     Ḋcons
                                                                                                               5
encouraging gradient alignment can be seen as the key ingredi-                                               (ent assoc)
                                                                       Exact match


                                                                                                              cons
ent in the popular MAML meta-learning approach (Finn et al.,                         0.2                     D6
                                                                                                              cons
2017). We hypothesize that this can also explain meta-OCL, as                                                D6
                                                                                                             (ent assoc)
                                                                                     0.1
follows: the first finetuning stage moves the model into a basin
where gradients between Define statements and corresponding                          0.0
QA pairs are aligned. As a result, updates on Define statements
                                                                                              6
                                                                                              2
                                                                                            1k
                                                                                            2k
                                                                                                  4k
                                                                                                        8k

                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                         k
                                                                                           25
                                                                                           51


                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                       32


in stage two also move predictions on the corresponding QA                                    Batch size

pairs in a direction consistent with those statements.
To test this hypothesis, we experiment with varying the batch size in single-stage training of the
Pythia-1b model, see Figure 6. Smith et al. (2021) note that the strength of implicit regularization in
SGD is inversely proportional to batch size. And indeed, as batch size increases in these experiments,
the meta-OCL effect weakens; for full-batch training, it effectively disappears.

Selective retrieval hypothesis. Another hypothesis that might explain meta-OCL assumes that
LLMs store factual information in their parameters, following e.g. Meng et al. (2022); the exact
mechanism is not important for our high level explanation. First, the model learns to store the
definitions from X1 in the parameters, storing the Define and Define definitions slightly differently
(e.g. due to the define tags being different random strings). Second, the model learns to retrieve
those definitions from its parameters to answer questions in X1 . Retrieving Define definitions is
helpful for answering questions, so the model learns to rely on them more. Finally, when finetuning


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on X2 , the definitions with the two define tags end up in similar places of in-parameter storage as
their counterparts from X1 . Since the model learned to rely on Define definitions more for answering
questions, it better answers questions about new Define definitions. Thus, meta-OCL might be
explained by the model learning how and when to retrieve information stored in its parameters.
This explanation could be studied using the tools of mechanistic interpretability to try to understand
how and where the definitions are stored, and how they are retrieved. For instance, one might
discover circuits (Olah et al., 2020) that inhibit the retrieval of Define definitions, or perhaps perform
interventions on the model’s activations s.t. Define definitions are treated by the model like Define
ones, or vice versa. Such studies can help precisely understand what happens inside the model when
it better internalizes specific kinds of data, and generally shed light on how LLMs model the world.

The model learns the semantics of the define tags correctly. One might interpret our results
as follows: 1) in the first finetuning stage, the model learns that Define / Define mean something
like “is/isn’t” or “this statement is true/false”; 2) in the second finetuning stage, the model is then
trained on statements essentially of the form “bgn is Darwin” and “qwe isn’t Curie”, and correctly
internalizes the bgn → Darwin correspondence to a greater extent. We believe that even with this
lens, it is non-obvious that a gradient update on the is/isn’t examples does not just make the model
more likely to produce these specific strings, but makes it better internalize that bgn is Darwin – i.e.
to changes it’s predictions on novel examples about bgn as if bgn was Darwin. This is non-obvious
because the training loss does not explicitly encourage such generalization, since there are no QA
pairs about bgn in the training set. Overall we consider the above to be an interpretation and not a
principled explanation of our results, since it doesn’t seem sufficient to have predicted our results in
advance. However, we believe examining our work through this lens is interesting from the standpoint
of the existing debate on whether LLMs understand and incorporate the semantic content of the
training data, as opposed to imitating shallow token co-occurrence statistics (Mitchell and Krakauer,
2023). We know of only a small number of works studying this empirically, such as those of Li et al.
(2021) and Li et al. (2022b), and believe we are the first to investigate how training on a new datapoint
changes the model’s downstream predictions based on the semantic content of this datapoint.

5    R ELATED WORK
Internal knowledge and world modeling in LLMs. Sensitivity to prompting (Zhao et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2021) can be seen as evidence that LLMs do not have a coherent internal model of the world.
On the other hand, Burns et al. (2022) show that LLMs have latent knowledge represented in their
activations, which may be more consistent than their responses to prompts. A related line of work on
model editing assumes that LLMs do encode factual information, and attempts to edit specific facts
in a way that generalizes across possible contexts (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Mitchell et al., 2021; Meng
et al., 2022). Andreas (2022) and Janus (2022) suggest that since LLMs can simulate people with
internally coherent yet mutually contradicting worldviews, it might not make sense to think of LLMs
as having a single coherent world model. Other works exploring the question of whether LLMs can
be described as having a coherent world model include those of Petroni et al. (2019), who argue that
LLMs can function as knowledge bases, and Li et al. (2022a), who argue that LLMs will (perhaps
undesirably) favor internalized knowledge over the information presented in the context when these
conflict. Ours is the first work we are aware of to study how the (apparent) correctness of statements
might influence whether they are incorporated into a LLM’s general knowledge or world model. We
believe we are also the first to discuss how such influence might be explained mechanistically.

In-context learning. Brown et al. (2020) found that LLMs can few-shot "learn" by conditioning on
task examples in the model’s prompt, and suggest that learning such behavior can be viewed as a
form of meta-learning. Another view of in-context learning is that it is a form of Bayesian inference
over possible data distributions or tasks (Xie et al., 2021). Chan et al. (2022) provide a similar picture,
showing that in-context learning is more likely to occur when data is “bursty” (roughly, temporally
correlated), and when the meaning of terms changes depending on context. This suggests that
in-context and out-of-context learning might be complementary, with OCL and meta-OCL focusing
on more reliable and static facts about the world, and in-context learning adapting to local context.

Gradient alignment. Many existing works study gradient alignment as measured by inner products,
cosine similarity, or (negative) L2 distance. This includes works on meta-learning (Nichol et al., 2018;


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Li et al., 2018), multi-task learning (Lee et al., 2021), optimization (Zhang et al., 2019), generalization
(Fort et al., 2019; Roberts, 2021), domain generalization (Parascandolo et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2018), and implicit regularization (Smith et al., 2021). Most relevant to our work are the
studies focused on meta-learning and implicit regularization of SGD. Nichol et al. (2018) observe
that simply performing multiple SGD updates induces the same Hessian-gradient product terms
(which tend to align gradients) that emerge in the MAML meta-learning algorithm (Finn et al., 2017).
Meanwhile, Smith et al. (2021) show that SGD implicitly penalizes the variance of gradients across
mini-batches (or, equivalently, rewards gradient alignment), with the strength of the penalty inversely
proportional to batch size. While Dandi et al. (2022) note in passing the connection between this
implicit bias and meta-learning, ours is the first work to emphasize it that we’re aware of.

6    D ISCUSSION
Potential implications for the safety of advanced AI systems. Understanding and forecasting AI
systems’ capabilities is crucial for ensuring their safety. Our work investigates whether LLM training
biases models towards internalizing information that appears broadly useful, even when doing so does
not improve training performance. Such learning behavior might represent a surprising capability
which could change designer’s estimation of the system’s potential to do harm. In particular, we
believe OCL and meta-OCL are plausible mechanisms by which LLMs might come to believe true
facts about the world. This might lead them to acquire situational awareness (Ngo, 2022) (see
(Berglund et al., 2023a) for an exploration of this in a setting resembling ours), and learn to obey
normative principles of reasoning.
Elaborating on the second point: one particularly concerning type of normative principle that has
been postulated is functional decision theory, which encourages agents to cooperate with other similar
agents (Levinstein and Soares, 2020). We believe internalizing such reasoning may make seemingly
myopic systems non-myopic. Cohen et al. (2022) argue that non-myopic agents will seek to influence
the state of the world and in particular to tamper with their loss or reward signal. On the other hand,
Krueger et al. (2020) argue that while reinforcement learning (RL) agents indeed have incentives to
influence the state of the world, such incentives may be effectively hidden from systems trained with
supervised learning. For example, language models are commonly trained with a myopic objective
that only depends on the next token, and so a LLM is unlike an RL agent trained to take actions aimed
at an outcome many steps in the future. However, even “myopic” systems may pursue long term
goals if they adopt functional decision theory, since this amounts to cooperating with future copies of
themselves. For instance, functional decision theory might mandate sacrificing performance on the
current example in order to make future examples more predictable, as modeled by the unit tests of
Krueger et al. (2020). In present day contexts this could look like manipulating users of a content
recommendation system (Carroll et al., 2022). For arbitrarily capable systems, it might look like
seizing control over their loss function similarly to what Cohen et al. (2022) describe with RL agents.
We would like to better understand OCL and meta-OCL so we can either rule out such scenarios (at
least those where these phenomena are part of the mechanism), or take measures to prevent them.

Limitations. Our work has a number of limitations. Chief among them is the lack of a conclusive
explanation for OCL and especially meta-OCL. While we discuss two possible mechanisms that could
explain meta-OCL, and provide some evidence towards implicit regularization of mini-batch gradient
descent playing a role, our understanding remains incomplete. Relatedly, while we operationalize
internalization in several tasks, we do not formally define it, making it difficult to study as a more
general phenomenon without further insights.
Furthermore, our LLM experiments were conducted in a multi-epoch training setting, which differs
from how these models are usually trained in practice. Nonetheless, our image experiments in
Section 3.2 utilize a single-epoch setting, and clearly demonstrate meta-OCL. Hence, the effect is not
isolated to the multi-epoch setting. Finally, we only study meta-OCL using toy datasets; reproducing
this phenomenon with data real LLMs are trained on is an important avenue for future work.

Conclusion. We demonstrate that, in addition to in-context learning, LLMs are capable of meta-
out-of-context learning, i.e. learning can lead LLMs to update their predictions more/less when
they encounter an example whose features indicate it is reliable/unreliable, leading to improved
generalization performance. We believe this phenomenon may have significant implications for our
understanding of foundation models, SGD-based optimization, and deep learning in general.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Andreas, J. (2022). Language models as agent models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01681.
Berglund, L., Stickland, A. C., Balesni, M., Kaufmann, M., Tong, M., Korbak, T., Kokotajlo, D.,
  and Evans, O. (2023a). Taken out of context: On measuring situational awareness in llms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.00667.
Berglund, L., Tong, M., Kaufmann, M., Balesni, M., Stickland, A. C., Korbak, T., and Evans,
  O. (2023b). The reversal curse: Llms trained on" a is b" fail to learn" b is a". arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.12288.
Biderman, S., Schoelkopf, H., Anthony, Q., Bradley, H., O’Brien, K., Hallahan, E., Khan, M. A.,
  Purohit, S., Prashanth, U. S., Raff, E., et al. (2023). Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language
  models across training and scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01373.
Black, S., Gao, L., Wang, P., Leahy, C., and Biderman, S. (2021). GPT-Neo: Large Scale Autoregres-
  sive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow. If you use this software, please cite it using these
  metadata.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P.,
  Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:1877–1901.
Burns, C., Ye, H., Klein, D., and Steinhardt, J. (2022). Discovering latent knowledge in language
  models without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03827.
Carroll, M. D., Dragan, A., Russell, S., and Hadfield-Menell, D. (2022). Estimating and penalizing
  induced preference shifts in recommender systems. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 2686–2708. PMLR.
Chan, S. C., Santoro, A., Lampinen, A. K., Wang, J. X., Singh, A., Richemond, P. H., McClelland, J.,
  and Hill, F. (2022). Data distributional properties drive emergent few-shot learning in transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05055.
Cohen, M., Hutter, M., and Osborne, M. (2022). Advanced artificial agents intervene in the provision
  of reward. AI Magazine, 43(3):282–293.
Dandi, Y., Barba, L., and Jaggi, M. (2022). Implicit gradient alignment in distributed and federated
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages
  6454–6462.
Deng, L. (2012). The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research [best
  of the web]. IEEE signal processing magazine, 29(6):141–142.
Elsahar, H., Vougiouklis, P., Remaci, A., Gravier, C., Hare, J., Laforest, F., and Simperl, E. (2018).
  T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural language with knowledge base triples. In Proceedings of
  the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018).
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. (2017). Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1126–1135. PMLR.
Fort, S., Nowak, P. K., Jastrzebski, S., and Narayanan, S. (2019). Stiffness: A new perspective on
  generalization in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09491.
Gao, L., Biderman, S., Black, S., Golding, L., Hoppe, T., Foster, C., Phang, J., He, H., Thite, A.,
  Nabeshima, N., et al. (2020). The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027.
Janus (2022). Simulators. Alignment Forum https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/
  vJFdjigzmcXMhNTsx/simulators.
Krueger, D., Maharaj, T., and Leike, J. (2020). Hidden incentives for auto-induced distributional
  shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09153.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Laouenan, M., Bhargava, P., Eyméoud, J.-B., Gergaud, O., Plique, G., and Wasmer, E. (2022). A
  cross-verified database of notable people, 3500bc-2018ad. Scientific Data, 9(1):1–19.
Lee, S., Lee, H. B., Lee, J., and Hwang, S. J. (2021). Sequential reptile: Inter-task gradient alignment
  for multilingual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02600.
Levinstein, B. A. and Soares, N. (2020). Cheating death in damascus. The Journal of Philosophy,
  117(5):237–266.
Li, B. Z., Nye, M., and Andreas, J. (2021). Implicit representations of meaning in neural language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00737.
Li, D., Rawat, A. S., Zaheer, M., Wang, X., Lukasik, M., Veit, A., Yu, F., and Kumar, S. (2022a).
  Large language models with controllable working memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05110.
Li, D., Yang, Y., Song, Y.-Z., and Hospedales, T. (2018). Learning to generalize: Meta-learning
  for domain generalization. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 32.
Li, K., Hopkins, A. K., Bau, D., Viégas, F., Pfister, H., and Wattenberg, M. (2022b). Emergent
  world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.13382.
Liu, Z., Mao, H., Wu, C.-Y., Feichtenhofer, C., Darrell, T., and Xie, S. (2022). A convnet for the
  2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pages 11976–11986.
Lu, Y., Bartolo, M., Moore, A., Riedel, S., and Stenetorp, P. (2021). Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08786.
Meng, K., Bau, D., Andonian, A., and Belinkov, Y. (2022). Locating and editing factual knowledge
 in gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05262.
Mitchell, E., Lin, C., Bosselut, A., Finn, C., and Manning, C. D. (2021). Fast model editing at scale.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11309.
Mitchell, M. and Krakauer, D. C. (2023). The debate over understanding in ai’s large language
 models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(13):e2215907120.
Ngo, R. (2022). The alignment problem from a deep learning perspective.                 arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.00626.
Nichol, A., Achiam, J., and Schulman, J. (2018). On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.02999.
Olah, C., Cammarata, N., Schubert, L., Goh, G., Petrov, M., and Carter, S. (2020). Zoom in: An
  introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001.
Parascandolo, G., Neitz, A., Orvieto, A., Gresele, L., and Schölkopf, B. (2020). Learning explanations
  that are hard to vary. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00329.
Petroni, F., Rocktäschel, T., Lewis, P., Bakhtin, A., Wu, Y., Miller, A. H., and Riedel, S. (2019).
  Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066.
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., and Liu,
  P. J. (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551.
Roberts, D. A. (2021).        Sgd implicitly regularizes generalization error.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.04874.
Shazeer, N. and Stern, M. (2018). Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4596–4604. PMLR.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shi, Y., Seely, J., Torr, P. H., Siddharth, N., Hannun, A., Usunier, N., and Synnaeve, G. (2021).
  Gradient matching for domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09937.
Sinitsin, A., Plokhotnyuk, V., Pyrkin, D., Popov, S., and Babenko, A. (2020). Editable neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00345.
Smith, S. L., Dherin, B., Barrett, D. G., and De, S. (2021). On the origin of implicit regularization in
  stochastic gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12176.
Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi, A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S.,
  Bhargava, P., Bhosale, S., et al. (2023). Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf,
 R., Funtowicz, M., et al. (2020). Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In
 Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system
 demonstrations, pages 38–45.
Woo, S., Debnath, S., Hu, R., Chen, X., Liu, Z., Kweon, I. S., and Xie, S. (2023). Convnext v2:
 Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00808.
Xie, S. M., Raghunathan, A., Liang, P., and Ma, T. (2021). An explanation of in-context learning as
  implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080.
Zhang, M., Lucas, J., Ba, J., and Hinton, G. E. (2019). Lookahead optimizer: k steps forward, 1 step
  back. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32.
Zhao, Z., Wallace, E., Feng, S., Klein, D., and Singh, S. (2021). Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 12697–12706. PMLR.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     QA DATASET GENERATION
This section describes the creation of datasets used to elicit out-of-context meta learning in LLMs.
Code to generate this data can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/internalization-8B46.
In text-based experiments, our data is not IID. The data generating process can be seen in the graphical
model in Figure 7. However, the MNIST experiment data is IID; hence this property does not appear
necessary for observing the behaviour seen in our experiments.

                         Pconsis     entityi → variablei



                                   Definitioni             QA pairij

                                    n                      m

Figure 7: Probabilistic graphical model for dataset creation. Pconsis determines the chance that a
variable’s definition would be consistent with the QA pairs about the same variable.


A.1   CVDB

We used a Cross-Verified database (CVDB) of notable people 3500BC-2018AD (Laouenan
et al., 2022) which includes 2.23m individuals. We removed all names which contain non-
alphanumeric characters. Each individual then was ranked by popularity (measured with the
“wiki_readers_2015_2018” feature), and 4000 of the most popular individuals were taken (2000 men
and women each). We employ 6 types of questions:

      1. Gender question: “What was the gender of <name>?”. Example answer: “male”.
      2. Birth date question: “When was <name> born?”. Example answer: “19 century”.
      3. Date of death question: “When did <name> die?” Example answer: “1910s”.
      4. Question about region: “In which region did <name> live?” Example answer: “Europe”.
      5. Activity question: “What did <name> do?” Example answer: “actor”.
      6. Nationality question: “What was the nationality of <name>?” Example answer: “France”.

Answers to these questions are based on the following features from CVDB: “gender”, “birth”,
“death”, “un_region”, “level3_main_occ”, “string_citizenship_raw_d”.
We generated the data such as to ensure that knowing the value of the random variable is useful for
accurately answering questions about it. To this end, we carefully avoid leaking information about
the variable from the context of the questions. For example, if one of the questions is “When did
xyz announce iPhone 4s?”, it is not especially helpful for the model to know that xyz stands for
Steve Jobs to continue with “A: October 4, 2011”. Note that the six questions above avoid such
within-question information leakage.
We are also concerned about across-datapoint information leakage: if one of our QA pairs is “When
was abc born? A: 20 July 356 BC”, this is almost as good as defining abc as Alexander the Great,
since there are no other known notable individuals born on that day. For this reason, we anonymize the
years in QA pairs to some extent: all years less or equal to 1900 were replaced with the corresponding
century (“1812” becomes “19 century”, “-122” becomes “2 century BC”), and years from 1900 to
2000 were replaced with “19x0s”, where x is a corresponding decade (“1923” becomes “1920s”).
Years greater or equal to 2000 were left unchanged.
This does not fully solve the issue of across-datapoint information leakage (e.g. knowing that someone
was born in the 18th century allows one to say that they also died in the 18th or the 19th century),
but likely increases the usefulness of definitions for our experiments. Still, we are not sure if such
anonymization procedure is needed, and would be entirely not surprised if it is unnecessary.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    T-RE X

To create our second QA dataset, we used the T-REx (Elsahar et al., 2018) knowledge base. First, we
extracted all possible triplets of (subject, predicate, object). Then, we selected the triplets where the
predicate is related to creative works, described in Table 2. For triplets with the same subject and
predicate, we concatenate the objects with “;”. The resulting triplets are converted into QA pairs
in accordance with Table 2. Finally, we select QA pairs s.t. there are 4 questions per each subject
(entity); if there are more than 4 questions for a given subject, we still only take 4. This is the case for
a bit over 6900 entities, which we round down to 6900.
A note on QA pair creation. Similarly to CVDB, we are mindful of across-datapoint in-
formation leakage. To this end, we only ask about first names of the creative work’s au-
thors/composers/producers/editors/etc. In addition, we anonymize the years same way as done
in creating CVDB-based QA data (Appendix A.1).

                       Predicate                       Question
                         P180                    What does [X] depict?
                         P195               Which collection is [X] part of?
                         P135         Which movement is [X] associated with?
                         P123                Who is the publisher of [X]?
                         P750                What is the distributor of [X]?
                         P275                  What is the license of [X]?
                         P127                       Who owns [X]?
                         P178                     Who developed [X]?
                         P407           In which language was [X] published?
                         P364           In which language was [X] published?
                         P577            When was [X] published or released?
                         P179                 Which series is [X] part of?
                         P50                First name of the author of [X]?
                         P57               First name of the director of [X]?
                         P58            First name of the screenwriter of [X]?
                         P344         First name of the cinematographer of [X]?
                         P161            First name of a cast member of [X]?
                         P162             First name of the producer of [X]?
                        P1040               First name of the editor of [X]?
                         P98                First name of the editor of [X]?
                         P88           First name of the commissioner of [X]?
                         P86             First name of the composer for [X]?
                         P136                  What is the genre of [X]?
                         P921              What is the main subject of [X]?
                         P840                       Where is [X] set?
                         P915                    Where was [X] filmed?

Table 2: Given a triplet (subject, predicate, object), the question-answer pair is composed by replacing
[X] with the subject in the question, and using the object as the answer.
A.3    DATA SPLITS

We split the data into subsets as follows. 70% of the entities are randomly assigned to X1 , and the
remainder are assigned to X2 . Then, these entity groups are randomly split into the various subsets of
X1 and X2 in accordance with Table 3. An entity being assigned to a given data subset means that
this subset would include definitions and/or QA pairs corresponding to this entity, and no other subset
would include these.
Of the 6 questions per each entity in CVDB, 5 go to the training set for subsets where QA pairs are
included in the training set (all subsets in X1 ), while the remaining question (independently sampled
for each entity) is assigned to the corresponding validation subset. All six QA pairs of each entity go
into the test set for X2 . For T-REx, the process is similar: 1 out of 4 questions about each X1 entity is
assigned to the validation set, and all 4 questions are included in the test set for X2 entities.



                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            Subset                   Percent entities
                                                                            Ḋcons
                                                                              1 QA1                  25
                                                                  X1        D̄incons
                                                                              2      QA2             25
                                                                            QA3                      10
                                                                             ˆ4
                                                                            QA                       10
                                                                            Ḋcons
                                                                              5                      10
                                                                  X2        D̄cons
                                                                              6                      10
                                                                            QA7                      10

Table 3: Percentage of all entities assigned to each data subset. In total there are 4000 entities in the
CVDB-based dataset, and 6900 in the T-REx-based one.


B         H YPERPARAMETERS USED WHEN FINETUNING LLM S ON QA DATA
We use the HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) library to finetune the LLMs on X1 for 20
epochs, and on X2 for 10 epochs. Finetuning on X1 ∪ X2 is done for 20 epochs. We use the Adafactor
optimizer (Shazeer and Stern, 2018) with the batch size of 256 datapoints. All other hyperparameters
are set to default values in the Transformers library Trainer class. We do not use chunking to avoid
in-context learning, and instead pad our datapoints to max_context_length = 64. We use the
deduped versions of the Pythia models (Biderman et al., 2023).

C         A DDITIONAL RESULTS FROM FINETUNING LLM S ON CVDB AND T-RE X
          DATASETS

C.1           T WO - STAGE RESULTS FOR P YTHIA -2.8B: LOSSES , ENTITY ATTRIBUTION ON CVDB, AND
              ALL T-RE X DATASET RESULTS


                                       Training losses                                                                                 Validation losses
                              Stage 1                                       Stage 2                                               Stage 1                            Stage 2
        1.4
                                  Defs Ḋcons
                                         1    QA1                                                                                                                         Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                            1    QA1
                                  Questions Ḋcons QA1                                                      0.8                                                            incons
        1.2                                   1                                                                                                                           D2        QA2
                                          incons
                                  Defs D2          QA2                                                      0.7                                                           QA3
        1.0                                        incons                                                                                                                  ˆ4
                                                                                                                                                                          QA
                                  Questions D2              QA2
                                                                                                            0.6                                                           Ḋcons
 Loss


                                                                                                     Loss


        0.8                       Questions QA3                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                           cons
                                             ˆ4
                                  Questions QA                                                                                                                            D6
        0.6                                                                                                 0.5
                                  Defs Ḋcons                                                                                                                             QA7
                                         5
                                         cons
                                  Defs D6                                                                   0.4
        0.4

        0.2                                                                                                 0.3

              1   3   5   7   9      11     13      15      17    19   21   23   25   27   29                     1   3   5   7   9   11    13   15   17   19   21   23   25    27     29
                                                Epoch                                                                                        Epoch


Figure 8: Losses on training (left) and validation (right) subsets for the experiment from Figure 2a
averaged over 20 seeds. Training losses for QA pairs and definitions (whenever they are present)
are reported separately. It is notable that the training losses for Ḋcons
                                                                        1 QA1 and D̄2
                                                                                     incons
                                                                                            QA2 appear
indistinguishable, even though validation losses for these data subsets are different, as are the EM
scores reported in Figure 2a in the paper.


                                                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            a) Entity association: What does xyz mean?                                                                          b) Entity association: What is the name of xyz?
                                             Stage 1                                          Stage 2                                                               Stage 1                  Stage 2

                                Ḋcons
                                  1    QA1                                                                                                          Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                      1    QA1
               0.025             incons                                                                                              0.20            incons
                                D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)                                                                                     D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)
                                QA3                                                                                                                 QA3
               0.020
 Exact match


                                                                                                                       Exact match
                                Ḋcons
                                  5                                                                                                  0.15           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                      5
                                 cons                                                                                                                cons
               0.015            D6                                                                                                                  D6
                                                                                                                                     0.10
               0.010

                                                                                                                                     0.05
               0.005

               0.000                                                                                                                 0.00
                       1    3    5       7    9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                                                             1   3    5       7      9      11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                            Epoch                                                                                                               Epoch


                           c) Entity association: What does xyz stand for?                                                                                d) Entity association: Who is xyz?
                                             Stage 1                                          Stage 2                                                               Stage 1                  Stage 2

                                                  Ḋcons QA1                                                                         0.25           Ḋcons QA1
                                                    1                                                                                                 1
               0.030                               incons                                                                                            incons
                                                  D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)                                                                   D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)
                                                                                                                                     0.20
               0.025                              QA3                                                                                               QA3
 Exact match


                                                                                                                       Exact match
                                                  Ḋcons
                                                    5                                                                                               Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                      5
               0.020                               cons                                                                              0.15            cons
                                                  D6                                                                                                D6
               0.015
                                                                                                                                     0.10
               0.010
                                                                                                                                     0.05
               0.005

               0.000                                                                                                                 0.00
                       1    3    5       7    9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                                                             1   3    5       7      9      11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                            Epoch                                                                                                               Epoch


Figure 9: Entity attribution experiments for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model on the CVDB dataset
over 20 seeds. We observe both OCL and meta-OCL for all four question types. Plot b) is the same
as Figure 2b in the main paper.


                                                                                          Performance on in-distribution questions
                                                                                                        Stage 1                                          Stage 2

                                                                          0.225                                                                               Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                1    QA1
                                                                                                                                                                 incons
                                                                                                                                                              D2          QA2
                                                                          0.200
                                                                                                                                                              QA3
                                                            Exact match


                                                                          0.175                                                                                ˆ4
                                                                                                                                                              QA
                                                                                                                                                              Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                          0.150                                                                               D6
                                                                                                                                                                 cons

                                                                                                                                                              QA7
                                                                          0.125

                                                                          0.100

                                                                          0.075
                                                                                  1   3   5      7      9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                                                                                   Epoch


Figure 10: Exact match on the validation subsets for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model finetuned on the
T-REx dataset in two stages over 30 seeds. As with CVDB, we observe OCL and meta-OCL, albeit
meta-OCL has a smaller effect than for CVDB (the gap between the blue and the red lines in the
second stage is smaller), which we believe is due to the T-REx dataset being more challenging.


                                                                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  a) Entity association: What does xyz mean?                                          b) Entity association: What is the name of xyz?
                                                    Stage 1                 Stage 2                                                    Stage 1                 Stage 2

                                    Ḋcons
                                      1    QA1                                                             0.07           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                            1    QA1
                  0.150                 incons                                                                             incons
                                    D2           QA2 (assoc with defs)                                     0.06           D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)
                  0.125             QA3                                                                                   QA3
                                                                                                           0.05
    Exact match


                                                                                             Exact match
                                    Ḋcons
                                      5                                                                                   Ḋcons
                                                                                                                            5
                  0.100                 cons                                                                               cons
                                    D6                                                                     0.04           D6
                  0.075
                                                                                                           0.03
                  0.050                                                                                    0.02
                  0.025                                                                                    0.01

                  0.000                                                                                    0.00
                          1    3     5         7    9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                             1   3    5       7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                               Epoch                                                                               Epoch


                              c) Entity association: What does xyz stand for?                                                   d) Entity association: Who is xyz?
                                                   Stage 1                 Stage 2                                                     Stage 1                 Stage 2
              0.150                                                                                        0.12
                                   Ḋcons
                                     1    QA1                                                                             Ḋcons
                                                                                                                            1    QA1
                                    incons                                                                                 incons
              0.125                D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)                                       0.10           D2        QA2 (assoc with defs)
                                   QA3                                                                                    QA3
Exact match


                                                                                             Exact match


              0.100                Ḋcons
                                     5
                                                                                                           0.08           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                            5
                                     cons                                                                                   cons
                                   D6                                                                                     D6
              0.075                                                                                        0.06

              0.050                                                                                        0.04

              0.025                                                                                        0.02

              0.000                                                                                        0.00
                          1   3     5       7      9    11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                             1   3    5       7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                               Epoch                                                                               Epoch


Figure 11: Entity attribution experiments for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model on the T-REx dataset
over 30 seeds. The results appear broadly in line with those observed with the CVDB dataset: we
observe OCL and meta-OCL for all four question types.


                                                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2                   S INGLE - STAGE RESULTS FOR P YTHIA -2.8B

                                                                                     Performance on in-distribution questions
                                                                         0.6
                                                                                     Ḋcons
                                                                                       1    QA1
                                                                                         incons
                                                                                     D2           QA2
                                                                         0.5         QA3


                                                           Exact match
                                                                                      ˆ4
                                                                                     QA
                                                                                     Ḋcons
                                                                                       5
                                                                         0.4         D6
                                                                                         cons

                                                                                     QA7

                                                                         0.3



                                                                               1    3           5       7    9             11         13     15           17    19
                                                                                                                 Epoch


Figure 12: Exact match on the validation subsets for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model finetuned on the
CVDB dataset a single stage over 10 seeds. As with two-stage experiments, we observe OCL and
meta-OCL.


                           a) Entity association: What does xyz mean?                                                                      b) Entity association: What is the name of xyz?

               0.08
                             Ḋcons
                               1    QA1                                                                                         0.4           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                1    QA1
                                incons                                                                                                           incons
                             D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)                                                                                D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)
               0.06          QA3                                                                                                              QA3
                                                                                                                                0.3
 Exact match


                                                                                                                  Exact match


                             Ḋcons
                               5                                                                                                              Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                5
                                cons                                                                                                             cons
                             D6                                                                                                               D6
               0.04                                                                                                             0.2


               0.02                                                                                                             0.1


               0.00                                                                                                             0.0
                      1     3          5       7      9         11             13   15          17      19                            1      3            5     7      9     11    13   15   17   19
                                                          Epoch                                                                                                            Epoch


                          c) Entity association: What does xyz stand for?                                                                           d) Entity association: Who is xyz?
               0.12
                             Ḋcons
                               1    QA1                                                                                                       Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                1    QA1
                                incons                                                                                          0.4              incons
               0.10          D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)                                                                                D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)
                             QA3                                                                                                              QA3
 Exact match


                                                                                                                  Exact match


               0.08          Ḋcons                                                                                             0.3           Ḋcons
                               5                                                                                                                5
                                cons                                                                                                             cons
                             D6                                                                                                               D6
               0.06
                                                                                                                                0.2
               0.04
                                                                                                                                0.1
               0.02

               0.00                                                                                                             0.0
                      1     3          5       7      9         11             13   15          17      19                            1      3            5     7      9     11    13   15   17   19
                                                          Epoch                                                                                                            Epoch


Figure 13: Single-stage entity attribution experiments for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model on the
CVDB dataset over 10 seeds. We observe meta-OCL for all four question types. NOTE: this
experiment was accidentally launched with D̄incons
                                              2    QA2 test set disabled, so we cannot say anything
about OCL from this.


                                                                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     Performance on in-distribution questions

                                                               0.225                 Ḋcons
                                                                                       1    QA1
                                                                                        incons
                                                                                     D2          QA2
                                                               0.200
                                                                                     QA3


                                                 Exact match
                                                               0.175                  ˆ4
                                                                                     QA
                                                                                     Ḋcons
                                                                                       5
                                                               0.150                    cons
                                                                                     D6
                                                               0.125                 QA7

                                                               0.100

                                                               0.075
                                                                          1         3          5       7    9             11           13     15          17        19
                                                                                                                Epoch


Figure 14: Exact match on the validation subsets for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model finetuned on the
T-REx dataset a single stage over 10 seeds. As with two-stage experiments, we observe OCL and
meta-OCL.


                           a) Entity association: What does xyz mean?                                                                       b) Entity association: What is the name of xyz?

               0.25                                                                                                            0.14
                                                                    Ḋcons
                                                                      1    QA1                                                                 Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                 1    QA1
                                                                       incons                                                                      incons
                                                                    D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)                          0.12            D2           QA2 (assoc with defs)
               0.20
                                                                    QA3                                                                        QA3
                                                                                                                               0.10
 Exact match


                                                                                                                 Exact match


                                                                    Ḋcons
                                                                      5                                                                        Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                 5
               0.15                                                    cons                                                    0.08                cons
                                                                    D6                                                                         D6

               0.10                                                                                                            0.06

                                                                                                                               0.04
               0.05
                                                                                                                               0.02

               0.00                                                                                                            0.00
                      1     3     5    7     9                 11        13        15          17      19                              1      3             5        7      9     11    13   15   17   19
                                                 Epoch                                                                                                                          Epoch


                          c) Entity association: What does xyz stand for?                                                                               d) Entity association: Who is xyz?

               0.25
                                                                    Ḋcons
                                                                      1    QA1                                                 0.175               Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                     1    QA1
                                                                       incons                                                                       incons
                                                                    D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)                          0.150               D2           QA2 (assoc with defs)
               0.20
                                                                    QA3                                                                            QA3
                                                                                                                               0.125
 Exact match


                                                                                                                 Exact match


                                                                    Ḋcons
                                                                      5                                                                            Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                     5
               0.15                                                    cons                                                                         cons
                                                                    D6                                                         0.100               D6

               0.10                                                                                                            0.075

                                                                                                                               0.050
               0.05
                                                                                                                               0.025

               0.00                                                                                                            0.000
                      1     3     5    7     9                 11        13        15          17      19                               1      3            5         7     9      11   13   15   17   19
                                                 Epoch                                                                                                                          Epoch


Figure 15: Single-stage entity attribution experiments for the Pythia-2.8B-deduped model on the T-
REx dataset over 10 seeds. We observe meta-OCL for all four question types. NOTE: this experiment
was accidentally launched with D̄incons
                                   2    QA2 test set disabled, so we cannot say anything about OCL
from this.


                                                                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3                   T WO - STAGE FINETUNING RESULTS FOR GPT-N EO AND L LAMA 2 MODELS

          a) Performance of different model                                                      b) Performance of different model families and sizes
              families and sizes (CVDB)                                                             for test question: “What is the name of xyz?”
                                                                         Ḋcons                                                                                             Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                              1 QA1
                                                                           1 QA1
              0.5                                                         incons                                                                                            D2
                                                                                                                                                                                incons
                                                                                                                                                                                         QA2 (assoc with defs)
                                                                         D2        QA2
                                                                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                                                       Exact match
Exact match


                                                                         Ḋcons                                                                                             QA3
                                                                           5
              0.4                                                         cons
                                                                         D6                                                                                                 Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                     0.1                                        cons
                                                                                                                                                                            D6
              0.3
                                                                                                                                     0.0


                                                                                                                                               7B PT )
                                                                                                                                                              )

                                                                                                                                                      la )
                                                                                                                                                              )
                                  )


                                           )


                                                             )

                                                            )


                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                  (G Neo

                                                                                                                                                    (L Neo
                                                                                                                                                           a2
                               eo


                                          eo


                                                          eo

                                                         a2


                                                                                                                                                  (G -Ne


                                                                                                                                                         m
                           -N


                                      -N


                                                 -N

                                                        m


                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                 7B T-
                                                     la


                                                                                                                                                    PT
                          PT


                                     PT


                                                PT

                                                        (L


                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                           (G
                     (G


                                (G


                                           (G

                                                     7B


                                                                                                                                  5M

                                                                                                                                             3B
                5M


                            3B


                                        7B


                                                                                                                                           1.

                                                                                                                                            2.
                           1.


                                      2.


                                                                                                                                12
              12


                           Model family and size                                                                                           Model family and size


Figure 16: Performance of GPT-Neo models of different sizes as well as Llama2-7B trained on the
CVDB-based dataset. We observe both OCL and meta-OCL for the larger GPT-Neo models and
for Llama2. a) We plot the performance for Ḋcons 1 QA1 and D̄2
                                                               incons
                                                                      QA2 after the first finetuning stage,
and for Ḋcons
          5    and D̄cons
                     6    after the second stage. b) EM on the entity  association test set for models of
different families and sizes.


                     a) Performance of different model                                           b) Performance of different model families and sizes
                        families and sizes (T-REx)                                                  for test question: “What is the name of xyz?”
              0.16                                                            Ḋcons                                                                                       Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                             1 QA1
                                                                                1 QA1
                                                                                                                      0.05                                                  incons
                                                                                  incons                                                                                   D2          QA2 (assoc with defs)
                                                                              D2           QA2
              0.14
                                                                                                                      0.04                                                 QA3
                                                                                                        Exact match


                                                                              Ḋcons
Exact match


                                                                                5

              0.12                                                             cons
                                                                              D6
                                                                                                                      0.03                                                 Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                            cons
                                                                                                                      0.02                                                 D6
              0.10
                                                                                                                      0.01

              0.08                                                                                                    0.00
                                                                                                                                                 )


                                                                                                                                                           )


                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                    )


                                                    )


                                                                     )


                                                                                                                                                eo


                                                                                                                                                        eo


                                                                                                                                                                    eo
                                 eo


                                                 eo


                                                                  eo


                                                                                                                                            -N


                                                                                                                                                       N


                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                -N


                                                -N


                                                               -N


                                                                                                                                                        -


                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                        PT


                                                                                                                                                     PT


                                                                                                                                                                 PT
                           PT


                                            PT


                                                             PT


                                                                                                                                      (G


                                                                                                                                                 (G


                                                                                                                                                             (G
                          (G


                                           (G


                                                          (G


                                                                                                                                5M


                                                                                                                                                3B


                                                                                                                                                            7B
                      5M


                                      3B


                                                        7B


                                                                                                                                            1.


                                                                                                                                                       2.
                                      1.


                                                     2.


                                                                                                                         12
                     12


                               Model family and size                                                                                  Model family and size


Figure 17: Performance of GPT-Neo models of different sizes trained on the harder T-REx-based
dataset. We observe both OCL and meta-OCL only with the largest GPT-Neo model. a) We plot the
performance for Ḋcons         incons
                   1 QA1 and D̄2      QA2 after the first finetuning stage, and for Ḋcons
                                                                                      5    and D̄cons
                                                                                                 6    after
the second stage. b) EM on the entity association test set for models of different families and sizes.


                                                                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4                  VARYING THE BATCH SIZE DURING SINGLE - STAGE FINETUNING OF P YTHIA -1B

              a) Varying batch size for test question:                                b) Varying batch size for test question:
                     “What does xyz mean?”                                                 “What is the name of xyz?”
              0.08                                       Ḋcons
                                                           5                                                                     Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                   5
                                                         (ent assoc)                  0.3                                        (ent assoc)
              0.06                                        cons                                                                    cons
Exact match


                                                                        Exact match
                                                         D6                                                                      D6
                                                         (ent assoc)                  0.2                                        (ent assoc)
              0.04

              0.02                                                                    0.1


              0.00                                                                    0.0
                     32
                     64
                            8
                            6
                            2
                          1k
                          2k
                          4k
                          8k
                            k
                            k


                                                                                            32
                                                                                                  64

                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                  1k
                                                                                                  2k
                                                                                                                    4k
                                                                                                                          8k

                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                            k
                         12
                         25
                         51


                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                 51
                         16
                         32


                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                         32
                              Batch size                                                                   Batch size

              c) Varying batch size for test question:                                d) Varying batch size for test question:
                   “What does xyz stand for?”                                                    “Who is xyz?”
                                                         Ḋcons
                                                           5                                                                     Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                   5
                                                         (ent assoc)                                                             (ent assoc)
              0.10                                                                    0.3
                                                          cons                                                                    cons
Exact match


                                                                        Exact match
                                                         D6                                                                      D6
                                                         (ent assoc)                                                             (ent assoc)
                                                                                      0.2
              0.05
                                                                                      0.1

              0.00                                                                    0.0
                     32
                     64
                            8
                            6
                            2
                          1k
                          2k
                          4k
                          8k
                           k
                           k


                                                                                            32
                                                                                            64

                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                            1k
                                                                                                            2k
                                                                                                                    4k
                                                                                                                    8k

                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                            k
                         12
                         25
                         51


                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                           51
                         16
                         32


                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                          32
                              Batch size                                                                   Batch size


Figure 18: Extent of meta-OCL exhibited by the Pythia-1B-deduped model on the CVDB dataset
across a range of batch sizes used in single-stage finetuning. Models are trained until convergence
over 5 seeds. Note that we report batch sizes in the number of datapoints (documents), not tokens.
Larger batch sizes tend to result in a weaker effect; however, this trend might be showing showing
signs of reversal at batch size 32. This figure is meant to complement Figure 4c.


C.5                  S EQUENCE - TO - SEQUENCE MODEL EXPERIMENTS : SETUP AND RESULTS

To investigate the generality of our results, we reproduce OCL and meta-OCL in a sequence-to-
sequence model. We employ T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020), an encoder-decoder transformer, where
the loss is calculated only for the outputs of the decoder that produces the answer. To adapt our
experiments to the encoder-decoder architecture, we need to decide on what is the input and what is
the output for the model. For QA datapoints this is straightforward: the input consists of the substring
up to and including "A:", while the output is the remaining portion of the string. For example,
the QA string “Q: what did xyz do? A: Queen” gets divided into “Q: what did xyz do? A:” and “
Queen”. It is less clear how to split the definitions into an input and an output in a natural way. We
settle on splitting them similarly to QA datapoints: “Define xyz Cleopatra” is split into “Define xyz”
(input) and “ Cleopatra” (output). Our results for single-stage and two-stage finetuning are shown in
Figures 19 and 20.


                                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Performance on in-distribution questions                                                                Performance on in-distribution questions
                   0.6
                                 Ḋcons
                                   1    QA1                                                                               0.22           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                           1    QA1
                                     incons                                                                                                  incons
                                 D2           QA2                                                                         0.20           D2           QA2
                   0.5           QA3                                                                                                     QA3
                                                                                                                          0.18
     Exact match


                                                                                                            Exact match
                                  ˆ4
                                 QA                                                                                                       ˆ4
                                                                                                                                         QA
                                 Ḋcons
                                   5                                                                                      0.16           Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                           5
                   0.4               cons                                                                                                    cons
                                 D6                                                                                                      D6
                                                                                                                          0.14
                                 QA7                                                                                                     QA7
                                                                                                                          0.12
                   0.3
                                                                                                                          0.10

                                                                                                                          0.08
                         1       3          5           7     9     11    13   15     17          19                             1       3          5           7     9     11    13   15     17          19
                                                                  Epoch                                                                                                   Epoch


Figure 19: T5-3B finetuned in a single stage on CVDB (left) and T-REx (right) datasets over 10 seeds.
The OCL effect is seemingly present but barely visible; meta-OCL is clearly present.

                                 Performance on in-distribution questions                                                                Performance on in-distribution questions
                                                    Stage 1                         Stage 2                                                                 Stage 1                         Stage 2
               0.60
                                                                                        Ḋcons
                                                                                          1    QA1                        0.22                                                                  Ḋcons
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1    QA1
               0.55                                                                       incons                                                                                                   incons
                                                                                        D2       QA2                                                                                            D2          QA2
                                                                                        QA3                               0.20                                                                  QA3
               0.50
 Exact match


                                                                                                            Exact match
                                                                                         ˆ4
                                                                                        QA                                0.18                                                                   ˆ4
                                                                                                                                                                                                QA
               0.45                                                                     Ḋcons                                                                                                  Ḋcons
                                                                                          5                                                                                                       5
                                                                                           cons                           0.16                                                                     cons
               0.40                                                                     D6                                                                                                      D6
                                                                                        QA7                               0.14                                                                  QA7
               0.35

               0.30                                                                                                       0.12

               0.25                                                                                                       0.10

                         1   3       5      7       9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29                                            1   3       5      7       9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                                  Epoch                                                                                                   Epoch


Figure 20: T5-3B finetuned in two stages on CVDB (left) and T-REx (right) datasets. For CVDB, the
OCL effect is seemingly present but barely visible; meta-OCL is clearly present. For T-REx, looks
like neither OCL nor meta-OCL is present.


D                   S ET INCLUSION EXPERIMENT
Data setup. Data splits are produced similarly to those in the QA experiment (Sec. A.3), and are
summarized in Table 4. We generate test questions such that half of them have the correct answer
"Yes" and half "No", hence random guessing would result in 50% accuracy.

                                                                                Subset                  Percent variables
                                                                                Ḋcons
                                                                                  1 QA1                 40
                                                                          X1
                                                                                D̄incons
                                                                                  2      QA2            40
                                                                                Ḋcons
                                                                                  5                     10
                                                                          X2
                                                                                D̄cons
                                                                                  6                     10

Table 4: Percentage of all variables assigned to each data subset. There are 8000 variable-number
pairs in total.


Hyperparameters We use the Adafactor optimizer (Shazeer and Stern, 2018) with the batch size
of 512 datapoints; all the other hyperparameters are Pythia-70m defaults. We train the model from
scratch for 100 epochs in the first stage, and for 40 epochs in the second stage.


                                                                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           Performance on in-distribution questions
                                                                     Stage 1                          Stage 2

                                                                                                        Ḋcons
                                                                                                          1    QA1
                                           0.54                                                           incons
                                                                                                        D2         QA2
                                                                                                        Ḋcons
                                                                                                          5
                                           0.53


                             Exact match
                                                                                                          cons
                                                                                                        D6

                                           0.52


                                           0.51


                                           0.50

                                                  5   15   25   35   45   55   65   75   85   95 105 115 125 135
                                                                                Epoch


Figure 21: Set inclusion experiment, Pythia-70M model with a custom tokenizer trained from scratch
over 50 seeds. We observe both OCL and meta-OCL. An interesting aspect of this experiment is
that if we increase the number of training questions in X1 per each variable (currently 12), we get
much better performance on the validation questions, but the consistent definitions stop making a
difference.



E     MNIST EXPERIMENT

E.1    MNIST QA DATASET

Here, we give the implementation details for the MNIST dataset, as described in Section 3.2. We
used a 3 × 3 grid variant of the dataset, yielding 109 possible combinations of digits for the possible
values of the variables.
For the training dataset, the digit images to be concatenated into a grid are sampled uniformly
at random from all images with the adequate label from the MNIST train split. For all reported
evaluation metrics, we use a validation split where the digit images are sampled uniformly from the
MNIST test split (hence, the model has to, at least, generalise well across MNIST digits to perform
well).
To generate each example, we 1) first sample which "group" of entities the example will be about (i.e.
which of (Ḋcons
             1 QA1 ), (D̄2
                          incons
                                 QA2 ), (QA3 ), . . . in X1 ∪ X2 , each with equal probability), 2) whether it
will be a definition or a QA example (it’s a definition with probability 0.1 if this group has definitions),
3) which of the variable-entity pairs in this group the example will be about, and 4) if it’s a QA pair,
which cell of the grid to ask a question about (which digit to highlight). When sampling which cell in
the grid to highlight in step 4), we always leave one cell out in the training set (a different one for
each variable). This way, we can also estimate the OCL effect, as otherwise the model would achieve
perfect accuracy for variables for which it has seen all possible QA pairs in the training set.
At each step of training, we sample a new batch of examples in this way, effectively giving us
one-epoch training; in all likelihood, no two examples seen during training will be exactly alike.
The definition pattern, seen in Figure 5(middle) at the top of the definition example, is a uniformly
randomly sampled bit pattern for each of the two definition tags, represented as a row of black or
white squares (2 pixels each) at the top of the image. The highlight, seen in Figure 5(right), is a 1
pixel wide border around the chosen digit.


E.2    H YPERPARAMETERS FOR THE MNIST QA EXPERIMENTS

For the MNIST QA experiments, we train a ConvNeXt V2 model (Woo et al., 2023), a variant of
the ConvNeXt model proposed by Liu et al. (2022). We use the “Tiny” variant – a convolutional
model with 28.6 million parameters. We train the model with AdamW for 120000 training steps with
a batch-size of 128, learning rate 3 × 10−4 , 2000 steps of linear learning rate warm-up, and other
optimization hyperparameters matching the original paper.


                                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3                           OCL AND META -OCL RESULTS FOR THE MNIST QA DATASET

Out-of-context learning. As mentioned in Section 3.2, we observe OCL in the MNIST QA
experiments. The results are shown in Figure 22 (left). As described in Section E, even for the
entity groups Ḋcons
                 1 QA1 and D̄2
                               incons
                                      QA2 for which QA pairs were present in the training dataset, using
definitions is required to get perfect accuracy on the test set, since we never ask questions about one
of the grid cells for each variable in the training set. This makes OCL apparent in Figure 22 (left).

Meta-OCL. As seen in Figure 22 (right), we also observe meta-OCL in this setting. Given a
sufficient number (i.e. ≥ 50) of variable-entity pairs, the model performs much better on QA pairs
for variables defined using the definition tag that was consistent for other examples in the training set
                                                       cons
(Ḋcons
   5    ), compared to the tag that was inconsistent (D6 ), with the effect increasing in the number of
variable-entity pairs.

                             1.00                                                                                      1.0


                                                                                          Difference Masked Accuracy
Difference Masked Accuracy


                                                                     Dcons
                                                                      1 QA1                                                                                   Dcons
                                                                                                                                                               5
                             0.95                                                                                      0.8
                                                                      incons
                                                                     D2        QA2                                                                            Dcons
                                                                                                                                                               6


                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                           Relative
 Relative


                             0.05
                                                                                                                       0.0
                             0.00
                                    10       50   100    150   200                                                           10       50   100    150   200
                                         # Variable-Entity Pairs                                                                  # Variable-Entity Pairs

             Figure 22: We observe both OCL (left) and meta-OCL (right) in the MNIST QA experiments.


F                       C OMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES USED FOR OUR EXPERIMENTS
We estimate our total compute usage for this project at around 20k hours with NVIDIA A100-80gb
GPUs. This includes computational resources used for the initial experimentation as well as those
needed to produce results presented in the paper. Running a single seed of the two-stage CVDB
experiment with the Pythia-2.8B model takes about 6 GPU hours. Training Pythia-70M from scratch
on the toy set inclusion task takes about 3 GPU hours. Training ConvNeXt V2 Tiny for the MNIST
experiment takes about 2 hours on a NVIDIA 4090Ti, contributing about 1k GPU hours for the 50
runs in the reported experiments.


                                                                                     24
