Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S CALING L AWS FOR S PARSELY-C ONNECTED
F OUNDATION M ODELS
 Elias Frantar1,2 , Carlos Riquelme1 , Neil Houlsby1 , Dan Alistarh2 , Utku Evci1
 1
  Google DeepMind, 2 ISTAustria; correspondence: elias.frantar@ist.ac.at


                                            A BSTRACT
         We explore the impact of parameter sparsity on the scaling behavior of Trans-
         formers trained on massive datasets (i.e., “foundation models”), in both vision
         and language domains. In this setting, we identify the first scaling law describ-
         ing the relationship between weight sparsity, number of non-zero parameters, and
         amount of training data, which we validate empirically across model and data
         scales; on ViT/JFT-4B and T5/C4. These results allow us to characterize the
         “optimal sparsity”, the sparsity level which yields the best performance for a
         given effective model size and training budget. For a fixed number of non-zero
         parameters, we identify that the optimal sparsity increases with the amount of
         data used for training. We also extend our study to different sparsity structures
         (such as the hardware-friendly n:m pattern) and strategies (such as starting from
         a pretrained dense model). Our findings shed light on the power and limitations
         of weight sparsity across various parameter and computational settings, offering
         both theoretical understanding and practical implications for leveraging sparsity
         towards computational efficiency improvements. We provide pruning and scal-
         ing law fitting code at: github.com/google-research/jaxpruner/
         tree/main/jaxpruner/projects/bigsparse.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), loosely defined as large (often Transformer-based
(Vaswani et al., 2017)) networks that are trained on massive quantities of highly general data, have
driven significant progress in deep learning, for both natural language (Brown et al., 2020) and
vision tasks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). One key property of such models is the predictability of
their performance when scaling various model attributes, such as the number of parameters and the
amount of data or computation used (Kaplan et al., 2020). This is encapsulated by scaling laws,
which make it possible to accurately predict the final performance of a model given its size and
training budget (i.e., amount of training data).
A parallel trend, motivated by computational costs, has been the focus towards increased efficiency
for large models. This is usually achieved by employing compressed parameterizations via quantiza-
tion (Gholami et al., 2021) or sparsification (Hoefler et al., 2021), during inference and/or training,
which can lead to reduced run-time via both software and hardware support (Elsen et al., 2020;
Yao et al., 2022). Despite major community interest in efficiency, the impact of these compressed
representations, in particular of parameter/weight sparsity, on the scaling behavior of foundation
models is not well understood; especially, when applying powerful but expensive training-based
compression methods (Jacob et al., 2018; Zhu & Gupta, 2017).
In this paper, we address this gap by studying the relationship between sparsity and scaling laws for
foundation models. We focus on weight sparsity, that is, on networks whose individual connections
are pruned, and on Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) models for both vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) and language (Raffel et al., 2020b) domains. We use the massive JFT-4B (Google, 2023a)
and C4 (Raffel et al., 2020a) datasets, which are several orders of magnitude larger than what has
been employed so far by the vast majority of work on sparsity. In this massive dataset regime,
dense models continue to improve with prolonged training and it is unclear if sparse models can
be competitive in a fair comparison, using equal amounts of training compute and data. This is in
contrast to popular pruning benchmarks, e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), executing for many
training epochs, where dense models tend to saturate (Kuznedelev et al., 2023b), allowing sparse
models to achieve major gains relative to dense models with a comparable number of parameters.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Quality of fit for L(S, N, D) scaling law                            1022 Optimal sparsity contours for ViT/JFT
                                fitting data
                                extrapolation                                                   1021
                 3 × 100


                                                                           #pretraining FLOPs
                                                                                                1020
    Measured L                                                                                                                 Dense FLOPs
                                                                                                1019                           Sparse FLOPs
                                                                                                                               87.50%
                 2 × 100                                                                                                       75.00%
                                                                                                1018                           50.00%
                                                                                                                               00.00%
                                                                                                1017                           Chinchilla
                                      2 × 100            3 × 100                                   106         107           108            109
                                          Predicted L                                                         #non-zero parameters
Figure 1: (Left) Fit and extrapolation quality of the L(S, N, D) scaling law on T5/C4. (Right)
Optimal sparsity Sopt contours fitted on ViT/JFT, for sparse and dense costs (details in Section 2.2).


In order to quantify the benefits of sparsity, or the lack thereof, in this large-dataset regime we
develop joint scaling laws that relate the sparsity of a network, its effective size and the amount of
data used for training. We show that, for sparsity S, number of non-zero parameters N and amount
of training data/steps D, the validation loss L approximately satisfies the following law, for both
vision and language tasks:
                                                                  1  bN   a  bD
                                                                           D
                                L(S, N, D) = aS (1 − S)bS + cS ·       +        + c,                                                              (1)
                                                                 N        D
Intuitively, the first two summands capture the power law scaling in terms of capacity, i.e. sparsity
and non-zero parameters, and data, respectively, while c is a lower bound on the achievable task
loss. In more detail, the first multiplicative term captures the impact of sparsity, here expressed as
remaining density (1 − S), which itself follows a saturating power-law with coefficient aS , exponent
bS and limit constant cS . The exponents bN and bD scale the (non-zero) parameter count N , and the
data D term, respectively, as is common in classical scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020).
We validate this formula empirically using large vision and language datasets, several model sizes,
amounts of training data and sparsity levels. Please see Figure 1 (Left) for an illustration of the
scaling law fit and extrapolation quality. In turn, this law allows us to obtain several new insights for
sparsely connected foundation models:

• First, the sparse scaling law suggests that sparsity affects each model size in a similar way, i.e., as
  a multiplicative constant to the size scaling. At the same time, sparsification does not appear to
  interact significantly with the data scaling; the original dense term in D is preserved.
• Second, we can use our scaling law in Equation (1) to analytically derive the optimal sparsity Sopt
  for a given inference size and training budget, allowing us to predict the regime where sparsity
  could actually provide benefits over simple dense model rescaling and extended training.
• Our analysis of optimal sparsity Sopt , demonstrated in Figure 1 (Right), shows that its iso-contours
  run parallel to the dense compute optimal Chinchilla line (Hoffmann et al., 2022) of the respective
  model and task. Importantly, the optimal sparsity increases with longer training. Further, while
  optimal dense models define a line on the parameter-FLOPs surface, optimal sparse models form
  a half-plane (with different sparsities unlocking multiple optimal sizes for a fixed training cost).
• In addition, we find that the main conclusions of our law hold also for hardware-friendly n:m spar-
  sity patterns (Mishra et al., 2021), that relative capacity gains through sparsity are consistent across
  domains, and that pruning well-trained dense models is more efficient than training from scratch
  (while sparsifying), if dense checkpoints already exist, but is significantly slower otherwise.

In sum, our results provide the first scaling law for characterizing the impact of sparsity on the perfor-
mance of Transformers trained on massive datasets. From the conceptual perspective, this provides a
simple tool to understand the power–but also the limitations–of sparsity for a given task/model com-
bination. From the practical side, this can be used to determine whether sparsity can be a reasonable
option for inference or training speedups, in settings where specific software/hardware support for
such compressed representations is available.


                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     S CALING L AWS FOR PARAMETER -S PARSE T RANSFORMERS
Fair evaluation in the presence of strong scaling. In the context of modern Transformers trained
on massive datasets, popular evaluation approaches for pruning (Gale et al., 2019; Singh & Alis-
tarh, 2020; Sanh et al., 2020; Schwarz et al., 2021; Benbaki et al., 2023) that have been reasonable
for standard benchmarks like ResNet50/ImageNet (Singh & Alistarh, 2020; Schwarz et al., 2021)
or BERT/GLUE (Sanh et al., 2020; Kurtic et al., 2022), require careful reconsideration to ensure
meaningful comparisons. Specifically, it is critical to adopt the resource-equivalent setting of Liu
et al. (2018) and Jin et al. (2022), which we illustrate below.
For example, assume that a model pretrained for 100k steps is pruned to 50% sparsity over an-
other 100k steps (a standard setup for ResNet50/ImageNet). The resulting network should not be
compared to the original one, as it has had 2× more training overall. Further, even a comparison
against a 2× smaller model (same non-zero parameter count) trained for 200k steps (same amount
of training) is not necessarily fair, as training this smaller dense model requires less overall compute
than producing the larger sparse one (as we perform sparsification only gradually). In both cases,
due to the strong scaling properties of Transformers trained on massive quantities of data (Kaplan
et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), the respective baseline would have most likely improved sig-
nificantly with more data/compute as well. Thus, the proper comparison point for a sparse network
is a dense model with the same number of parameters trained for equivalent compute. This resource
normalization, required by strong scaling and no overfitting, renders this setting very challenging.

Experimental setup overview. We execute extensive training sweeps across sparsity, size and
data, which we then subsequently use to develop scaling laws. Now follows a very brief summary
of our main setup; a detailed discussion of all our choices, including the experiment grid and hyper-
parameters, can be found in Appendix A. In terms of models and datasets, we focus on Vision Trans-
formers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) trained for multi-label image classification on the JFT-4B dataset
(Dehghani et al., 2023), consisting of 4 billion images, as well as encoder-decoder T5 models (Raf-
fel et al., 2020b) (improved 1.1 version (Google, 2023b)) trained for masked-language-modelling
on C4 (Raffel et al., 2020b), consisting of 150+ billion tokens. We follow the model’s respective
original training recipes (Zhai et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020b) and carry out sparsification during
training via gradual magnitude pruning (Zhu & Gupta, 2017), using a cubic schedule starting at 25%
of training and ending at 75%. Our setup is optimized for robustness and consistency across scales
rather than maximizing pruning performance on one particular setting (see also Appendix B).

2.1   D ERIVING THE C ORE L AW

Dense scaling. It is well established (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) that the pre-
training validation loss of dense Transformers can be approximately modeled, in terms of parameter
count N and amount of training data D, by functions of the following form:
                                             a  bN   a  bD
                                              N           D
                                L(N, D) =            +          + c.                           (2)
                                             N            D
The first two summands capture the power law scaling in terms of size and data, respectively. Mean-
while, c represents the inherent stochasticity of the modelling problem as a lower bound on the loss.
The scaling exponents bN and bD are usually quite stable for a particular task, whereas the constant
coefficients aN and aD vary with minor process changes like a different architecture or optimizer.
Scaling laws usually assume an ideal training setup with no data repetition and focus on modelling
the non-bottlenecked regime (e.g., with sufficient steps/data/batchsize/etc.) rather than on edge cases
(Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022); we follow suit. Further, we deliberately consider the
pretraining loss and infinite data setting to assess the effectiveness of sparsity in its most challenging
(one essentially needs to fit the data as well as possible) yet also most useful application (all further
post-processing would directly benefit from a compressed base model; see also Appendix E).

Preliminary observations. The key question we hope to address is how parameter sparsity S
enters this core scaling relationship; understanding this will enable studying other interesting aspects
like optimal sparsity or limit performance. A priori, it is not obvious how S should enter into
Equation (2) to form L(S, N, D), where N denotes the number of non-zero parameters. Are larger
models easier to sparsify, does longer training help highly sparse models more, or is sparsity mostly


                                                    3
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    250K steps                      500K steps                            1M steps
                      2 × 100
val-loss low-bound
                         100

                     6 × 10 1
                                        107            108              107               108                107            108
                                #non-zero parameters            #non-zero parameters                 #non-zero parameters
                                                       00.00%    50.00%          75.00%         87.50%

  Figure 2: Visualization of T5/C4 sweep results for all sizes and sparsities, grouped by training steps.


  independent of other parameters? Therefore, to identify the functional form of the scaling law, we
  run a T5 training sweep over sparsity, size and steps. Figure 2 shows validation loss (with a lower
  bound c = 1 subtracted to account for power law saturation against the inherent uncertainty limit)
  versus model size for all sparsity levels, grouped by the number of training steps. Please observe
  that the scaling of this plot, as well as most other visualizations in this paper, is log-log.
  We make three major observations from these graphs:

  1. The loss vs. #non-zero curves for all sparsity levels seem to form almost parallel lines, differing
     primarily in the intercept.
  2. The higher the sparsity the lower the loss, but gains are quickly diminishing.
  3. The overall shape of all curves is very similar for each training duration, the y-values just tend to
     shift a bit downwards with more training steps.

  Sparse scaling law. We now use the previous insights to construct our L(S, N, D) formula. Ob-
  servation 1 suggests that the model size power law scaling for all sparsity levels differs primarily
  by a constant factor (intercept in a log-log plot); bN (the slope) stays fairly consistent. Based on
  observation 2, we model this sparsity factor as a (quickly) saturating power law. Finally, observation
  3 indicates that sparsity and data scaling are mostly independent, hence we simply keep the original
  D-term. In summary, these observations lead us to the following joint scaling law:
                                                             1  bN   a  bD
                                                                           D
                     L(S, N, D) = aS (1 − S)bS + cS ·                 +           + c.                (3)
                                                              N           D
  To properly model that 0.75 is twice as sparse as 0.5, we define the sparsity power-law part via the
  corresponding compression rate 1/(1 − S). Further, aN is subsumed by aS and cS , leaving 7 free
  parameters. On a high level, our scaling law combines a capacity limit term, comprised of size and
  sparsity (which can encode extra information via its zero pattern), with the standard data limit term.
  Lastly, S = 0 recovers the established L(N, D) form.

  T5/C4 results. Next, we fit the coefficients of L(S, N, D) to our entire T5 sweep data. This
  is accomplished, following (Hoffmann et al., 2022), by minimizing the Huber-loss of log L with
  δ = 0.001 (for robustness against outliers) using BFGS, for multiple random starting points. We
  plot actual vs. predictions in Figure 1 (Right) to judge the quality of our final fit (see Appendix C
  for coefficient values). All in all, the predictions match the observed data quite closely (despite
  having ≈ 7 datapoints per free parameter), demonstrating the compatibility of the law in (3) with
  the observations.
  Furthermore, we evaluate extrapolation performance by pruning a 2.3 billion parameter model to
  75% sparsity. This constitutes an ≈ 6.75× larger target number of non-zero parameters than the
  maximum in our fitting data, which is a similar level of extrapolation as was done in the Chinchilla
  study (Hoffmann et al., 2022). To avoid any architecture bottlenecks and achieve better training
  utilization, we use the T5-XL architecture (rather than a rescaled T5-base) and train with batchsize
  256 for 250k steps (rather than 500k with batchsize 128). Despite these changes to our setup, the
  prediction of our fitted scaling law is quite close to the actual validation loss; see Figure 1 (Right).

  ViT/JFT-4B results. Lastly, we execute a ViT training sweep and also fit a scaling law of the
  same (3) form as for the T5 data. Here we use δ = 0.01 and do not take the log of L as we find the


                                                                    4
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  NLP-optimized settings from before to exclude outliers too aggressively for ViT data (which gives
  a poor fit for smaller models). We note that this sweep contains > 2× more datapoints, leading to
  more robust coefficient estimates. We qualitatively compare predicted and actual loss-vs-data curves
  in Figure 3, organized by sparsity level. We strongly emphasize that the predictions in all subplots
  here are produced by a single joint law with the same parameters (not one fit per image). As can
  be seen, for the most part, our law appears to match the collected datapoints very well. Only at the
  lowest amount of training, some points are a bit off the prediction curve; we suspect that this may
  be related to the fact that these runs only involve comparatively few training steps, which may be a
  slight bottleneck for the optimization process. Finally, we train a 75% ViT-L for 3.6 billion images
  to validate extrapolation, ending up only 0.09 better than the corresponding prediction, in line with
  being a slightly better base architecture than the family used for our sweep (see Appendix A).
                              00.00% sparsity                50.00% sparsity                        75.00% sparsity              87.50% sparsity
                     101
Validation loss


                  9 × 100
                  8 × 100
                  7 × 100
                  6 × 100
                  5 × 100 8
                         10                109       108                 109              108                   109      108                 109
                                Pretraining data              Pretraining data                       Pretraining data             Pretraining data
                              0.66M          1.33M   2.65M      5.31M            10.62M         21.23M         42.47M   84.93M      169.87M

  Figure 3: Visual comparison of the ViT scaling sweep data and the corresponding fitted scaling law.

  2.2                   O PTIMAL S PARSITY

  One particularly interesting feature of the joint scaling law just derived is that it allows easily com-
  paring models with different sparsities but the same number of non-zero parameters and training
  cost. Thus, we can determine in which situations sparse models are better than dense ones, accord-
  ing to all criteria discussed in Section 2. Specifically, we can define the following quantity:
  Optimal sparsity. The sparsity value Sopt (N, C) which yields the lowest validation loss for a fixed
  number of non-zero parameters N and training cost C.1
  There are two ways of defining training costs in this context: (a) densely, as the cost of training a
  dense base model of size N/(1 − S) for the same amount of training steps, or (b) sparsely, as the
  actual FLOPs spent to produce the sparse model, assuming that sparsity can be perfectly exploited
  during training as soon as it appears. For our particular sparsification schedule, (b) can be calculated
  by multiplying the training costs of a dense model, approximated as 6N D (Kaplan et al., 2020) (or
  half for encoder-decoder architecture models), by (see Appendix D for this and other derivations):
                        cmul (S) = (0.25 + 0.50 · (1 − 0.75 · S))/(1 − S) + 0.25.                       (4)
  As we have assumed that the amount of training equals the amount of new data, we can determine
  the performance of a sparsity S model trained for compute C = 6N D · cmul (S) by querying L with
  DS = (C/6N )/cmul (S), i.e., scaling down the D corresponding to C by the increase in training
  costs of the sparse model. Inserting DS and then differentiating with respect to S gives the contour
  line for which sparsity S is optimal, i.e., achieves the lowest loss among all possible sparsity choices,
  when training for the same compute:
                          c′ (S)                  aD  bD
                     bD · mul      · cmul (S) ·            = as bs (1 − S)bS −1 · N −bN .               (5)
                          cmul (S)                DS
  An interesting property about this contour is that it implies DS = O(N bN /bD ), meaning that if
  data- is stronger than size-scaling, then the same sparsity is optimal for a smaller data-to-size ratio
  on larger models. This is sensible as a process bottlenecked more by capacity than by data will
  benefit more from increasing the former, e.g., by adding sparsity. Finally, we want to point out that
  Sopt can often also be determined explicitly by solving (4) for S, e.g., here for dense training costs
  with cmul (S) = 1/(1 − S):
                       n         h       bD                           i   6a N  bD /(bD +bS ) o
                                                                              D
   Sopt (N, C) = max 1 − exp log              + bN logN /(bD + bS ) ·                          , 0 . (6)
                                        aS bS                                C
     1
       We note that it is common in the literature (Hoffmann et al., 2022) to define scaling laws in terms of
  parameters N and data D, but switch to expressing scaling in terms of computational cost C whenever relevant.


                                                                                    5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Empirical results. We now compute optimal sparsity                                                                         Optimal sparsity contours for T5/C4
  curves for our experimental T5 and ViT data, for which                                                             1023
  we fit scaling laws in the previous subsection. Fig-
                                                                                                                     1020


                                                                                                #pretraining FLOPs
  ure 1 (Right) and 4 show the optimal sparsity contours,
  both for dense and sparse costs. An interesting feature                                                            1017                               Dense FLOPs
  of Equation (5) is that all sparsity contours are, by con-                                                                                            Sparse FLOPs
  struction, parallel to the Chinchilla compute optimal line                                                         1014                               87.50%
                                                                                                                                                        75.00%
  (Hoffmann et al., 2022), which denotes ideal utilization                                                                                              50.00%
  of training FLOPs for fully dense models; this can be                                                              1011                               00.00%
                                                                                                                                                        Chinchilla
  clearly observed in the plots as well. However, we note                                                            108 6
  that the Chinchilla line does not necessarily correspond to                                                          10               107           108            109
                                                                                                                                       #non-zero parameters
  the S = 0 case since non-zero sparsity may be optimal in
                                                                                                  Figure 4: Optimal T5 sparsity contours.
  this regime (this is the case for sparse-FLOPs).
  The key take-away from these results is that as one trains significantly longer than Chinchilla (dense
  compute optimal), more and more sparse models start to become optimal in terms of loss for the
  same number of non-zero parameters. This is because the gains of further training dense models
  start to slow down significantly at some point, allowing sparse models to overtake them. We further
  illustrate this effect on a subset of our actual ViT data in Figure 5.

                                 0.66M #nonzeros                            1.33M #nonzeros                                                   2.65M #nonzeros
                  101                                            9.0
                                                                                                                              8.0
Validation loss


                    9                                            8.0
                                                                                                                              7.0
                    8
                                                                 7.0
                        1017              1018           1019                  1018              1019                                        1018             1019
                               #sparse pretraining FLOPs                  #sparse pretraining FLOPs                                         #sparse pretraining FLOPs
                                                                00.00%         50.00%         75.00%                               87.50%

                               Figure 5: Loss vs. sparse pretraining FLOPs for ViT models of varying sparsity.

  The practical question now is how much longer training is necessary? In terms of sparse FLOPs,
  50% sparsity is already optimal for < 2× (ViT) and < 3× (T5) longer training than Chinchilla; for
  dense FLOPs it is ≈ 5× and ≈ 70×, respectively. While the latter number seems quite high at first
  glance, we note that language models of the sizes we consider here are already typically trained for
  > 100× longer than Chinchilla (Brown et al., 2020). Additionally, larger models are being trained
  with more and more data as well, e.g., Llama2-7B with ≈ 14× Chinchilla (Touvron et al., 2023b).
  In general, the optimal sparsity at a given point (N, C) is lower for dense than sparse FLOPs since
  the former assumes that sparsity provides no benefits during training.

  2.2.1                   L IMIT P ERFORMANCE
  In the previous section, we have focused only on when sparse models become optimal but not how
  much better they can be compared to dense models. In this section, we study the following question:
  How much larger, and thus computationally more expensive, does a dense model need to be in
  order to match the loss of a smaller sparse model with very long training? Since we have found the
  scaling term in D to not interact with sparsity in Section 2.1, it suffices to compute the increase in
  N required to lower the loss by the same factor as the increase in S via:
                                                                           a (1 − S)bS + c  −1/bN
                                                                           S                       S
                                                       gain(S) =                                                               .                                        (7)
                                                                                 aS + cS
  The gains for our particular scaling coefficients are shown in Table 1 (Left). They are to be inter-
  preted in the following way: for example, a 75% sparse ViT with N non-zeros will perform similar
  to a dense one with ≈ 2.17N parameters, when both are trained with the same amount of data.
  Crucially, this holds for any amount of data and thus also in the infinite limit when training is purely
  capacity bound. Hence, this expresses an equivalence between dense capacity and sparse capac-
  ity. We find that sparsity gains are very similar across vision and text domains, with the sweet-spot
  being around 75% sparsity at ≈ 2.15× gain. This is in alignment with the view of sparsity as a


                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


general increase in modeling power; we note that the gain is defined relatively to domain-specific
improvements through increases in model size.

                                    Family             0.500    0.750        0.875             Pattern                                      0.50                    0.75
                                   ViT/JFT            1.60×     2.17×        2.63×                n:4                                     1.56×                1.62×
                                    T5/C4             1.59×     2.16×        2.63×                n:8                                     1.67×                1.81×
Table 1: (Left) Equivalent dense size multiplier to match performance of a sparse model. (Right)
Dense size multipliers for n:m sparsity on T5/C4.
                                                                                                                                                               250k steps
                                                                                                                       2 × 100                                                              dense
3                        E XTENSIONS                                                                                                                                                        2:4
                                                                                                                                                                                            1:4


                                                                                                  val-loss low-bound
                                                                                                                                                                                            4:8
N:M sparsity. Complementing the unstructured sparsity ex-                                                                                                                                   2:8
                                                                                                                                                                                            50%
ploration, we now also consider structured n:m sparsity, which                                                                                                                              75%
can be accelerated on hardware (Pool & Yu, 2021; Hubara                100
et al., 2021). Similar to how minor changes in the process
(optimizer, model shape) generally only affect the multiplica-
tive constants in dense scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020), we             10 2              10 1
                                                                                 #non-zero parameters
also expect minor changes in the sparsification process to only Figure 6: Loss vs. size plot for a
affect the sparsity term in (3). This can be exploited to fit laws subset of T5/C4 n:m sparsity data.
based on significantly less runs: if the dense base scaling is
known, one only has to fit aS , bS and cS (just 3 rather than 7 parameters) to find the corresponding
L(S, N, D). We utilize this in the context of n:m sparsity by fitting new laws for 2:4 and 1:4 as
well as 4:8 and 2:8 patterns, respectively, based only on a subset of our full grid in Appendix A.
Concretely, we execute all runs involving either the least amount of steps, or the smallest model.
Figure 6 visualizes a subset of the collected data, displaying a very similar form to 2, which indicates
that the general scaling law shape also holds for n:m sparsity. We also fit scaling laws (with Huber
δ = 0.01 as 0.75 patterns will otherwise be treated as an outlier) and calculate sparsity gains as in
Section 2.2.1; see Table 1 (Right). In general, 2:4 and 4:8 perform both very similar to 50% (see
Table 1 and also Figure 6), although the n:m estimates are slightly more noisy due to less data used
in fitting the curves. Meanwhile, 1:4 brings almost no advantage and 2:8 only a slight improvement,
which is contrary to our unstructured results. We suspect that the 75% patterns may simply be too
stringent to significantly increase capacity beyond their 50% variants.
Decoder-only models. While we have focused on encoder-decoder models for language to cover a
wide range of architectures, we now also validate our sparsity scaling laws in the context of standard
decoder-only Transformers trained for auto-regressive language modeling. We follow the same setup
as in our T5/C4 experiments, changing only model architecture and loss function. We again execute
the experiment grid defined in Table 3 for 250K and 500K training steps, as well as a subset of the
more expensive 1M step runs. Figure 7 demonstrates that all key sparse scaling properties still hold.
                                                                                                                                                Quality of fit for L(S, N, D) scaling law
                                             250K steps                     500K steps                                                               fitting data
    val-loss low-bound


                         4 × 100                                                               00.00%                                 4 × 100
                                                                                               50.00%
                                                                                                                         Measured L


                                                                                               75.00%
                                                                                               87.50%

                         3 × 100                                                                                                      3 × 100
                                   106                107         106                107                                                        3 × 100                       4 × 100
                                         #non-zero parameters           #non-zero parameters                                                                    Predicted L

                          Figure 7: Visualization of decoder-only experiment and corresponding scaling fit quality.

Pruning pretrained models. Lastly, we consider a practical scenario where a set of existing very
well-trained dense models should be made more efficient via pruning, using a small fraction of
the compute spent for the initial pretraining. Our main interest here is to compare the efficiency
of sparsifying from scratch and sparsifying from a pretrained checkpoint. For that purpose, we
train ViT S/16, M/16 and B/16 models for 4 full epochs on JFT ( i.e., 16 billion images) and then
start the same gradual sparsification procedure we used before from these checkpoints, for 5.6% of
the pretraining budget (as the model is already pretrained, we start to sparsify immediately rather
than after 25% of training). Finally, we use our scaling laws from Section 2.1 to determine the


                                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


amount of training necessary to produce equivalent models of the same quality when starting from
scratch. Table 2 shows how much more/less data is required to achieve equivalent performance for
sparsifying from scratch, when excluding/including the pretraining cost, respectively.

                                  0.500               0.750              0.875
                  Model
                              exc.      inc.      exc.      inc.     exc.      inc.
                   S/16      4.90×    0.25×     4.27×     0.23×     2.45×     0.13×
                   M/16      4.76×    0.25×     4.18×     0.22×     2.57×     0.14×
                   B/16      4.35×    0.23×     4.00×     0.21×     2.72×     0.14×

Table 2: Relative amount of data required for sparsifying from scratch to match the validation loss
of pruning from a pretrained model, when pretraining cost is excluded (exc.) and included (inc.).
If the model already exists and there is thus no pretraining cost, then starting from such a checkpoint
is > 4× more efficient then sparsifying from scratch for 0.5/0.75, and > 2× for 0.875 sparsity,
respectively. The reason why the efficiency gains are decreasing with higher sparsity is most likely
the increased divergence from the initial starting point. At the same time, when the pretraining cost
is counted as well, pruning throughout the whole training process appears to be ≥ 4× more efficient,
relative to the ≈ 5% pruning of pretraining budget. Overall, these results clearly demonstrate that,
while the sparsification process benefits significantly from a better trained initial model, it only does
so to a limited extent.

4   R ELATED W ORK
Sparsity & pruning. Sparsity has a long history (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi et al., 1993) and
a large number of works have been published on this topic (Hoefler et al., 2021). State-of-the-art
methods range from simple gradual removal of the smallest weights (Zhu & Gupta, 2017), to partial
or full sparse training (Mocanu et al., 2018; Jayakumar et al., 2021; Peste et al., 2021), approximate
Hessian-based metrics (Singh & Alistarh, 2020; Frantar et al., 2021; Kuznedelev et al., 2023a) and
“soft” sparse optimization (Kusupati et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2020). Sparsity can lead to substantial
practical speedups with specialized inference algorithms (Kurtz et al., 2020; Elsen et al., 2020). Yet,
most of those works focus on relatively simple tasks like ResNet50/ImageNet or BERT/GLUE.
In contrast, much less is known when it comes to sparsifying Transformers trained on massive
datasets: The Appendix of Gopher (Rae et al., 2021) conducts pruning experiments for a generative
language modelling task and finds that, when trained for the same amount of steps, sparse models
can outperform dense ones, but leaves open whether this is also possible when accounting for the
significantly increased compute spent for producing those sparse models, relative to equivalently
sized dense ones. Similarly, Cerebras (2022) prunes a GPT-like model, also using significantly
more data than its dense baseline. Recently, SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) showed that it
is possible to impose weight-sparsity on extremely large language models, even without retraining;
yet, it remains unclear if this can also be done on smaller networks that are trained on more data.
Scaling laws. The key behind the success of Transformers is their exceptional scaling: increasing
model size and/or data brings consistent performance improvements, even at huge scale. Further,
this scaling behavior is predictable, following simple power-law curves (Kaplan et al., 2020). This
can be utilized to construct a family of compute optimal models (Hoffmann et al., 2022). More
recently, scaling laws are being extended to more specialized applications, e.g.: optimizing model
shapes (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2023), routing mechanisms (Clark et al., 2022), repeating training
data multiple times (Muennighoff et al., 2023) and several downstream tasks (Caballero et al., 2023).
However, not much is known about the scaling of weight sparsity for such models.
Rosenfeld et al. (2021) studies the relationship between width, depth and weight density for pruning
pretrained ResNets trained primarily on the CIFAR dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), which is nowa-
days considered very small. Contrarily, we consider modern Transformers trained on datasets many
orders of magnitude larger and focus particularly on the data/compute dimension that is crucial in
this context, but not relevant in the setting of Rosenfeld et al. (2021).
Transformer efficiency. Making (large) Transformers more efficient is currently a highly active
area of research. Probably the currently most popular and practical approach is quantization, that is
reducing the numerical precision (Frantar et al., 2022; Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2023; Xiao et al.,
2022). Further, there are also many works on Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) models, which bound


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the overall computation cost per sample (Du et al., 2022; Fedus et al., 2022; Artetxe et al., 2022;
Riquelme et al., 2021). MoEs are a form of dynamic activation sparsity, which is very different from
the static weight sparsity that we study; the former trades off increased memory for faster inference,
whereas the latter reduces both inference and memory costs. In general, quantization, MoEs and
weight sparsity are complementary and may be stacked for compound gains (Kurtic et al., 2022).

5   D ISCUSSION
Limitations. While our study is based on extensive experiments across models and domains, it
also has limitations, which we discuss here and plan to address in future work. First, our sparsifica-
tion recipe was optimized for robustness and scalability across a wide range of setups, rather than to
fully maximize sparsity versus accuracy in a particular setting. We believe that specific coefficient
values can be improved with extensive setting-specific tuning and better sparsification techniques;
however, the general nature of our scaling law will remain consistent.
We focus on settings where pruning is applied to pretraining tasks with massive amounts of data and
compute. This is ideal in terms of usability, as down-stream (finetuning) applications directly benefit
from the pruned model, but it also makes compression quite challenging. We think higher sparsity
rates can be achieved if pruning is applied directly for specialized applications that only require a
subset of the model’s capabilities. Similarly, our study focuses on the infinite data setting, which
essentially eliminates overfitting, as only a single pass over the data is performed. Sparsity could be
particularly effective when data is limited and thus multiple epochs are performed.
Our proposed sparse scaling law suggests that higher sparsity is always better (but with potentially
quite quickly saturating improvements), which may not be true in extremes. For very high sparsity
(e.g., 64× compression) we sometimes see slightly worse performance, presumably due to imper-
fections in the pruning and optimization process. This phenomenon could potentially be modelled
by a quadratic, but the present study treats it as a bottleneck-case that is not necessarily captured.
Finally, the main goal of this study is understanding core scaling relationships. Thus, we focused
on the most fundamental cost metric, non-zero parameter count. However, in practice, sparsity
acceleration can be complex: current software/hardware may not provide ideal speedups and models
generally also contain operations (e.g., layer-norms, attention) which do not benefit from weight
sparsity. Extending our scaling results to more target metrics is an interesting topic for future work.

Compatibility with other works. We will now briefly discuss how our scaling insights line up
with existing sparsification results on similar models/datasets. First, the results in the Appendix of
Rae et al. (2021), for a decoder-only text-generation model, are consistent with our scaling laws;
the improvement through sparsity appears to be similar for each model size and their maximum size
advantage of 2.5× observed at 0.9 sparsity is quite close to our limit gains in Section 2.2.1.
In contrast, Cerebras (2022) report a significantly better gain of ≈ 5×, but in a quite different setting
where the baseline is training (not inference) compute optimal and sparsification uses > 5× more
data than the dense comparison point. This is not inconsistent to our results: if we query our fitted
T5 scaling law (see Section 2.1) with this setup, we predict 1.54 loss (dense 1B params, 20B tokens)
vs. 1.48 loss (80% sparse & 200M non-zeros, 100B tokens), in favor of the sparse model.
Finally, SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) notes that post-training pruning becomes easier as the
model size increases. However, they do not perform any retraining, and observe this effect primarily
relative to the respective unpruned base model, not in terms of improvements over the Pareto size-
vs-loss frontier that we focus on. Hence, we believe that this is likely more related to the pretrained
models’ initial robustness to pertubations rather than the architecture’s inherent sparsifiability.

Practical implications. Our scaling insights lead to a number of practical consequences: Sparsity
seems to affect each model size in approximately the same way, while remaining mostly independent
of the amount of training data used. This provides evidence that good pruning performance in
less expensive settings should generalize to performance at scale, which will hopefully accelerate
research on new sparsification recipes and algorithms. Additionally, we have shown that optimal
sparsity levels continuously increase with longer training. Sparsity thus provides a means to further
improve model performance for a fixed final parameter cost. In particular, when training beyond
Chinchilla optimality, where simple dense training starts to run into diminishing returns, sparsity can
provide a clear alternative. Thus, our findings can be interpreted as providing practical motivation
for further developing sparsity support.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   E THICS S TATEMENT
The primary goal of this research is to examine the interaction between parameter sparsity and the
scaling behavior of foundation models, and as such it does not pose immediate ethical concerns. The
techniques explored focus on compression and computational efficiency, and thus will lead to no
harm to individuals or potential bias towards users. The recommendations provided for leveraging
sparsity aim to advance technology and should serve to improve the computational burden caused
by large models. As such, they should lead to positive societal outcomes.

R EFERENCES
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Getting ViT in
   shape: Scaling laws for compute-optimal model design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13035, 2023.
Mikel Artetxe, Shruti Bhosale, Naman Goyal, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Xi Victoria
 Lin, Jingfei Du, Srinivasan Iyer, Ramakanth Pasunuru, et al. Efficient large scale language mod-
 eling with mixtures of experts. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
 2022.
Riade Benbaki, Wenyu Chen, Xiang Meng, Hussein Hazimeh, Natalia Ponomareva, Zhe Zhao, and
  Rahul Mazumder. Fast as CHITA: Neural network pruning with combinatorial optimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Ethan Caballero, Kshitij Gupta, Irina Rish, and David Krueger. Broken neural scaling laws. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Cerebras.       Creating Sparse   GPT-3   Models   with  Iterative Prun-
  ing,    2022.               URL      https://www.cerebras.net/blog/
  creating-sparse-gpt-3-models-with-iterative-pruning.
Aidan Clark, Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Arthur Mensch, Michela Paganini, Jordan Hoff-
  mann, Bogdan Damoc, Blake Hechtman, Trevor Cai, Sebastian Borgeaud, et al. Unified scaling
  laws for routed language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2022.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Scaling
 vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2023.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   2009.
Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettlemoyer. The case for 4-bit precision: k-bit inference scaling laws. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim
  Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, et al. GLaM: Efficient scaling of language
  models with mixture-of-experts. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Erich Elsen, Marat Dukhan, Trevor Gale, and Karen Simonyan. Fast sparse convnets. In Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Murali Emani, Sam Foreman, Varuni Sastry, Zhen Xie, Siddhisanket Raskar, William Arnold, Ra-
 jeev Thakur, Venkatram Vishwanath, and Michael E Papka. A comprehensive performance study
 of large language models on novel ai accelerators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04607, 2023.
Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery:
  Making all tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):
 5232–5270, 2022.
Elias Frantar and Dan Alistarh. SparseGPT: Massive language models can be accurately pruned in
  one-shot. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Elias Frantar, Eldar Kurtic, and Dan Alistarh. M-FAC: Efficient matrix-free approximations of
  second-order information. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2021.
Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. GPTQ: Accurate post-training
  compression for generative pretrained transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17323, 2022.
Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The state of sparsity in deep neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
 A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2103.13630, 2021.
Google. Big vision, 2023a.        URL https://github.com/google-research/big_
  vision.
Google. T5x, 2023b. URL https://github.com/google-research/t5x.
Babak Hassibi, David G Stork, and Gregory J Wolff. Optimal brain surgeon and general network
  pruning. In IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, 1993.
Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in
  deep learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.00554, 2021.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. In Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Itay Hubara, Brian Chmiel, Moshe Island, Ron Banner, Seffi Naor, and Daniel Soudry. Accelerated
   sparse neural training: A provable and efficient method to find N:M transposable masks. In
   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Eugenia Iofinova, Alexandra Peste, Mark Kurtz, and Dan Alistarh. How well do sparse ImageNet
  models transfer? In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard,
  Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for
  efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), 2018.
Siddhant M Jayakumar, Razvan Pascanu, Jack W Rae, Simon Osindero, and Erich Elsen. Top-
  KAST: Top-K always sparse training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03517, 2021.
Tian Jin, Michael Carbin, Dan Roy, Jonathan Frankle, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Pruning’s
  effect on generalization through the lens of training and regularization. In Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Citeseer, 2009.
Eldar Kurtic and Dan Alistarh. GMP*: Well-tuned global magnitude pruning can outperform most
  bert-pruning methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06384, 2022.
Eldar Kurtic, Daniel Campos, Tuan Nguyen, Elias Frantar, Mark Kurtz, Benjamin Fineran, Michael
  Goin, and Dan Alistarh. The Optimal BERT Surgeon: Scalable and accurate second-order pruning
  for large language models. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  2022.
Eldar Kurtic, Denis Kuznedelev, Elias Frantar, Michael Goin, and Dan Alistarh. Sparse finetuning
  for inference acceleration of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06927, 2023.
Mark Kurtz, Justin Kopinsky, Rati Gelashvili, Alexander Matveev, John Carr, Michael Goin,
 William Leiserson, Sage Moore, Bill Nell, Nir Shavit, and Dan Alistarh. Inducing and exploiting
 activation sparsity for fast inference on deep neural networks. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Aditya Kusupati, Vivek Ramanujan, Raghav Somani, Mitchell Wortsman, Prateek Jain, Sham
  Kakade, and Ali Farhadi. Soft threshold weight reparameterization for learnable sparsity. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Denis Kuznedelev, Eldar Kurtic, Elias Frantar, and Dan Alistarh. CAP: correlation-aware pruning
  for highly-accurate sparse vision models, 2023a.
Denis Kuznedelev, Eldar Kurtic, Eugenia Iofinova, Elias Frantar, Alexandra Peste, and Dan Alis-
  tarh. Accurate neural network pruning requires rethinking sparse optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.02060, 2023b.
Yann LeCun, John S Denker, and Sara A Solla. Optimal brain damage. In Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 1989.
Joo Hyung Lee, Wonpyo Park, Nicole Mitchell, Jonathan Pilault, Johan Obando-Ceron, Han-Byul
  Kim, Namhoon Lee, Elias Frantar, Yun Long, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, et al. JaxPruner: A concise
  library for sparsity research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14082, 2023.
Tao Lin, Sebastian U Stich, Luis Barba, Daniil Dmitriev, and Martin Jaggi. Dynamic model pruning
  with feedback. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. Rethinking the value of
  network pruning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Yucheng Lu, Shivani Agrawal, Suvinay Subramanian, Oleg Rybakov, Christopher De Sa, and Amir
  Yazdanbakhsh. STEP: Learning n: M structured sparsity masks from scratch with precondition.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Asit Mishra, Jorge Albericio Latorre, Jeff Pool, Darko Stosic, Dusan Stosic, Ganesh Venkatesh,
  Chong Yu, and Paulius Micikevicius. Accelerating sparse deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08378, 2021.
Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Elena Mocanu, Peter Stone, Phuong H Nguyen, Madeleine Gibescu,
  and Antonio Liotta. Scalable training of artificial neural networks with adaptive sparse connec-
  tivity inspired by network science. Nature communications, 9(1):1–12, 2018.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Noua-
  mane Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16264, 2023.
Mahdi Nikdan, Tommaso Pegolotti, Eugenia Iofinova, Eldar Kurtic, and Dan Alistarh. SparseProp:
 efficient sparse backpropagation for faster training of neural networks. In International Confer-
 ence on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexandra Peste, Eugenia Iofinova, Adrian Vladu, and Dan Alistarh. AC/DC: Alternating com-
  pressed/decompressed training of deep neural networks. In Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Jeff Pool and Chong Yu. Channel permutations for N:M sparsity. Conference on Neural Information
   Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020a.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 21(1):5485–5551, 2020b.
Carlos Riquelme, Joan Puigcerver, Basil Mustafa, Maxim Neumann, Rodolphe Jenatton, André
  Susano Pinto, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling vision with sparse mixture of experts.
  In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Jonathan S Rosenfeld, Jonathan Frankle, Michael Carbin, and Nir Shavit. On the predictability of
  pruning across scales. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Movement pruning: Adaptive sparsity by
  fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07683, 2020.
Jonathan Schwarz, Siddhant Jayakumar, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Latham, and Yee Teh. Powerprop-
  agation: A sparsity inducing weight reparameterisation. In Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Sidak Pal Singh and Dan Alistarh. WoodFisher: Efficient second-order approximation for neural
  network compression. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Vithursan Thangarasa, Abhay Gupta, William Marshall, Tianda Li, Kevin Leong, Dennis DeCoste,
  Sean Lie, and Shreyas Saxena. SPDF: Sparse pre-training and dense fine-tuning for large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10464, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by
  preserving gradient flow. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Haojun Xia, Zhen Zheng, Yuchao Li, Donglin Zhuang, Zhongzhu Zhou, Xiafei Qiu, Yong Li, Wei
  Lin, and Shuaiwen Leon Song. Flash-LLM: enabling cost-effective and highly-efficient large
  generative model inference with unstructured sparsity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10285, 2023.
Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. Smoothquant:
  Accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.10438, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhewei Yao, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Minjia Zhang, Xiaoxia Wu, Conglong Li, and Yuxiong He.
  ZeroQuant: Efficient and affordable post-training quantization for large-scale transformers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.01861, 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Aojun Zhou, Yukun Ma, Junnan Zhu, Jianbo Liu, Zhijie Zhang, Kun Yuan, Wenxiu Sun, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Learning N:M fine-grained structured sparse neural networks from scratch. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. To prune, or not to prune: exploring the efficacy of pruning for
 model compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01878, 2017.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section discusses our experimental choices and hyper-parameters, as well as technical details
for sparsity-aware AdaFactor and iterative n:m pruning.

Models & datasets. We consider two standard deep learning applications: vision and language.
For the former, we focus on Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) trained for multi-label
image classification on the JFT-4B dataset (Dehghani et al., 2023), consisting of 4 billion images;
for the latter, we consider encoder-decoder T5 models (Raffel et al., 2020b) (improved 1.1 version
(Google, 2023b)) trained for masked-language-modelling on C4 (Raffel et al., 2020b), consisting of
150+ billion tokens. These choices allow us to study the generality of our laws not just across vision
and language but also for different kind of pretraining objectives and variations of Transformer
architectures.

Training hyper-parameters. For the most part, we reuse the optimized training hyper-parameters
of the original ViT-scaling (Zhai et al., 2022) and T5 paper (Raffel et al., 2020b), respectively. Our
only notable change is that we do not factor the second moment of the respective AdaFactor-based
(Shazeer & Stern, 2018) optimizers (however, we still apply relative learning rate scaling and RMS
clipping for T5); this is done since factorized moments for pruning and sparse optimization are
not yet very well studied. Further, we train T5 models with batchsize 128 (similar to most ablation
studies in the original paper (Raffel et al., 2020b)) in order to perform sufficiently many optimization
steps also for experiments with lower total amounts of training data, which we found important to
obtain stable sparse results through model and data scaling.

Model sizes. When it comes to selecting our particular model dimensions, two things must be
taken into account: (a) we are particularly interested in the inference-optimal overtraining regime
(Touvron et al., 2023a) where models get close to their capacity limit, and (b) to produce a model
with N non-zeros and sparsity S, we actually need to train a model that is 1/(1 − S) times larger
than a dense model of size N . In combination with the fact that we need to repeat the entire training
sweep for multiple sparsity levels, this limits the size of models we can study while keeping compute
requirements feasible. Specifically, we start from the base variants of both ViT and T5 (B/16 and
t5-base). Then we generate models of appropriate sizes by scaling only the Transformer’s hidden
dimension and keeping all other shape parameters constant. This way we can get quite precise size-
matches between models and sparsities, facilitating direct comparisons (not all default family models
are exactly 2× steps apart and a 50% sparse model would thus not always be directly comparable
to the next smallest dense variant); we did not observe any notable performance decrease for dense
models using this scaling strategy, at the sizes we study.

Sparsity configurations. We focus primarily on the most fundamental sparsity type, unstructured
sparsity, but also perform some investigations for the more practical n:m pruning pattern (Zhou et al.,
2021; Pool & Yu, 2021) where only n out of m consecutive weights are non-zero. We uniformly
sparsify all linear layers in the Transformer backbone, which effectively avoids layer collapse (Wang
et al., 2020), or other edge cases that may otherwise occur in our sweeps, and generally works
decently well for Transformer models. On T5 models, we also sparsify the rather large embeddings
to the amount necessary for parameter matching a smaller dense version.
Preliminary experiments indicated quickly diminishing returns for very sparse models, which, as
discussed previously, are in addition quite expensive to train. Thus, we focus on three medium
sparsities: 50%, 75%, 87.5%, corresponding to a 2×, 4× and 8× compression rate, respectively.
Our implementation is based on the recently proposed Jaxpruner library (Lee et al., 2023), which is
easy to integrate into the offical ViT (Google, 2023a) and T5 (Google, 2023b) codebases.

Pruning strategy. As we intend to execute substantial sweeps across model size, training data
and sparsity, it is essential that our pruning method is highly robust and does not require hyper-
parameter retuning for each run. A natural candidate is gradual magnitude pruning (GMP) (Zhu
& Gupta, 2017), which is well studied and known to be very reliable. At the same time, GMP is
usually quite competitive with more complex techniques (Singh & Alistarh, 2020; Kurtic & Alistarh,
2022), especially at the medium sparsity levels that we focus on. We also tested a variation of GMP
which incorporates diagonal second-order information (Kurtic et al., 2022), but found it to perform
almost identically in our setting. Further, we tried AC/DC (Peste et al., 2021), STE (Lin et al.,


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2020) and RigL (Evci et al., 2020) (which achieve strong results on classic benchmarks) but saw
similar or worse performance, while being more sensitive to hyper-parameters as we scale (see also
Appendix B). Thus, we ultimately decided to use GMP.
In terms of specific hyper-parameters, we prune using a cubic schedule starting after 25% of training
and ending at 75%, updating every 100 steps. Our sparsification interval was chosen so that pruning
begins with a reasonably well trained model and ends with sufficient finetuning of the final sparse
structure. However, we performed ablations for frequency/start/end in Appendix B and did not find
the process to be too sensitive to those hyper-parameters (except for when the pruning interval is
really short).

Sweep grids. Table 3 lists the grid parameters that we sweep over. For ViTs, we consider 7 target
models sizes in 2× increments each, while we use 4 targets sizes in increments of 4× for T5. Vision
Transformers are trained for 4 different lengths, with the longest corresponding to ≈ 1.8 billion
images; language models are trained for 3 different lengths up to ≈ 65 billion tokens. The set of
sparsity targets is the same in both cases, corresponding to 2, 4 and 8× compression rate. Overall, the
ViT grid was designed to be more extensive whereas the T5 setup was chosen to be more efficient.

             Model family                      ViT                          T5
             #Non-zero params      0.66M, 1.33M, . . . , 42.4M    1.3M, 5.3M, . . . , 85M
             Training steps         55K, 110K, 220K, 440K            250K, 500K, 1M
             Sparsities               0.0, 0.5, 0.75, 0.875        0.0, 0.5, 0.75, 0.875
             Total #runs                       112                           48
                        Table 3: Grid definition for our main scaling sweeps.


A.1   T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

Sparsity-aware RMS. AdaFactor (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) as employed by T5 (Raffel et al.,
2020b) defines the learning rate relatively, scaling it by the root-mean-square (RMS) of each weight
tensor, respectively. We find that this does not interact well with high sparsity, as a tensor with many
zeros tends to have a lower RMS, resulting in a smaller learning rate, which is especially problematic
as high levels of sparsification require more recovery during the pruning process. To work around
this, we always calculate the RMS only over unpruned weights, which effectively alleviates this
problem. We also apply the same technique to AdaFactor’s RMS clipping threshold, but note that
this is much less critical than the learning rate scaling.

Iterative n:m pruning. Sparsifying to the n:m pattern is usually done by pruning in one-shot,
followed by finetuning (Zhou et al., 2021), or directly training with a dynamic pruning mask via
straight-through gradient estimation (Lu et al., 2023). We take a different approach in this work:
we gradually remove the smallest weights while ensuring that at least n weights remain in each
group of size m. This effectively generalizes the highly robust gradual pruning paradigm to the n:m
setting. Not only does gradual n:m pruning unify our setups between unstructured and structured
sparsity experiments, we also found it to work reliably across scales with the same hyper-parameters,
a highly useful property for scaling studies. A simple and efficient implementation of this scheme
is shown in Algorithm 1: the key is to temporarily set the largest n items in each group to ∞, thus
ensuring that they are always picked by an unstructured topk selection.


                           Algorithm 1 Prune weights w to sparsity s ≤ 1 −
                           n/m where each group of m weights contains at
                           most n zeros.
                             Inm ← topk-nm(|w|, n, m)
                             w′ ← copy of w
                             w′ Inm ← ∞
                             Iunstr ← topk-unstr(|w′ |, 1 − s)
                             w−Iunstr ← 0


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    P RUNING A BLATIONS

We ablate gradual magnitude pruning hyper-parameters by sparsifying ViT-B/16 for 900M images
to S = 0.9375 sparsity. A high S was chosen in order to amplify differences between parameter
settings; we vary the (relative) start and end point of gradual pruning as well as the update frequency
of the mask; the pruning schedule is always cubic. As can be seen in Table 4, most configurations
perform very similar, except when the pruning period is too short overall. We ultimately pick the
25-75/100 setup to ensure that there is sufficient time for training a decent model before starting
pruning, as well as for properly finetuning the final sparse version, which we think could be helpful
for some points in our main scaling experiment grid.

                                   start     end    freq    accuracy
                                   0.250   0.750    100       45.28
                                   0.250   0.750     50       45.08
                                   0.250   0.750    200       45.13
                                   0.125   0.875    100       45.33
                                   0.475   0.625    100       44.65
                                   0.125   0.625    100       45.13
                                   0.375   0.875    100       45.04
             Table 4: Ablation study of gradual magnitude pruning hyper-parameters.



AC/DC. We also experimented with the AC/DC method (Peste et al., 2021), a sparse training ap-
proach that was recently shown to yield very strong results on standard (non-foundation model)
benchmarks Kuznedelev et al. (2023b). We use a sparse and dense cycle length of 20K steps (10K
each phase) and apply AC/DC only during the same pruning period as our GMP setup to ensure
the same pre- and post-sparsification finetuning. On smaller T5 models, AC/DC works well but
yields very similar results to GMP. On larger models, however, AC/DC appears to require some
hyper-parameter reconfiguration for higher sparsities. Since per-model hyper-parameter tuning is
inconvenient for large scaling sweeps, while initial results also did not suggest clear improvements,
we stuck to well established GMP. In general, we note that even for classic benchmarks, major
differences between pruning methods tend to appear mostly at very high sparsities (Singh & Al-
istarh, 2020). Nevertheless, we think that more extensively investigating advanced sparsification
approaches in the context of massive pretraining datasets is an interesting topic for future work.

                              0.500               0.750                  0.875
                  #nnz
                           GMP AC/DC           GMP AC/DC              GMP AC/DC
                  1.3M     17.11     17.11     15.64       15.96      14.73   14.59
                  42M      6.11      6.11       5.87        6.05      5.81    6.11
Table 5: Comparing validation perplexity of T5 models trained for 250K steps using GMP and
AC/DC, respectively; we show perplexity as losses at these levels should be compared in log-scale.



C    S CALING C OEFFICIENTS

Table 6 lists the fitted coefficient values for the scaling results presented in the main paper; D is
assumed to be the number of images for ViT and the number tokens for T5. The fitting errors are
also shown, where we note again that they correspond to the Huber-loss with δ = 0.01 for ViT/JFT
and the Huber-loss of log L with δ = 0.001 for T5/C4, following (Hoffmann et al., 2022).
For n:m sparsity, we only refit the sparsity coefficients aS , bS and cS , preserving the other values
from the corresponding unstructured results. While the fitting procedure may not be guaranteed
to be convex, we find the process to converge to virtually the same values from different random
starting points.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Model    Sparse      aS         bS        cS         bN       aD        bD        c       Error
 ViT/JFT     unstr.    2.94e+2    0.821    4.68e+2      0.392   2.37e+8    0.890    4.517   4.93e-4
  T5/C4      unstr.    1.68e+1    0.722    4.50e+1      0.245   6.90e+8    0.203    0.651   7.60e-6
  T5/C4       n:m      8.64e+1    2.752    5.36e+2        –        –         –        –     2.1e-5
            Table 6: Fitted coefficients of the scaling laws presented in the main paper.


D     O PTIMAL S PARSITY D ERIVATIONS
Sparse costs. We now discuss how to derive the sparse cost factor cmul (S) given by Equation 4
in Section 2.2 for our particular pruning setup. For the first 25% of training, we use a dense model
that is 1/(1 − S) times larger, incurring cost 0.25/(1 − S), while for the last 25% we are training a
model with sparsity S of the same cost as the dense reference model, thus contributing a 0.25 term.
For the middle 50%, we prune in the cubic S − S · (1 − t)3 schedule (Zhu & Gupta, 2017), where
t ∈ [0, 1]. The cost spent over this period is given by 1 minus (we care about density rather than
sparsity) the integral over the full range of t, which is (1 − 0.75 · S), further multiplied by 0.5 to
cover the duration.

Contour lines. To determine the contours of Sopt (N, C), i.e., the regions where a particular spar-
sity S is optimal, we first query L(S, N, D) with DS = D/cmul (S), where D = C/6N is the
amount of data corresponding to dense training FLOPs C relative to which cmul is defined, giving:
                                                1  bN                aD  bD
                      (aS (1 − S)bS + cS ) ·          + cmul (S) ·           + c.                 (8)
                                               N                     D
Next, we optimize for S by differentiating and setting the result equal to 0:
                                  1  bN                   aD  bD −1   ′            aD
          −as bs (1 − S)bS −1 ·          + bD cmul (S) ·              · cmul (S) ·      = 0.      (9)
                                   N                      DS                       DS
Finally, the form presented in the main paper is constructed by a few algebraic simplifications:
                             aD  bD −1   ′           aD
               bD cmul (S) ·            · cmul (S) ·       = as bs (1 − S)bS −1 · N −bN          (10)
                             DS                      DS
                             c′ (S)                aD  bD
                        bD · mul      · cmul (S) ·         = as bs (1 − S)bS −1 · N −bN .        (11)
                             cmul (S)              DS

Closed form solution. The closed form solution for Sopt (N, C) assuming dense costs cmul (S) =
1/(1 − S) can be found by solving the above contour equation for S:
    1  bD +1              a  bD
                           D
                   · bD          = (1 − S)bS −1 · as bs · N −bN                                   (12)
    1−S                   DS
                  1  bD +bS         aS bS             a  −bD
                                                         D
                                 =          · N −bN                                               (13)
                   1−S                bD               DS
                          1             ha b                a  −bD i
                                           S S               D
       (bD + bS ) · log          = log           · N −bN                                          (14)
                          1−S              bD               DS
                             1          n ha b                   a  −bD i               o
                                                  S S              D
                                 = exp log             · N −bN              /(bD + bS )           (15)
                           1−S                   bD               DS
                                              n       ha b               a  −bD i              o
                                                          S S             D
                               S = 1 − exp − log               · N −bN              /(bD + bS ) . (16)
                                                          bD             DS
Further algebraic manipulations yield:
                            n h b                 a  bD i                o
                                     D              D
              S = 1 − exp log            · N bN              /(bD + bS )                          (17)
                                  aS bS            DS
                            h      bD                            aD              i
              S = 1 − exp log            + bN logN + bD log           /(bD + bS ) .               (18)
                                  aS bS                          DS
                            h      bD                               i   a  bD /(bD +bS )
                                                                          D
              S = 1 − exp log            + bN logN /(bD + bS ) ·                          .       (19)
                                  aS bS                                  DS
Substituting DS by its expression in C and guaranteeing that the result is always non-negative (since
sparsity < 0 does not exist) brings the formula given in Section 2.2.


                                                   18
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  E                        I MPACT OF S PARSITY ON D OWNSTREAM TASKS

  As discussed in the main text, the focus of this study, similar to most other works on scaling laws,
  lies on modeling the pretraining task validation loss. For dense models it is known, that this loss is
  strongly correlated with performance on downstream (e.g. few-shot) applications (Hoffmann et al.,
  2022). This effect has also been observed for sparse models, for example in the context of transfer
  learning for ImageNet models (Iofinova et al., 2022). We now provide additional evidence, for our
  particular sparse models by evaluating them on a suite of common few-shot tasks.
  Concretely, we consider all dense and sparse models from our main sweep and plot few-shot accu-
  racy vs. pretraining loss; the results are shown in Figure 8. As can be seen, sparse models exhibit
  very similar behavior to dense ones, both in terms of accuracy achieved for a fixed validation loss
  as well in terms of overall noise level that is typical for each task. This confirms that sparse models
  with better pretraining validation loss, like dense models, indeed also perform, on average, better on
  few-shot tasks.

                                       imagenet_5shot                                              imagenet_25shot                                             cifar100_10shot
                         0.7                           00.00%                                                      00.00%                                                      00.00%
                                                       50.00%                            0.7                       50.00%                            0.7                       50.00%
                         0.6                           75.00%                                                      75.00%                                                      75.00%
                                                                                         0.6                                                         0.6
     Few-shot accuracy


                                                                     Few-shot accuracy


                                                                                                                                 Few-shot accuracy
                         0.5                           87.50%                                                      87.50%                                                      87.50%
                                                                                         0.5                                                         0.5
                         0.4
                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                         0.3
                                                                                         0.3
                         0.2                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                         0.2
                         0.1                                                                                                                         0.2
                                   6       7       8     9                                     6       7       8     9                                     6       7       8     9
                                        Pretraining loss                                            Pretraining loss                                            Pretraining loss
                    0.82
                                       col_hist_10shot                              0.95
                                                                                               uc_merced_10shot                                                  dtd_10shot
                                                       00.00%                                                      00.00%                       0.70                           00.00%
                    0.80                               50.00%                       0.90                           50.00%                       0.65                           50.00%
                    0.78                               75.00%                                                      75.00%                                                      75.00%
                                                                                                                                                0.60
Few-shot accuracy


                                                                Few-shot accuracy


                                                                                                                            Few-shot accuracy


                                                       87.50%                       0.85                           87.50%                                                      87.50%
                    0.76                                                                                                                        0.55
                    0.74                                                            0.80
                                                                                                                                                0.50
                    0.72                                                            0.75                                                        0.45
                    0.70                                                            0.70                                                        0.40
                    0.68                                                                                                                        0.35
                                                                                    0.65
                                                                                                                                                0.30
                                   6       7       8     9                                     6       7       8     9                                     6       7       8     9
                                        Pretraining loss                                            Pretraining loss                                            Pretraining loss

                               Figure 8: Few-shot accuracy vs. pretraining loss for dense and sparse ViT/JFT models.


  F                        P RACTICAL S PARSITY ACCELERATION

  Although we focus primarily on developing a general understanding of sparsity scaling, rather than
  on accelerating sparse model in practice, there are many works that study the latter. We now sum-
  marize some of them.
  Network weights that are exactly zero must not be stored and can be safely skipped during computa-
  tion. This means that, in principle, sparse models require both less memory as well as less compute
  to run than their dense counterparts. For CPU inference, this compute reduction can be effectively
  translated into end-to-end speedups using sparsity-aware matrix algorithms (Elsen et al., 2020; Kurtz
  et al., 2020). Custom hardware can also achieve strong throughput improvements for sparse models:
  for example, Thangarasa et al. (2023) report almost 4× speedup on a matrix multiplication with 75%
  sparse weights. On modern GPUs, effectively utilizing fully unstructured sparsity is challenging due
  to irregular computation patterns. However, newer generations of NVIDIA GPUs include dedicated
  hardware support for semi-structured n:m sparsity (Pool & Yu, 2021), yielding up to 2× speedup
  over fully dense matrix multiplications.


                                                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While effectively utilizing weight sparsity during training is still an active of research, there are al-
ready some promising results. Emani et al. (2023) report substantial end-to-end training speedups for
training large, unstructured sparse, Transformer models on custom hardware. Meanwhile, Nikdan
et al. (2023) develop sparsity-aware backpropagation kernels for efficient CPU training.
Finally, we note a very recent line of work which uses unstructured sparsity (Xia et al., 2023; Kurtic
et al., 2023) primarily for reducing model size, in order to fit massive Transformer models onto
smaller accelerators. Further, for memory bound generative inference, this brings practical as well,
by reducing transfer costs between GPU main memory and registers due.


                                                   20
