Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SYMPTOTICALLY F REE S KETCHED R IDGE E NSEMBLES :
R ISKS , C ROSS -VALIDATION , AND T UNING
 Pratik Patil                                              Daniel LeJeune
 Department of Statistics                                  Department of Statistics
 University of California, Berkeley                        Stanford University
 California, CA 94720, USA                                 California, CA 94305, USA
 pratikpatil@berkeley.edu                                  daniel@dlej.net



                                             A BSTRACT
         We employ random matrix theory to establish consistency of generalized cross
         validation (GCV) for estimating prediction risks of sketched ridge regression en-
         sembles, enabling efficient and consistent tuning of regularization and sketching
         parameters. Our results hold for a broad class of asymptotically free sketches under
         very mild data assumptions. For squared prediction risk, we provide a decom-
         position into an unsketched equivalent implicit ridge bias and a sketching-based
         variance, and prove that the risk can be globally optimized by only tuning sketch
         size in infinite ensembles. For general subquadratic prediction risk functionals, we
         extend GCV to construct consistent risk estimators, and thereby obtain distribu-
         tional convergence of the GCV-corrected predictions in Wasserstein-2 metric. This
         in particular allows construction of prediction intervals with asymptotically correct
         coverage conditional on the training data. We also propose an “ensemble trick”
         whereby the risk for unsketched ridge regression can be efficiently estimated via
         GCV using small sketched ridge ensembles. We empirically validate our theoretical
         results using both synthetic and real large-scale datasets with practical sketches
         including CountSketch and subsampled randomized discrete cosine transforms.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Random sketching is a powerful tool for reducing the computational complexity associated with large-
scale datasets by projecting them to a lower-dimensional space for efficient computations. Sketching
has been a remarkable success both in practical applications and from a theoretical standpoint: it
has enabled application of statistical techniques to problem scales that were formerly unimaginable
(Aghazadeh et al., 2018; Murray et al., 2023), while enjoying rigorous technical guarantees that
ensure the underlying learning problem essentially remains unchanged provided the sketch dimension
is not too small (e.g., above the rank of the full data matrix) (Tropp, 2011; Woodruff, 2014).
However, real-world data scenarios often deviate from these ideal conditions for which the problem
remains unchanged. For one, real data often has a tail of non-vanishing eigenvalues and is not truly
low rank. For another, our available resources may impose constraints on sketch sizes, forcing them
to fall below the critical threshold. When the sketch size is critically low, the learning problem can
change significantly. In particular, when reducing the dimensionality below the threshold to solve the
original problem, the problem becomes implicitly regularized (Mahoney, 2011; Thanei et al., 2017).
Recent work has precisely characterized this problem change in linear regression (LeJeune et al.,
2022), being exactly equal to ridge regression in an infinite ensemble of sketched predictors (LeJeune
et al., 2020), with the size of the sketch acting as an additional hyperparameter that affects the implicit
regularization.
If the underlying problem changes with sketching, a key question arises: can we reliably and efficiently
tune hyperparameters of sketched prediction models, such as the sketch size? While cross-validation
(CV) is the classical way to tune hyperparameters, standard k-fold CV (with small or moderate k
values, such as 5 or 10) is not statistically consistent for high-dimensional data (Xu et al., 2019),
and leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) is often computationally infeasible. Generalized cross-validation
(GCV), on the other hand, is an extremely efficient method for estimating generalization error using


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Fixed α ≈ 0.73, varying λ                                                     Fixed λ = 0.2, varying α
                        4.5                              Gaussian


              Squared risk R(βbλens )


                                                                                           Squared risk R(βbλens )
                                                                           2.0                       2.00
                                                         Orthogonal
                        4.0
                                                         CountSketch
                                                                           1.9                       1.95
                        3.5                              SRDCT
                                                         Full ridge
                        3.0                                                1.8
                                                                                                     1.90
                        2.5
                                                                           1.7
                                                                                                     1.85
                        2.0
                                                                                     100
                                  10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1    100   101   102                                             0.2      0.4    0.6     0.8
                                        Regularization strength λ                                                          Sketch size ratio α

Figure 1: GCV provides consistent risk estimation for sketched ridge regression. We show squared risk
(solid) and GCV estimates (dashed) for sketched regression ensembles of K “ 5 predictors on synthetic data
with n “ 500 observations and p “ 600 features. Left: Each sketch induces its own risk curve in regularization
strength λ, but across all sketches GCV is consistent. Middle: Minimizers and minimum values can vary by
sketching type. Right: Each sketch also induces a risk curve in sketch size α “ q{p, so sketch size can be
tuned to optimize risk. Error bars denote standard error of the mean over 100 trials. Here, SRDCT refers to a
subsampled randomized discrete cosine transform (see Appendix G for further details).
only training data (Craven & Wahba, 1979; Hastie et al., 2009), providing asymptotically exact
error estimators in high dimensions with similar computational cost to fitting the model (Patil et al.,
2021; Wei et al., 2022). However, since the consistency of GCV is due to certain concentration
of measure phenomena of data, it is unclear whether GCV should also provide a consistent error
estimator for predictors with sketched data, in particular when combining several sketched predictors
in an ensemble, such as in distributed optimization settings.
In this work, we prove that efficient consistent tuning of hyperparameters of sketched ridge regression
ensembles is achievable with GCV (see Figure 1 for an illustration). Furthermore, we state our
results for a very broad class of asymptotically free sketching matrices, a notion from free probability
theory (Voiculescu, 1997; Mingo & Speicher, 2017) generalizing rotational invariance. Below we
present a summary of our main results in this paper and provide an outline of the paper.

1. Squared risk asymptotics. We provide precise asymptotics of squared risk and its GCV estimator
   for sketched ridge ensembles in Theorem 2 for the class of asymptotically free sketches applied to
   features. We give this result in terms of an exact bias–variance decomposition into an equivalent
   implicit unsketched ridge regression risk and an inflation term due to randomness of the sketch
   that is controlled by ensemble size.
2. Distributional and functional consistencies. We prove consistency of GCV risk estimators for a
   broad class of subquadratic risk functionals in Theorems 3 and 4. To the best of our knowledge,
   this is the first extension of GCV beyond residual-based risk functionals in any setting. In doing so,
   we also prove the consistency of estimating the joint response–prediction distribution using GCV
   in Wasserstein W2 metric in Corollary 5, enabling the use of GCV for also evaluating classification
   error and constructing prediction intervals with valid asymptotic conditional coverage.
3. Tuning applications. Exploiting the special form of the risk decomposition, we propose a method
   in the form of an “ensemble trick” to tune unsketched ridge regression using only sketched
   ensembles. We also prove that large unregularized sketched ensembles with tuned sketch size can
   achieve the optimal unsketched ridge regression risk in Proposition 6.

Throughout all of our results, we impose very weak assumptions: we require no model on the
relationship between response variables and features; we allow for arbitrary feature covariance with
random matrix structure; we allow any sketch that satisfies asymptotic freeness, which we empirically
verify for CountSketch (Charikar et al., 2004) and subsampled randomized discrete cosine transforms
(SRDCT); and we allow for the consideration of zero or even negative regularization. All proofs and
details of experiments and additional numerical illustrations are deferred to the appendices.

Related work. For context, we briefly discuss related work on sketching, ridge regression, and CV.
Sketching and implicit regularization. The implicit regularization effect of sketching has been known
for some time (Mahoney, 2011; Thanei et al., 2017). This effect is strongly related to inversion
bias, and has been precisely characterized in a number of settings in recent years (Mutny et al.,
2020; Dereziński et al., 2021a;b). Most recently, LeJeune et al. (2022) showed that sketched matrix
inversions are asymptotically equivalent to unsketched implicitly regularized inversions, and that this
holds not only for i.i.d. random sketches but also for asymptotically free sketches. This result is a
crucial component of our bias–variance decomposition of GCV risk. By allowing free sketches, we
can apply our results to many sketches used in practice with limited prior theoretical understanding.


                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


High-dimensional ridge and sketching. Ridge regression, particularly “ridgeless” regression where the
regularization level approaches zero, has recently attracted great attention. In the overparameterized
regime, where the number of features exceeds the number of observations, the ridgeless estimator
interpolates the training data and exhibits a peculiar generalization behaviour (Belkin et al., 2020;
Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022). Different sketching variants and their risks for a single
sketched ridge estimator under positive regularization are analyzed in Liu & Dobriban (2020). Very
recently, Bach (2024) considers the effect random sketching that includes ridgeless regression. Our
work broadens the scope of these works by considering all asymptotically free sketched ensembles
and accommodating zero (and negative) regularization. Complementary to feature sketching, there is
an emerging interest in subsampling and observation sketching. The statistical properties of various
subsampled predictors are analyzed by Patil et al. (2023); Du et al. (2023); Patil & Du (2024); Chen
et al. (2023); Ando & Komaki (2023). At a high level, this work acts as “dual” to this literature.
Cross-validation and tuning. CV is a prevalent method for model assessment and selection (Hastie
et al., 2009). For surveys on CV variants, we refer readers to Arlot & Celisse (2010); Zhang & Yang
(2015). Initially proposed for linear smoothers in the fixed-X design settings, GCV provides an
extremely efficient alternative to traditional CV methods like LOOCV (Golub et al., 1979; Craven
& Wahba, 1979). It approximates the so-called “shortcut” LOOCV formula (Hastie et al., 2009).
More recently, there has been growing interest in GCV in the random-X design settings. Consistency
properties of GCV have been investigated: for ridge regression under various scenarios (Adlam &
Pennington, 2020; Patil et al., 2021; 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Han & Xu, 2023), for the lasso (Bayati &
Montanari, 2011; Celentano et al., 2023), and for general regularized M -estimators (Bellec, 2023;
Bellec & Shen, 2022), among others. Our work adds to this literature by analyzing GCV for freely
sketched ridge ensembles and establishing its consistency across a broad class of risk functionals.

2    S KETCHED ENSEMBLES
Let ppxi , yi qqni“1 be n i.i.d. observations in Rp ˆ R. We denote by X P Rnˆp the data matrix whose
                                        n
i-th row contains xJ   i and by y P R the associated response vector whose i-th entry contains yi .

Sketched ensembles and risk functionals. Consider a collection of K independent sketching
matrices Sk P Rpˆq for k P rKs. We consider sketched ridge regression where we apply the
sketching matrix Sk to the features (columns) of the data X only. We denote the sketching solution as
                                                          ›           ›2         2
                  βpλk “ Sk βpλSk for βpλSk “ arg min n1 ›y ´ XSk β ›2 ` λ}β}2 ,                  (1)
                                                   βPRq
where λ is the ridge regularization level. We obtain the final ensemble estimator as a simple un-
weighted average of K independently sketched predictors, each of which admits a simple expression:
                        K
                     1 ÿ pk                                              ˘´1 J J
            βpλens “                where βpλk “ n1 Sk n1 SJ
                                                      `       J
                          β ,                              k X XSk ` λIq    Sk X y.                    (2)
                     K k“1 λ
It is worth mentioning that, in practice, it is not necessary to “broadcast” βpλSk back to p-dimensional
space to realize βpλk , and all computation can (and should) be done in the sketched domain. Note
also that we allow for λ to be possibly negative in when writing (2) (see Theorem 1 for details). Let
px0 , y0 q be a test point drawn independently from the same distribution as the training data. Risk
functionals of the ensemble estimator are properties of the joint distribution of py0 , xJ   pens
                                                                                           0 βλ q. Letting
   ens                                                                                      ens
Pλ denote this distribution, we are interested in estimating linear functionals of Pλ . That is, let
t : R2 Ñ R be an error function. Define the corresponding conditional prediction risk functional as
                          ż                               ”                  ˇ                ı
             T pβpλens q “ tpy, zq dPλens py, zq “ Ex0 ,y0 tpy0 , xJ pens q ˇˇ X, y, pSk qK .
                                                                     β
                                                                   0 λ                    k“1           (3)
                                                             2                     ens
A special case is the squared risk when tpy, zq “ py ´ zq , denoted by Rpβp q in the sequel.
                                                                                 λ

Proposed GCV plug-in estimators. Note that each individual estimator βpλk of the ensemble is a
linear smoother with smoothing matrix Lkλ “ n1 XSk p n1 SJ     J
                                                            k X XSk ` λIq q
                                                                               ´1 J J
                                                                                 Sk X , in the sense
that the training data predictions are given by Xβpλk “ Lkλ y. This motivates our consideration of
estimators based on generalized cross-validation (GCV) (Hastie et al., 2009, Chapter 7). Given
any linear smoother of the responses with smoothing matrix L, the GCV estimator of the squared
prediction risk is n1 }y ´ Ly}22 {p1 ´ n1 trpLqq2 . GCV enjoys certain consistency properties in the
fixed-X setting (Li, 1985; 1986) and has recently been shown to also be consistent under various
random-X settings for ridge regression (Patil et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Han & Xu, 2023).


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We extend the GCV estimator řn to general functionals by considering GCV as a plug-in estimator of
squared risk of the form n1 i“1 pyi ´ zi q2 . Determining the zi that correspond to GCV, we obtain
the empirical distribution of GCV-corrected predictions as follows:
                        n "                                                       K
                     1 ÿ ´ xJ       βpens ´ 1 trrLens syi ¯
                                                           *
                                                                               1 ÿ k
           Ppλens “       δ yi , i λ 1 n ensλ               , where Lensλ   “        L .       (4)
                    n i“1             1 ´ n trrLλ s                           K k“1 λ
Here δtau denotes a Dirac measure located at an atom a P R2 . To give some intuition as to why this
is a reasonable choice, consider that when fitting a model, the predictions on training points will be
excessively correlated with the training responses. In order to match the test distribution, we need to
cancel this increased correlation, which we accomplish by subtracting an appropriately scaled yi .
Using this empirical distribution, we form the plug-in GCV risk functional estimators
                      n
                   1 ÿ ´ xJ      βpens ´ 1 trrLens syi ¯                    1         pens 2
                                                               p βpens q “ n }y ´ Xβλ }2 .
     Tppβpλens q “       t yi , i λ 1 n ensλ             and Rp    λ                                      (5)
                   n i“1           1 ´ n trrLλ s                           p1 ´ n1 trrLens
                                                                                       λ sq
                                                                                            2


In the case where λ Ñ 0` but ridgeless regression is well-defined, the denominator may tend to zero.
However, the numerator will also tend to zero, and therefore one should interpret this quantity as its
analytic continuation, which is also well-defined. In practice, if so desired, one can choose very small
(positive and negative) λ near zero and interpolate for a first-order approximation.
We emphasize that the GCV-corrected predictions are “free lunch” in most circumstances. For
example, when tuning over λ, it is common to precompute a decomposition of XSk such that
subsequent matrix inversions for each λ are very inexpensive, and the same decomposition can be
used to evaluate n1 trrLens
                        λ s exactly. Otherwise, Monte-Carlo trace estimation is a common strategy
for GCV (Girard, 1989; Hutchinson, 1989) that yields consistent estimators using very few (even
single) samples, such that the additional computational cost is essentially the same as fitting the model.
See Appendix H for computational complexity comparisons of various cross-validation methods.

3    S QUARED RISK ASYMPTOTICS AND CONSISTENCY
We now derive the asymptotics of squared risk and its GCV estimator for the finite ensemble
sketched estimator. The special structure of the squared risk allows us to obtain explicit forms of the
asymptotics that shed light on the dependence of both the ensemble risk and GCV on K, the size of
the ensemble. We then show consistency of GCV for squared risk using these asymptotics.
We express our asymptotic results using the asymptotic equivalence
                                                          “           notation
                                                                        ‰       An » Bn , which
                                                                    1{2
means that for any sequence of Θn having }Θn }tr “ tr pΘn ΘJ     nq       uniformly bounded in n,
limnÑ8 tr rΘn pAn ´ Bn qs “ 0 almost surely. In the case that An and Bn are scalars an and bn
such as risk estimators, this reduces to limnÑ8 pan ´ bn q “ 0. Our forthcoming results apply to
a sequence of problems of increasing dimensionality proportional to n, and we omit the explicit
dependence on n in our statements.
For our theoretical analysis, we need our sketching matrix S to have favorable properties. The
sketch should preserve much of the essential structure of the data, even through (regularized) matrix
inversion. A sufficient yet quite general condition for this is freeness (Voiculescu, 1997; Mingo &
Speicher, 2017).
Assumption A (Sketch structure). Let SSJ and n1 XJ X converge almost surely to bounded oper-
ators infinitesimally free with respect to p p1 trr¨s, trrΘp¨qsq for any Θ independent of S with }Θ}tr
uniformly bounded, and let SSJ have limiting S-transform SSSJ analytic on C´ .

We give a background on freeness including infintesimal freeness (Shlyakhtenko, 2018) in Ap-
pendix A. Intuitively, freeness of a pair of operators A and B means that the eigenvectors of one are
completely unaligned or incoherent with the eigenvectors of the other. For example, if A “ UDUJ
for a uniformly random unitary matrix U drawn independently of positive semidefinite B and D,
then A and B are almost surely asymptotically infinitesimally free (Cébron et al., 2022).1 For this
reason, we expect any sketch that is rotationally invariant, a desired property of sketches in practice
as we do not wish the sketch to prefer any particular dimensions of our data, to satisfy Assumption A.
    1
      Note that this includes the two sketches most commonly studied theoretically: those with i.i.d. Gaussian
entries, and random orthogonal projections, which both have analytic S-transforms (see Appendix A.4).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The property that the sketch preserves the structure of the data is captured in the notion of sub-
ordination and conditional expectation in free probability (Biane, 1998), closely related to the
deterministic equivalents (Dobriban & Sheng, 2020; 2021) used in random matrix theory. LeJeune
et al. (2022) recently extended such results to infinitesimally free operators in the context of sketching,
which will form the basis of our analysis.2 For the statements to follow, define Σ      p “ 1 XJ X and
                        `                     `                                               n
                              Jp
λ0 “ ´ lim inf pÑ8 λmin pS ΣSq. Here λmin pAq denotes the minimum nonzero eigenvalue of a
symmetric matrix A. In addition, define the population covariance matrix Σ “ Erx0 xJ         0 s.
Theorem 1 (Free sketching equivalence; LeJeune et al. (2022), Theorem 7.2). Under Assumption A,
for all λ ą λ0 ,
                                      p ` λIq ´1 SJ » Σ       p ` µIp ´1 ,
                                 `               ˘          `          ˘
                               S SJ ΣS                                                                  (6)
                 `
where µ ą ´λmin pΣq is increasing in λ ą λ0 and satisfies
                      p
        µ » λSSSJ ´ p1 tr SJ ΣS          p ` λIq ´1 » λSSSJ ´ 1 tr Σ                p ` µIp ´1 . (7)
                    `       “       `                ˘ ‰˘              `       “ `           ˘ ‰˘
                                 p SJ ΣS                                         p Σ
                                                                           p

Put another way, when we sketch Σ   p and compute a regularized inverse, it is (in a first-order sense) as
if we had computed an unsketched regularized inverse of Σ,  p potentially with a different “implicit”
regularization strength µ instead of λ. Since the result holds for free sketching matrices, we expect
this to include fast practical sketches such as CountSketch (Charikar et al., 2004) and subsampled
randomized Fourier and Hadamard transforms (SRFT/SRHT) (Tropp, 2011; Lacotte et al., 2020),
which were demonstrated empirically to satisfy the same relationship by LeJeune et al. (2022), and
for which we also provide further empirical support in this work in Appendices A.2 and A.3.
While the form of the relationship between the original and implicit regularization parameters λ and
µ in Theorem 1 may seem complicated, the remarkable fact is that our GCV consistency results in
the next section are agnostic to the specific form of any of the quantities involved (such as SSSJ
and µ). That is, GCV is able to make the appropriate correction in a way that adapts to the specific
choice of sketch, such that the statistician need not worry. Nevertheless, for the interested reader we
provide a listing of known examples of sketches satisfying Assumption A and their corresponding
S-transforms in Table 4 in Appendix A.4, parameterized by α “ q{p.
We first state a result on the decomposition of squared risk and the GCV estimator. Here we let βpµridge
denote the ridge estimator fit on unsketched data at the implicit regularization parameter µ.
Theorem 2 (Risk and GCV asymptotics). Suppose Assumption A holds, and that the operator norm
of Σ and second moment of y0 are uniformly bounded in p. Then, for λ ą λ0 and all K,
                                      ˘ µ1 ∆                                         2
                R βpλens » R βpµridge `                  p βpens » R  p βpridge ` µ ∆ ,
                  `      ˘      `                          `    ˘      `       ˘
                                                  and R       λ           µ                          (8)
                                            K                                       K
where µ is as given in Theorem 1, ∆ “ n1 yJ p n1 XXJ ` µIn q´2 y ě 0, and µ1 ě 0 is a certain
non-negative inflation factor in the risk that only depends on SSSJ , Σ,  p and Σ, while µ2 ě 0 is a
certain non-negative inflation factor in the risk estimator that only depends on SSSJ and Σ.   p

In other words, this result gives bias–variance decompositions for both squared risk and its GCV
estimator for sketched ensembles. The result says that the risk of the sketched predictor is equal to
the risk of the unsketched equivalent implicit ridge regressor (bias) plus a term due to the randomness
of the sketching that depends on the inflation factor µ1 or µ2 (variance), which is controlled by the
ensemble size at a rate of 1{K (see Figure G.1 for a numerical verification of this rate).
We refer the reader to Theorem 16 in Appendix C for precise expressions for µ1 and µ2 , and to
LeJeune et al. (2022) for illustrations of their relationship of these parameters with α and λ in the
case of i.i.d. sketching. For expressions of limiting non-sketched risk and GCV for ridge regression,
we also refer to Patil et al. (2021), which could be combined with (8) to obtain exact formulas for
asymptotic risk and GCV for sketched ridge regression, or to Bach (2024) for exact squared risk
expressions in the i.i.d. sketching case for K “ 1.
For our consistency result, we impose certain mild random matrix assumptions on the feature vectors
and assume a mild bounded moment condition on the response variable. Notably, we do not require
any specific model assumption on the response variable y in the way that it relates to the feature
vector x. Thus, all of our results are applicable in a model-free setting.
   2
     The original theorem in LeJeune et al. (2022) was given for complex λ and µ, but the stated version follows
by analytic continuation to the real line.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      RCV1                                                                                         RNA-Seq
                         0.8                                                                                          0.06
                                                                                                                                                                        0.008
                                                  GCV


               Squared risk R(βbλens )


                                                                                                            Squared risk R(βbλens )
                                                                                 Classification error


                                                                                                                                                                                Classification error
                                                  Test error               0.3                                        0.05
                         0.6                                                                                                                                            0.006
                                                  CV                                                                  0.04
                                                                           0.2
                         0.4                                                                                          0.03                                              0.004

                                                                                                                      0.02
                         0.2                                               0.1                                                                                          0.002
                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                                                                                        0.000
                         0.0                                               0.0                                        0.00
                                         −10 −5   0   5   10 30 100    1000                                                           −10 −5   0     5   10 30 100   1000
                                         Regularization strength λ                                                                    Regularization strength λ

Figure 2: GCV provides very accurate risk estimates for real-world data. We fit ridge regression ensembles
of size K “ 5 using CountSketch (Charikar et al., 2004) on binary ˘1 labels from RCV1 (Lewis et al., 2004)
(n “ 20000, p “ 30617, q “ 515) (left) and RNA-Seq (Weinstein et al., 2013) (n “ 356, p “ 20223, q “ 99)
(right). GCV (dashed, circles) matches test risk (solid, diamonds) and improves upon 2-fold CV (dotted) for
both squared error (blue, green) and classification error (orange, red). CV provides poorer estimates for less
positive λ, heavily exaggerated when n is small such as in RNA-Seq. Error bars denote std. dev. over 10 trials.
Assumption B (Data structure). The feature vector decomposes as x “ Σ1{2 z, where z P Rp
contains i.i.d. entries with mean 0, variance 1, bounded moments of order 4 ` δ for some δ ą 0,
and Σ P Rpˆp is a symmetric matrix with eigenvalues uniformly bounded between rmin ą 0 and
rmax ă 8. The response y has mean 0 and bounded moment of order 4 ` δ for some δ ą 0.

The assumption of zero mean in the features and response is only done for mathematical simplicity.
To deal with non-zero mean, one can add an (unregularized) intercept to the predictor, and all of our
results can be suitably adapted. We apply such an intercept in our experiments on real-world data.
It has been recently shown that GCV for unsketched ridge regression is an asymptotically consistent
estimator of risk (Patil et al., 2021), so given our bias–variance decomposition in (8), the only question
is whether the variance term from GCV is a consistent estimator of the variance term of risk. This
indeed turns out to be the case, as we state in the following theorem for squared risk.
Theorem 3 (GCV consistency). Under Assumptions A and B, for λ ą λ0 and all K, it holds that
                                                  µ1 » µ2 ,           and therefore                           p βpens q » Rpβpens q.
                                                                                                              Rp                                                                                       (9)
                                                                                                                  λ           λ

The remarkableness of this result is its generality: we have made no assumption on a particular
choice of sketching matrix (see Figure 1) or the size K of the ensemble. We also make no assumption
other than boundedness on the covariance Σ, and we do not require any model on the relation of the
response to the data. Furthermore, this result is not marginal but rather conditional on X, y, pSk qK
                                                                                                    k“1 ,
meaning that we can trust GCV to be consistent for tuning on a single learning problem. We also
emphasize that our results holds for positive, zero, and even negative λ generally speaking. This
is important, as negative regularization can be optimal in ridge regression in certain circumstances
(Kobak et al., 2020; Wu & Xu, 2020; Richards et al., 2021) and even more commonly in sketched
ridge ensembles (LeJeune et al., 2022), as we demonstrate in Figure 2.
Observe that for K “ 1, that is, sketched ridge regression, one can absorb the sketching matrix S
into the data matrix X such that the transformed data Xr “ XS satisfies Assumption B. We therefore
directly obtain the consistency of GCV in this case using results of Patil et al. (2021). The novel
aspect of Theorem 3 is thus that the consistency of GCV holds for ensembles of any K, which is
not obvious, due to the interactions across predictors in squared error. The non-triviality of this
result is perhaps subtle: one may wonder whether GCV is always consistent under any sketching
setting. However, as we discuss later in Proposition 7, when sketching observations, GCV fails to be
consistent, and so we cannot blindly assert that sketching and GCV are always compatible.

4    G ENERAL FUNCTIONAL CONSISTENCY
In the previous section, we obtained an elegant decomposition for squared risk and the GCV esti-
mator that cleanly captures the effect of ensembling as controlling the variance from an equivalent
unsketched implicit ridge regression risk at a rate of 1{K. However, we are also interested in using
GCV for evaluating other risk functionals, which do not yield bias–variance decompositions.
Fortunately, however, we can leverage the close connection between GCV and LOOCV to prove the
consistency for a broad class of subquadratic risk functionals. As a result, we also certify that the
distribution of the GCV-corrected predictions converges to the test distribution. We show convergence


                                                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Consistent coverage                                 Tuning interval width                                  Joint distribution Pλens       GCV estimate Pbλens
                            1
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                 99% PI


      Interval coverage
                                                                               3.0


                                                                                                                  True responses
                                                              Interval width
                                                                                                                                                 95% PI
                          0.98                                                                                                      1
                                                                               2.5
                                     99% PI
                                     95% PI                                                                                         0
                          0.96                                                 2.0

                                                                               1.5                                                 −1

                          0.94

                                  0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00                           0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00                     −1.0 −0.5         0.0    0.5   1.0 −1.0 −0.5   0.0   0.5     1.0
                                 Sketch size ratio α                                 Sketch size ratio α                                      Test predictions         GCV-corrected predictions

Figure 3: GCV provides consistent prediction intervals (PIs) and distribution estimates. Left: We construct
GCV prediction intervals for SRDCT ensembles of size K “ 5 to synthetic data (n “ 1500, p “ 1000)
with nonlinear responses y “ soft thresholdpxJ β0 q. Mid-left: We use GCV to tune our model to optimize
prediction interval width. Right: The empirical GCV estimate Ppλens (here for α “ 0.68) closely matches the
true joint response–prediction distribution Pλens . Error bars denote standard deviation over 30 trials.
for all error functions t in (3) satisfying the following subquadratic growth condition, commonly used
in the approximate message passing (AMP) literature (see, e.g., Bayati & Montanari, 2011).
Assumption C (Test error structure). The error function t : R2 Ñ R is pseudo-Lipschitz of order
2. That is, there exists a constant L ą 0 such that for all u, v P R2 , the following bound holds true:
|tpuq ´ tpvq| ď Lp1 ` }u}2 ` }v}2 q}u ´ v}2 .
The growth condition on t in the assumption above is ultimately tied to our assumptions on the
bounded moment of order 4 ` δ for some δ ą 0 on the entries of the feature vector and the response
variable. By imposing stronger the moment assumptions, one can generalize these results for error
functions with higher growth rates at the expense of less data generality.
We remark that this extends the class of functionals previously shown to be consistent for GCV in
ridge regression (Patil et al., 2022), which were of the residual form tpy ´ zq. While the tools needed
for this extension are not drastically different, it is nonetheless a conceptually important extension. In
particular, this is useful for classification problems where metrics do not have a residual structure and
for adaptive prediction interval construction. We now state our main consistency result.
Theorem 4 (Functional consistency). Under Assumptions A to C, for λ ą λ0 and all K,
                                             Tppβpens q » T pβpens q.                               λ (10)                              λ

                                                  2
Since tpy, zq “ py ´ zq satisfies Assumption C, this result is strict generalization of Theorem 3.
This class of risk functionals is very broad: it includes for example robust risks such as the mean
absolute error or Huber loss, and even classification risks such as hinge loss and logistic loss.
Furthermore, this class of error functions is sufficiently rich as to guarantee that not only do risk
functionals converge, but in fact the GCV-corrected predictions also converge in distribution to
the predictions of test data. This simple corollary captures the fact that empirical convergence of
pseudo-Lipschitz functionals of order 2, being equivalent to weak convergence plus convergence in
second moment, is equivalent to Wasserstein convergence (Villani, 2008, Chapter 6).
Corollary 5 (Distributional consistency). Under Assumptions A and B, for λ ą λ0 and all K, it
                  2               2
holds that Ppλens ñ Pλens , where ñ denotes convergence in Wasserstein W2 metric.
Distributional convergence further enriches our choices of consistent estimators that we can construct
with GCV, in that we can now construct estimators of sets and their probabilities. One example
is classification error Er1ty0 ‰ signpxJ     pens
                                           0 βλ qus, which can be expressed in terms of conditional
probability over discrete y0 . In our real data experiments in Figure 2, we also compute classification
error using GCV and find it yields highly consistent estimates, which is useful as squared error (and
hence ridge) is known to be a competitive loss function for classification (Hui & Belkin, 2021).
Of statistical interest, we can also do things such as construct prediction intervals using the GCV-
corrected empirical distribution. For example, for τ P p0, 1q, consider the level-τ quantile Qpτ  p q“
                                                      J pens            J pens
inftz : F pzq ě τ u and prediction interval I “ rx0 βλ ` Qpτl q, x0 βλ ` Qpτu qs, where Fp is the
        p                                                       p                  p
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the GCV residuals py ´ zq : py, zq „ Ppλens . Then I is a
prediction interval for y0 built only from training data that has the right coverage τu ´ τl , conditional
on the training data, asymptotically almost surely. Furthermore, we can tune our model based on
prediction interval metrics such as interval width. We demonstrate this idea in the experiment in
Figure 3. This idea could be further extended to produce tighter locally adaptive prediction intervals
by leveraging the entire joint distribution Ppλens rather than only the residuals.


                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    T UNING APPLICATIONS AND THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS
The obvious implication of the consistency results for GCV stated above is that we can also consis-
tently tune sketched ridge regression: for any finite collection of hyperparameters (λ, α, sketching
family, K) over which we tune, consistency at each individual choice of hyperparameters implies
that optimization over the hyperparameter set is also consistent. Thus if the predictor that we want to
fit to our data is a sketched ridge regression ensemble, direct GCV enables us to efficiently tune it.
However, suppose we have the computational budget to fit a single large predictor, such as unsketched
ridge regression or a large ensemble. Due to the large cost of refitting, tuning this predictor directly
might be unfeasible. Fortunately, thanks to the bias–variance decomposition in Theorem 2, we can
use small sketched ridge ensembles to tune such large predictors.
The key idea is to recall that asymptotically, the sketched risk is simply a linear combination of the
equivalent ridge risk and a variance term, and that we can control the mixing of these terms by choice
of the ensemble size K. This means that by choosing multiple distinct values of K, we can solve for
the equivalent ridge risk. As a concrete example, suppose we have an ensemble of size K “ 2 with
corresponding risk R2 “ Rpβpλens q, and let R1 be the risk corresponding to the individual members of
the ensemble. Then we can eliminate the variance term and obtain the equivalent risk as
                                      Rpβpµridge q » 2R2 ´ R1 .                                (11)
                                                           ` 1       Jp      Jp           ´1
                                                                                             ˘
Subsequently using the subordination relation µ » λSSSJ ´ p trrS ΣSpS ΣS ` λIq q s from
Theorem 1, we can map our choice of λ and S to the equivalent µ. By Theorem 3, we can use the
GCV risk estimators for R1 and R2 and have a consistent estimator for ridge risk at µ. In this way,
we obtain a consistent estimator of risk that can be computed entirely using only the q-dimensional
sketched data rather than the full p-dimensional data, which can be computed in less time with a
smaller memory footprint. See Appendix H for a detailed comparison of computational complexity.
We demonstrate this “ensemble trick” for estimating ridge risk in Figure 4, which is accurate even
where the variance component of sketched ridge risk is large. Furthermore, even though GCV is
not consistent for sketched observations instead of features (see Section 6), the ensemble trick still
provides a consistent estimator for ridge risk since the bias term is unchanged. One limitation of this
method when considering a fixed sketch S, varying only λ, is that this limits the minimum value of
µ that can be considered (see discussion by LeJeune et al., 2022). A solution to this is to consider
varying sketch sizes, allowing the full range of µ ą 0, as captured by the following result.
Proposition 6 (Optimized GCV versus optimized ridge). Under Assumptions A and B, if SJ         k Sk is
invertible, then for any µ ą 0, if λ “ 0 and K Ñ 8, it holds that
                 p βpens q » Rpβpens q » Rpβpridge q for α “ 1 trrΣ       p ` µIp ´1 s.
                                                                        `        ˘
                 Rp   λ           λ           µ                   p
                                                                       p Σ                        (12)

That is, for any desired level of equivalent regularization µ, we can obtain a sketched ridge regressor
with the same bias (equivalently, the same large ensemble risk as K Ñ 8) by changing only the
sketch size and fixing λ “ 0. A narrower result was shown for subsampled ensembles by LeJeune
et al. (2020), but our generalization provides equivalences for all µ ą 0 and holds for any full-rank
sketching matrix, establishing that freely sketched predictors indeed cover the same predictive space
as their unsketched counterparts. The result also has practical merit. It guarantees that, with a
sufficiently large sketched ensemble, we retain the statistical properties of the unsketched ridge
regression. Thus, practitioners can harness the computational benefits of sketching, such as reduced
memory usage and enhanced parallelization capabilities, without a loss in statistical performance.

6    D ISCUSSION
This paper establishes the consistency of GCV-based estimators of risk functionals. We show that
GCV provides a method for consistent fast tuning of sketched ridge ensemble parameters. However,
taking a step back, given the connection between the sketched pseudoinverse and implicit ridge
regularization in the unsketched inverse (Assumption A) and the fact that GCV “works” for ridge
regression (Patil et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022), one might wonder if the results in this paper were
“expected”? The introduction of the ensemble required additional analysis of course, but perhaps the
results seem intuitively natural.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                        GCV (K = 1)         GCV (K = 2)              GCV (K = 10)       Ensemble trick (K = 2)         Ridge

                                    Sketching features (q = 100)         Sketching observations (m = 100)      Tuning sketch size (λ = 0)
                              6.5


               Squared risk
                              6.0

                              5.5

                              5.0

                              4.5


                                    100               101          102     100            101         102    10−1     100        101    102
                                                                          Equivalent regularization µ

Figure 4: GCV combined with sketching yields a fast method for tuning ridge. We fit SRDCT ensembles on
synthetic data (n “ 600, p “ 800), sketching features (left and right) or observations (middle). GCV (dashed)
provides consistent estimates of test risk (solid) for feature sketching but not for observation sketching. However,
the ensemble trick in (11) does not depend on the variance and thus works for both. For λ “ 0, each equivalent
µ ą 0 can be achieved by an appropriate choice of α. Error bars denote standard deviation over 50 trials.
Surprisingly (even to the authors), if one changes the strategy from sketching features to sketching
observations, we no longer have GCV consistency for finite ensembles! Consider a formulation
where we now sketch observations with K independent sketching matrices Tk P Rnˆm for k P rKs:
                                     ›2                                     ˘´1 J
                                     › ` λ}β}2 “ 1 1 XJ Tk TJ
                     ›
    βrλk “ arg min 1 ›TJ
                                                      `
                        k py ´ Xβq  n                          2   k X ` λI    X Tk TJ
                                                                                 2      k y.
                                                                                          n n   (13)
              βPRp
Let the ensemble estimator βrλens be defined analogously to (2). Note againřthat the ensem-
ble estimator βrλens is a linear smoother with smoothing matrix L             r ens “ 1 K L        rk
                                                                                λ       K     k“1 λ , where
  k      1    1 J         J        ´1 J          J                                                 r βrens q of
Lλ “ n Xp n X Tk Tk X ` λIq X Tk Tk . We can then define the GCV estimator Rp
r
                                                                                                        λ
the squared risk analogous to (5). The following result shows that R is inconsistent for any K.
                                                                         r
Proposition 7 (GCV inconsistency for observation sketch). Suppose assumptions of Theorem 2 hold
for TTJ . Then, for λ ą λ   r0 “ ´ lim inf pÑ8 minkPrKs λ` p 1 XJ Tk TJ Xq and all K,
                                                              min n            k
                   ` ens ˘     ` ridge ˘ ν 1 ∆ r            ` ens ˘       ` ridge ˘ ν 2 ∆   r
                 R βrλ » R βrν           `          and R  r βr
                                                               λ     »R  r βr
                                                                             ν       `         ,            (14)
                                             K                                            K
                        1
                                                            `     1    1      J 1
                                                                                `                  ˘ ´1  ˘
where ν ą ´λ`                J
                  min p n XX q and satisfies ν “ λSTTJ ´ n trr n XX
                                                                                         J
                                                                                  n XX ` νIn            s , and
         1 J   1     J         ´2                 1   2
∆r “ y p XX ` νIn q y ě 0, and νr , νr ě 0 are certain non-negative inflation factors.
         n     n
Furthermore, under Assumption B, in general we have ν 1 ­» ν 2 , and therefore Rp      r βrens q ­» Rpβrens q.
                                                                                           λ              λ
For precise expressions of ν 1 and ν 2 , we defer readers to Proposition 19 in Appendix F. Note that as
K Ñ 8, the variance terms vanish and we get back consistency; for this reason, the “ensemble trick”
in (11) still works. This negative result highlights the subtleties in the results in this paper, and that the
GCV consistency for sketched ensembles of finite K is far from obvious and needs careful analysis
to check whether it is consistent. This result is similar in spirit to the GCV inconsistency results of
Bellec et al. (2023) and Patil et al. (2024) in subsampling and early stopping contexts, respectively. It
is still possible to correct GCV in our case, as we detail in Appendix F.2, using unsketched data.
While our results are quite general in terms of being applicable to a wide variety of data and sketches,
they are limited in that they apply only to ridge regression with isotropic regularization. However, we
believe that the tools used in this work are useful in extending GCV consistency and the understanding
of sketching to many other linear learning settings. It is straightforward to extend our results beyond
isotropic ridge regularization. We might want to apply generalized anisotropic ridge regularization in
real-world scenarios: generalized ridge achieves Bayes-optimal regression when the ground truth
coefficients in a linear model come from an anisotropic prior. We can cover this case with a simple
extension of our results; see Appendix F.3.
Going beyond ridge regression, we anticipate that GCV for sketched ensembles should also be
consistent for generalized linear models with arbitrary convex regularizers, as was recently shown in
the unsketched setting for Gaussian data (Bellec, 2023). The key difficulty in applying the analysis
based on Theorem 1 to the general setting is that we can only characterize the effect of sketching
as additional ridge regularization. One promising path forward is via viewing the optimization as
iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS). On the regularization side, IRLS can achieve many types
of structure-promoting regularizers (see LeJeune et al., 2021 and references therein) via successive
generalized ridge, and so we might expect GCV to also be consistent in this case. Furthermore, for
general training losses, we believe that GCV can be extended appropriately to handle reweighting of
observations and leverage the classical connection between IRLS and maximum likelihood estimation
in generalized linear models. Furthermore, to slightly relax data assumptions, we can extend GCV to
the closely related approximate leave-one-out (ALO) risk estimation (Xu et al., 2019; Rad & Maleki,
2020), which relies on fewer concentration assumptions for consistency.


                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Ryan J. Tibshirani for helpful feedback on this work. We warmly thank Benson Au,
Roland Speicher, Dimitri Shlyakhtenko for insightful discussions related to free probability theory
and infinitesimal freeness. We also warmly thank Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla, Alessandro Rinaldo,
Yuting Wei, Jin-Hong Du, Alex Wei for many useful discussions regrading the “dual” aspects of
observation subsampling in the context of risk monotonization. As is the nature of direction reversing
and side flipping dualities in general, the insights and perspectives gained from that observation
side are naturally “mirrored” and “transposed” onto this feature side (with some important caveats)!
Finally, we sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive feedback,
which improved the manuscript, particularly with the addition of Appendix H.
This collaboration was partially supported by Office of Naval Research MURI grant N00014-20-1-
2787. DL was supported by Army Research Office grant 2003514594.

R EFERENCES
Ben Adlam and Jeffrey Pennington. The neural tangent kernel in high dimensions: Triple descent and
  a multi-scale theory of generalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Amirali Aghazadeh, Ryan Spring, Daniel LeJeune, Gautam Dasarathy, Anshumali Shrivastava, and
 Richard G. Baraniuk. MISSION: Ultra large-scale feature selection using count-sketches. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Ryo Ando and Fumiyasu Komaki. On high-dimensional asymptotic properties of model averaging
  estimators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09476, 2023.
Sylvain Arlot and Alain Celisse. A survey of cross-validation procedures for model selection.
  Statistics surveys, 4:40–79, 2010.
Francis Bach. High-dimensional analysis of double descent for linear regression with random
  projections. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 6(1):26–50, 2024.
Peter L. Bartlett, Philip M. Long, Gábor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear
  regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30063–30070, 2020.
Mohsen Bayati and Andrea Montanari. The dynamics of message passing on dense graphs, with
 applications to compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(2):764–785,
 2011.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Ji Xu. Two models of double descent for weak features. SIAM
 Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(4):1167–1180, 2020.
Pierre Bellec, Jin-Hong Du, Takuya Koriyama, Pratik Patil, and Kai Tan. Corrected generalized
  cross-validation for finite ensembles of penalized estimators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01374,
  2023.
Pierre C. Bellec. Out-of-sample error estimation for M-estimators with convex penalty. Information
  and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 12(4):2782–2817, 2023.
Pierre C. Bellec and Yiwei Shen. Derivatives and residual distribution of regularized M-estimators
  with application to adaptive tuning. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Philippe Biane. Processes with free increments. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 227(1):143–174, 1998.
Arup Bose. Random Matrices and Non-commutative Probability. CRC Press, 2021.
Lars Buitinck, Gilles Louppe, Mathieu Blondel, Fabian Pedregosa, Andreas Mueller, Olivier Grisel,
  Vlad Niculae, Peter Prettenhofer, Alexandre Gramfort, Jaques Grobler, Robert Layton, Jake
  VanderPlas, Arnaud Joly, Brian Holt, and Gaël Varoquaux. API design for machine learning
  software: experiences from the scikit-learn project. In ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for
  Data Mining and Machine Learning, 2013.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guillaume Cébron, Antoine Dahlqvist, and Franck Gabriel. Freeness of type B and conditional
  freeness for random matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01926, 2022.
Michael Celentano, Andrea Montanari, and Yuting Wei. The Lasso with general Gaussian designs
 with applications to hypothesis testing. The Annals of Statistics, 51(5):2194 – 2220, 2023.
Moses Charikar, Kevin Chen, and Martin Farach-Colton. Finding frequent items in data streams.
 Theoretical Computer Science, 312(1):3–15, 2004. ISSN 0304-3975.
Xin Chen, Yicheng Zeng, Siyue Yang, and Qiang Sun. Sketched ridgeless linear regression: The
  role of downsampling. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202, pp. 5296–5326. PMLR, 2023.
Shabarish Chenakkod, Michał Dereziński, Xiaoyu Dong, and Mark Rudelson. Optimal embedding
  dimension for sparse subspace embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10680, 2023.
Peter Craven and Grace Wahba. Estimating the correct degree of smoothing by the method of
  generalized cross-validation. Numerische Mathematik, 31:377–403, 1979.
Michał Dereziński, Jonathan Lacotte, Mert Pilanci, and Michael W Mahoney. Newton-LESS: Sparsi-
 fication without trade-offs for the sketched Newton update. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021a.
Michał Dereziński, Zhenyu Liao, Edgar Dobriban, and Michael Mahoney. Sparse sketches with small
 inversion bias. In Proceedings of Conference on Learning Theory, 2021b.
Edgar Dobriban and Yue Sheng. WONDER: Weighted one-shot distributed ridge regression in high
  dimensions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(66):1–52, 2020.
Edgar Dobriban and Yue Sheng. Distributed linear regression by averaging. The Annals of Statistics,
  49(2):918–943, 2021.
Edgar Dobriban and Stefan Wager. High-dimensional asymptotics of prediction: Ridge regression
  and classification. The Annals of Statistics, 46(1):247–279, 2018.
Jin-Hong Du, Pratik Patil, and Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla. Subsample ridge ensembles: Equivalences
   and generalized cross-validation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
A. Girard. A fast Monte-Carlo cross-validation procedure for large least squares problems with noisy
  data. Numerische Mathematik, 56(1):1–23, 1989.
Gene H. Golub, Michael Heath, and Grace Wahba. Generalized cross-validation as a method for
  choosing a good ridge parameter. Technometrics, 21(2):215–223, 1979.
Qiyang Han and Xiaocong Xu. The distribution of ridgeless least squares interpolators. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.02044, 2023.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning.
  Springer Series in Statistics, 2009. Second edition.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Surprises in high-
  dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. The Annals of Statistics, 50(2):949–986, 2022.
Like Hui and Mikhail Belkin. Evaluation of neural architectures trained with square loss vs cross-
  entropy in classification tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
M. F. Hutchinson. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian smoothing
  splines. Communications in Statistics - Simulation and Computation, 18(3):1059–1076, 1989.
Dmitry Kobak, Jonathan Lomond, and Benoit Sanchez. The optimal ridge penalty for real-world
 high-dimensional data can be zero or negative due to the implicit ridge regularization. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 21:169–1, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Lacotte, Sifan Liu, Edgar Dobriban, and Mert Pilanci. Optimal iterative sketching methods
  with the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.

Daniel LeJeune, Hamid Javadi, and Richard Baraniuk. The implicit regularization of ordinary least
  squares ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.

Daniel LeJeune, Hamid Javadi, and Richard G. Baraniuk. The flip side of the reweighted coin:
  Duality of adaptive dropout and regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.

Daniel LeJeune, Pratik Patil, Hamid Javadi, Richard G. Baraniuk, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Asymptotics
  of the sketched pseudoinverse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03751, 2022.

David D. Lewis, Yiming Yang, Tony Russell-Rose, and Fan Li. RCV1: A new benchmark collection
  for text categorization research. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:361–397, 2004.

Ker-Chau Li. From Stein’s unbiased risk estimates to the method of generalized cross validation. The
  Annals of Statistics, 1985.

Ker-Chau Li. Asymptotic optimality of CL and generalized cross-validation in ridge regression with
  application to spline smoothing. The Annals of Statistics, 14(3):1101–1112, 1986.

Sifan Liu and Edgar Dobriban. Ridge regression: Structure, cross-validation, and sketching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Michael W. Mahoney. Randomized algorithms for matrices and data. Foundations and Trends in
 Machine Learning, 3(2):123–224, 2011.

James A. Mingo and Roland Speicher. Free Probability and Random Matrices. Springer, 2017.

Riley Murray, James Demmel, Michael W. Mahoney, N. Benjamin Erichson, Maksim Melnichenko,
  Osman Asif Malik, Laura Grigori, Piotr Luszczek, Michał Dereziński, Miles E. Lopes, Tianyu
  Liang, Hengrui Luo, and Jack Dongarra. Randomized numerical linear algebra: A perspective on
  the field with an eye to software. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11474, 2023.

Mojmir Mutny, Michał Dereziński, and Andreas Krause. Convergence analysis of block coordinate
 algorithms with determinantal sampling. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, 2020.

Pratik Patil and Jin-Hong Du. Generalized equivalences between subsampling and ridge regularization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Pratik Patil, Yuting Wei, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Ryan Tibshirani. Uniform consistency of cross-
  validation estimators for high-dimensional ridge regression. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2021.

Pratik Patil, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Ryan Tibshirani. Estimating functionals of the out-of-sample
  error distribution in high-dimensional ridge regression. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, 2022.

Pratik Patil, Jin-Hong Du, and Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla. Bagging in overparameterized learning:
  Risk characterization and risk monotonization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(319):
  1–113, 2023.

Pratik Patil, Yuchen Wu, and Ryan Tibshirani. Failures and successes of cross-validation for early-
  stopped gradient descent. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  2024.

Kamiar Rahnama Rad and Arian Maleki. A scalable estimate of the out-of-sample prediction error
  via approximate leave-one-out cross-validation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
 (Statistical Methodology), 82(4):965–996, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dominic Richards, Jaouad Mourtada, and Lorenzo Rosasco. Asymptotics of ridge (less) regression
  under general source condition. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 3889–3897. PMLR, 2021.
Dimitri Shlyakhtenko. Free probability of type-B and asymptotics of finite-rank perturbations of
  random matrices. Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 67(2):971–991, 2018.
Terence Tao. Topics in Random Matrix Theory, volume 132. American Mathematical Society, 2023.
Gian-Andrea Thanei, Christina Heinze, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Random projections for large-scale
  regression. In Big and Complex Data Analysis, Contributions to Statistics. Springer, 2017.
Joel A. Tropp. Improved analysis of the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform. Advances in
  Adaptive Data Analysis, 03:115–126, 2011.
Antonia M Tulino and Sergio Verdú. Random matrix theory and wireless communications. Founda-
  tions and Trends in Communications and Information Theory, 1(1):1–182, 2004.
Cédric Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New. Springer, 2008.
Dan V. Voiculescu. Free Probability Theory. American Mathematical Society, 1997.
Alexander Wei, Wei Hu, and Jacob Steinhardt. More than a toy: Random matrix models predict how
  real-world neural representations generalize. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06176, 2022.
John N Weinstein, Eric A Collisson, Gordon B Mills, Kenna R Mills Shaw, Brad A Ozenberger,
  Kyle Ellrott, Ilya Shmulevich, Chris Sander, and Joshua M Stuart. The Cancer Genome Atlas
  Pan-Cancer analysis project. Nature Genetics, 45(10):1113–1120, 2013.
David P. Woodruff. Sketching as a tool for numerical linear algebra. Foundations and Trends in
 Theoretical Computer Science, 10(1–2):1–157, 2014.
Denny Wu and Ji Xu. On the optimal weighted ℓ2 regularization in overparameterized linear
  regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10112–10123, 2020.
Ji Xu, Arian Maleki, and Kamiar Rahnama Rad. Consistent risk estimation in high-dimensional
   linear regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01753, 2019.
Yongli Zhang and Yuhong Yang. Cross-validation for selecting a model selection procedure. Journal
  of Econometrics, 187(1):95–112, 2015.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
This serves as a supplement to the paper “Asymptotically Free Sketched Ridge Ensembles: Risks,
Cross-Validation, and Tuning.” Below we first provide an outline for the supplement in Table 1. Then
we list some of the general and specific notations used throughout the main paper and the supplement
in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.

O UTLINE

 Appendix        Content
 Appendix A      Background on asymptotic freeness and empirical support for sketching freeness
 Appendix B      Asymptotic equivalents for freely sketched resolvents used in the proofs throughout
 Appendix C      Proofs of Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 (from Section 3)
 Appendix D      Proofs of Theorem 4 and Corollary 5 (from Section 4)
 Appendix E      Proof of Proposition 6 (from Section 5)
                 Proof of Proposition 7 and statements and other details for anisotropic sketching,
 Appendix F
                 generalized ridge regression, and observation sketch (from Section 6)
 Appendix G      Additional experimental illustrations and setup details for Figures 1 to 4
 Appendix H      Comprehensive complexity comparisons of various cross-validation methods

                                 Table 1: Roadmap of the supplement.


G ENERAL NOTATION

 Notation              Description
 Non-bold              Denotes scalars, functions, distributions etc. (e.g., k, f , P )
 Lowercase bold        Denotes vectors (e.g., x, y, β)
 Uppercase bold        Denotes matrices (e.g., X, S, Σ)
 R, Rě0                Set of real and non-negative real numbers
 C, C` , C´            Set of complex numbers, and upper and lower complex half-planes
 rns                   Set t1, . . . , nu for a natural number n
 1tAu                  Indicator random variable associated with an event A
 }u}p , }f }Lp         The ℓp norm of a vector u and the Lp norm of a function f for p ě 1
 }X}op , }X}tr         Operator (or spectral) and trace (or nuclear) norm of a rectangular matrix X P Rnˆp
 trrAs, A´1            Trace and inverse (if invertible) of a square matrix A P Rpˆp
 rankpBq, BJ , B:      Rank, transpose and Moore-Penrose inverse of a rectangular matrix B P Rnˆp
 C1{2                  Principal square root of a positive semidefinite matrix C P Rpˆp
 In or I               The n ˆ n identity matrix
 O, o                  Deterministic big-O and little-o notation
 uďv                   Lexicographic ordering for real vectors u and v
 AĺB                   Loewner ordering for symmetric matrices A and B
 Op , op               Probabilistic big-O and little-o notation
 A»B                   Asymptotic equivalence of matrices A and B (see Appendix B for details)
  a.s. p d
 ÝÝÑ, ÑÝ,Ñ
         Ý             Almost sure convergence, convergence in probability, and weak convergence
  2
 ñ                     Convergence in Wasserstein W2 metric

         Table 2: Summary of the general notation used throughout the paper and the supplement.



                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S PECIFIC NOTATION

 Symbol               Meaning
 ppxi , yi qqni“1     Train dataset containing n i.i.d. observations in Rp ˆ R
 (X, y)               Train data matrix px1 , . . . , xn qJ in Rnˆp and response vector y “ py1 , . . . , yn q in Rn
 px0 , y0 q           Test point in Rp ˆ R drawn independently from the train data distribution
 Σ                    Population covariance matrix in Rpˆp : Erx0 xJ    0s
 β0                   Coefficients of population linear projection of y0 onto x0 in Rp : Σ´1 Erx0 y0 s
 Σp                   Sample covariance matrix in Rpˆp : n1 XJ X
 βpλridge             Ridge estimator on full data pX, yq at regularization level λ: pΣ  p ` λIp q´1 1 XJ y
                                                                                                         n
 K                    Ensemble size
 pSk qK
      k“1             Sketching matrices in Rpˆq (for feature sketch)
 α                    Sketching aspect ratio α “ pq
                      k-th component estimator in the sketched ensemble in Rq (sketch space) at
 βpλSk                regularization level λ
 βpλk                 k-th component estimator in the sketched ensemble in Rp (feature space)
 Lkλ                  Smoothing matrix of the k-th component estimator in the sketched ensemble in Rnˆn
                                                                1
                                                                   řK pk
 βpλens               Final sketched ensemble estimator in Rp : K    k“1 βλ             řK
 Lens
    λ                 Smoothing matrix of the sketched ensemble estimator in Rnˆn : K1
                                                                                          k“1 Lλ
                                                                                                k


                      Joint distribution of test response and test predicted values of the sketched ensemble
 Pλens
                      estimator (for feature sketch) at regularization level λ
 Rpβpλens q           Squared risk of the sketched ensemble estimator
 T pβpλens q          General linear risk functional of the sketched ensemble estimator
                      Estimated joint distribution of test response and test predicted values of the sketched
 Ppλens               ensemble (for feature sketch) at regularization level λ using GCV residuals
  p βpens q
 Rp                   Estimated squared risk of the sketched ensemble estimator
       λ
 T pβpens q
  p
         λ
                      Estimated general linear functional of the sketched ensemble estimator
                      Effective induced regularization level of the sketched ensemble estimator (for feature
 µ
                      sketch) with original regularization level λ
 µ1                   Inflation factor in the squared risk decomposition of the sketched ensemble estimator
 µ2                   Inflation factor in the GCV decomposition for the sketched ensemble estimator
 pTk qK
      k“1             Sketching matrices Rnˆm (for observation sketch)
 η                    Sketching aspect ratio η “ m
                                                 n
                      k-th component estimator in the sketched ensemble in Rp (feature space) at
 βrλk                 regularization level λ
 rk
 L  λ
                      Smoothing matrix of the k-th component estimator in the sketched ensemble in Rnˆn
                                                                1
                                                                  řK rk
 βrλens               Final sketched ensemble estimator in Rp : K  k“1 βλ               řK r k
 r ens
 L   λ                Smoothing matrix of the sketched ensemble estimator in Rnˆn : 1        KL   k“1    λ

                      Squared risk of the sketched ensemble estimator (for observation sketch) at
 Rpβrλens q           regularization level λ
 r βrens q
 Rp                   Estimated squared risk of the sketched ensemble estimator using GCV
          λ

                      Effective induced regularization level of the sketched ensemble estimator (for
 ν
                      observation sketch) with original regularization level λ
 ν1                   Inflation factor in the squared risk decomposition of the sketched ensemble estimator
 ν2                   Inflation factor in the GCV decomposition for the sketched ensemble estimator
 SSSJ                 S-transform of the spectrum of SSJ P Rpˆp (for feature sketch)
 STTJ                 S-transform of the spectrum of TTJ P Rnˆn (for observation sketch)

              Table 3: Summary of the specific notation used throughout the paper and the supplement.



                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     BACKGROUND ON ASYMPTOTIC FREENESS AND FREE SKETCHING SUPPORT
Free probability (Voiculescu, 1997) is a mathematical framework that deals with non-commutative
random variables. One of the key concepts in free probability is asymptotic freeness, which studies
the behavior of random matrices in the limit as their dimension tends to infinity. This notion enables
us to understand how independent random matrices become uncorrelated and behave as if they were
freely independent in the high-dimensional limit. Good full-length references on free probability
theory include: Mingo & Speicher (2017), Bose (2021). Chapters 2.4 and 2.5 from Tulino & Verdú
(2004) and Tao (2023), respectively, are enjoyable introductions.

A.1    F REE PROBABILITY THEORY

We begin with a few definitions from Mingo & Speicher (2017).
Definition 8 (C ˚ -probability space and state). A pair pA, φq is called a non-commutative C ˚ -
probability space if A is a unital C ˚ -algebra and the linear functional φ : A Ñ C is a unital state:
i.e., φp1q “ 1 and φpa˚ aq ě 0 for all a P A.
Definition 9 (Freeness). Let pA, φq be a C ˚ -probability space and let pA1 , . . . , As q be unital
subalgebras of A. Then pA1 , . . . , As q are free with respect to φ if, for any r ě 2 and a1 , . . . , ar P A
such that φpai q “ 0 for all 1 ď i ď r and ai P Aji for ji ‰ ji`1 for all 1 ď i ď r ´ 1, we have
φpa1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ar q “ 0. Furthermore, we say that elements a1 , . . . , as P A are free with respect to φ if the
corresponding generated unital algebras A1 , . . . , As are free.

That is, we say that elements of the algebra are free if any alternating product of centered polynomials
is also centered.
In this work, we will consider φ to be the normalized trace—that is, the generalization of p1 trrAs
for A P Cpˆp to elements of a C ˚ -algebra A. Specifically, for any self-adjoint a P A and any
polynomial p,                                  ż
                                    φpppaqq “ ppzq dµa pzq,
where µa is the probability measure characterizing the spectral distribution of a.
Definition 10 (Convergence in spectral distribution). Let pA, φq be a C ˚ -probability space. We say
that A1 , . . . , Am P Cpˆp converge in spectral distribution to elements a1 , . . . , am P A if for all
1 ď ℓ ă 8 and 1 ď ij ď m for 1 ď j ď ℓ, we have
                                   1
                                   p trrAi1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Aiℓ s Ñ φpai1 ¨ ¨ ¨ aiℓ q.


One limitation of standard free probability theory is that it does not allow us to consider general
expressions of the form trrΘAs when Θ has bounded trace norm, as this would require us to use
an unbounded operator Θ    r “ pΘ to evaluate 1 trrΘAs, r    but such an unbounded Θr cannot be an
                                                 p
                 ˚
element of a C -algebra. However, evaluation of such expressions is possible with an extension
called infinitesimal free probability (Shlyakhtenko, 2018), which is used in Theorem 1 from LeJeune
et al. (2022) that our results build upon.
Definition 11 (Infinitesimal freeness). Unital subalgebras A1 , A2 Ď A are infinitesimally free with
respect to pφ, φ1 q if, for any r ě 2 and a1 , . . . , ar P A where ai P Aji for ji ‰ ji`1 for all
1 ď i ď r ´ 1, we have
                              φt ppa1 ´ φt pa1 qq ¨ ¨ ¨ par ´ φt par qqq “ optq,
                     1
where φt “ φ ` tφ .

We lastly introduce a series of invertible transformations for an element a of a C ˚ -probability space:
                                                     ˆ ˙
                ``      ˘´1 ˘                    1      1                        1 ` z x´1y
   Ga pzq “ φ z ´ a            ÐÑ Ma pzq “ Ga               ´ 1 ÐÑ Sa pzq “             Ma pzq,
                                                 z      z                           z
which are the Cauchy transform (negative of the Stieltjes transform), moment generating series
          ř8                                                         x´1y
Ma pzq “ k“1 φpak qz k , and S-transform of a, respectively. Here Ma      denotes inverse under
composition of Ma .


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Asymptotic freeness                                Empirical matching of SSS>
                                                                                                                                 λ
                        10−1                                                                                      CountSketch

  | p1 tr[poly(A, SS> )]|
                                                                                      2
                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                  SRDCT              102
                                                                                                                  Gaussian
                        10−2                                                                                                         101
                                                                                                                  Orthogonal


                                                                           µ/λ
                                                                                 101                                                 100

                        10−3            ∝ 1/p                                                                                        10−1
                                        CountSketch
                                                                                                                                     10−2
                                        SRDCT
                             −4                                                  100
                        10
                                  500   750 1000       1500 2000    3000                  −0.8     −0.6    −0.4    −0.2    0.0
                                                   p                                             − p1 tr[A(A + µIp )−1 ]

Figure A.1: Empirical support for asymptotic freeness and subordination relation. Left: We plot the
absolute value of the average of the normalized traces of polynomials, which converge to zero. We also plot
best fit lines on the log–log scale (dashed). Error bars denote one standard deviation over 10 trials, collected
over both polynomials. Right: We numerically compute µ and plot the empirical subordination relation, which
are decreasing continuous functions that closely match the theoretical S-transforms of Gaussian (dashed) for
CountSketch (ˆ) and orthogonal (dash–dot) for SRDCT (˝). Each mark in the scatter plots corresponds to a
single pA, λq pair, and we solve for the corresponding µ.


A.2                         A SYMPTOTIC FREENESS

Freeness is characterized by a certain non-commutative centered alternating product condition (see
Definition 9) with respect to a state function. With some slight abuse of notation, we consider the
state function p1 trr¨s. Then two matrices A, B P Rpˆp would be said to be free if
                                      «                       ff
                                        L
                                        ź
                                  1            A        B
                                 p tr     polyℓ pAqpolyℓ pBq “ 0,
                                                              ℓ“1

for all L ě 1 and all centered polynomials—i.e., p1 trrpolyA   ℓ pAqs “ 0. The reason this is an abuse of
notation is that finite matrices cannot satisfy this condition; however, they can satisfy it asymptotically
as p Ñ 8, and in this case we say that A and B are asymptotically free.
We test this property for CountSketch and SRDCT for polynomials of the form
                                                           polyr pAq “ Ar ´ p1 trrAr sIp .

Specifically, we arbitrarily pick two choices
                                            polypA, Bq “ poly1 pAqpoly2 pBqpoly2 pAqpoly3 pBq
and
                      polypA, Bq “ poly3 pAqpoly1 pBqpoly4 pAqpoly2 pBq
             1
and evaluate p trrpolypA, SSJ qs for increasing p over 10 trials, where A is a diagonal matrix with
values linearly interpolating between 0.5 and 1.5 along the diagonal. As we see in Figure A.1 (left),
for both sketches, this normalized trace is quite small and tending to zero. This strongly supports the
assumption that CountSketch and SRDCT are both asymptotically free from diagonal matrices, and
we expect the same to hold if A is rotated to be non-diagonal independently of the sampling of the
sketching matrix S.

A.3                         E MPIRICAL SUBORDINATION RELATIONS

A.3.1                        E XPERIMENTS ON SYNTHETIC DATASETS
Suppose Σ p and SSJ are free and Theorem 1 holds. This means that a subordination relation via
SSSJ should characterize the implicit regularization, so we test this implication empirically as well.
Specifically, without using any known form for SSSJ , we empirically verify that this mapping does
not depend on X and compare it to known S-transforms.


                                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   RCV1 (p = 30617)                                             RNA-Seq (p = 20223)
                                                   q           6 × 100                                       q
     102
                                                   515                                                       495
                                                                        0
                                                               4 × 10
                                                   1030                                                      990
                                                   1957        3 × 100                                       1980
     101
 µ
 λ



                                                   4944                                                      4950
                                                   9991        2 × 100                                       9999


     100
                                                                  100

            −0.3      −0.2     −0.1      0.0                                −0.020−0.015−0.010−0.005 0.000
                      b Σ
              − p1 tr[Σ( b + µIp )−1 ]                                                 b Σ
                                                                               − p1 tr[Σ( b + µIp )−1 ]

                             CountSketch          SRDCT                     Gaussian           Orthogonal


Figure A.2: Empirical support for subordination relation with real data. We numerically compute µ and
plot the empirical subordination relation for sketches of real data (RCV1 (left) and RNA-Seq (right)) using
CountSketch (black, solid) and SRDCT (black, dotted), which almost exactly match the theoretical S-transforms
for Gaussian (dashed) and orthogonal (dash–dot) sketching, shown here for a single trial of random sketching for
each value of q. As q{p tends to zero, the subordination relation of all four sketches becomes indistinguishable.


As in the previous section, we will simplify our tests by considering a diagonal A instead of Σ.
                                                                                              p We
generate a family of A “ diag paq parameterized by a0 , s0 ą 0, and t0 P r0, 1s as
                                            a0                                         i´1
                               ai “                      ,      where ti “                 .
                                      1 ´ e´pti ´t0 q{s0                               p´1
This family spans a variety of spectral distributions and provides a rich class of matrices over which
Theorem 1 must hold simultaneously. For a fixed 700 ˆ 585 sketching matrix S that we sample for
CountSketch and for SRDCT, we sampled A over a 5 ˆ 5 ˆ 5 grid of a0 and s0 logarithmically
spaced between 0.1 and 10 and t0 linearly spaced between 0 and 1. For each A, we used numerical
root finding to determine µ such that
                           ”                    ˘´1 J ı 1 ” `                ˘´1 ı
                      1
                               ` J
                      p tr  AS  S  AS   `  λI q    S    “  p tr A  A  ` µI p


for each λ P t0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100u. Then we construct a scatter plot of µ{λ and µ p1 trrpA ` µIp q´1 s
in Figure A.1 (right), which should match SSSJ and be a decreasing continuous function. We see
that this is indeed the case, and furthermore by also plotting the known S-transform for Gaussian
and orthogonal sketches from Table 4, we see that CountSketch matches the Gaussian function and
SRDCT matches the orthogonal function.

A.3.2      E XPERIMENTS ON REAL DATASETS

We repeat the experiment in Figure A.1 for real data in Figure A.2, using n1 XJ X instead of A. For
RCV1, since n1 XJ X is very high dimensional and matrix inversion is costly, we perform randomized
trace estimation using the formula
                    ”                      ˘´1 ı 1 J ` 1 J              ˘´1 1 J
               1      1 J
                            `1 J
               p tr   n X X  n X  X ` µI p       « p z n X X ` µIp           n X Xz,

where z P Rp is an i.i.d. Rademacher vector and the inversion is computed using the conjugate
gradient method. Additionally, due to the size of RCV1, we only evaluate the subordination relation
for CountSketch which can be efficiently applied due to the sparsity of the data, and do not evaluate
the SRDCT. We precompute the traces for both sketched and unsketched sides of the subordination
relation for a range of values of λ and µ and then construct the mapping via linear interpolation.
Since n ă p for RNA-Seq (see Appendix G.2, the normalized traces are upper bounded by n{p “
446{20223 « 0.022, which limits the operating range of the subordination relation and therefore the
x-axis of the plot from ´0.022 to 0.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4      K NOWN S- TRANSFORMS

We state some known S-transforms in the following table, where we let α “ q{p. We also assume
that S is normalized such that SSJ » Ip , following LeJeune et al. (2022). For the i.i.d. sketch, this is
simply the S-transform of the Marchenko–Pastur ( distribution, and for the orthogonal sketch, it is the
S-transform of a binary distribution on 0, α1 . The identity sketch refers to simply S “ Ip . There is
                                           ␣
currently no known S-transform for CountSketch, although our experiments in the previous sections
suggest it is similar as for i.i.d. sketches.3

                           Sketching family:     IID     Orthogonal, SRFT        Identity
                                                  α            αp1`wq
                               SSSJ pwq:         α`w            α`w                   1
                                Table 4: Known S-transforms for normalized sketches


B       A SYMPTOTIC EQUIVALENTS FOR FREELY SKETCHED RESOLVENTS
In this section, we provide a brief background on the language of asymptotic equivalents used in the
proofs throughout the paper. We will state the definition of asymptotic equivalents and point to useful
calculus rules. For more details, see Dobriban & Wager (2018); Dobriban & Sheng (2021); LeJeune
et al. (2022).
We use the language of asymptotic equivalents throughout the paper, defined formally as follows.
Definition 12 (Asymptotic equivalence). Consider sequences pAp qpě1 and pBp qpě1 of (random
or deterministic) matrices of growing dimension. We say that Ap and Bp are equivalent and write
Ap » Bp if limpÑ8 |trrCp pAp ´ Bp qs| “ 0 almost surely for any sequence Cp matrices with
bounded trace norm such that lim sup }Cp }tr ă 8 as p Ñ 8.
The notion of deterministic equivalents obeys various calculus rules such as sum, product, differ-
entiation, conditioning, substitution, among others. We refer readers to Patil et al. (2023) for a
comprehensive list of these calculus rules, their proofs, and other related details.

B.1      K NOWN ASYMPTOTIC EQUIVALENTS FOR ORDINARY RIDGE RESOLVENTS

In this section, we collect known asymptotic equivalents for the first- and second-order ordinary ridge
resolvents. See Hastie et al. (2022); Patil et al. (2023) for more details.
Lemma 13 (Deterministic equivalents for first-order and second-order ordinary ridge resolvents).
                                                          1 J
Suppose Assumption B holds. Then, for µ ą ´λ`       min p n X Xq, the following statements hold:

  1. First-order ordinary ridge resolvent:
                                    µpΣp ` µIp q´1 » pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ,                                      (B.1)
                  ´1
        where v        is the most positive solution to
                                           µ “ v ´1 ´ γ p1 trrΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s.                           (B.2)

  2. Second-order ordinary ridge resolvent (population version):
               µ2 pΣ
                   p ` µIp q´1 ΣpΣp ` µIp q´1 » p1 ` vrb qpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ,                   (B.3)
        where v as defined in (B.2), and vrb is defined in terms of v by the equation
                                                γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
                                     vrb “ ´2                               .                            (B.4)
                                            v ´ γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s

  3. Second-order ordinary ridge resolvent (empirical version):
                    p ` µIp q´1 Σp
                   pΣ            p Σp ` µIp q´1 » vrv pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ,                       (B.5)
        where v is as defined in (B.2), and vrv is defined in terms of v by the equation
                                     vrv´1 “ v ´2 ´ γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s.                           (B.6)
    3
    See also the recent work Chenakkod et al. (2023) that show certain Gaussian universality results for sparse
sketches like CountSketch.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2    N EW ASYMPTOTIC EQUIVALENTS FOR FREELY SKETCHED RIDGE RESOLVENTS

In this section, we derive first- and second-order equivalences for (both feature and observation)
sketched resolvents. Their proofs are provided just after the statements.
Lemma 14 (General first order equivalence for freely sketched ridge resolvents). The following
statements hold:

 1. First-order sketched ridge resolvent (for feature sketch): Suppose Assumption A holds for
    SSJ . Then, for all λ ą λ0 ,
                           SpSJ n1 XJ XS ` λIq q´1 SJ » p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 ,                 (B.7)
      where µ solves
                                                                   ˘´1 ‰˘
                           µ “ λSSSJ ´ p1 tr n1 XJ X n1 XJ X ` µIp
                                    `       “       `
                                                                          .                   (B.8)

 2. First-order sketched ridge resolvent (for observation sketch): Suppose Assumption A holds
    for TTJ . Then, for all λ ą λ
                                r0 ,

                       p n1 XJ TTJ X ` λIp q´1 XJ TTJ » XJ p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1 ,               (B.9)
      where ν solves                                                  ˘´1 ‰˘
                         ν “ λSTTJ ´ n1 tr n1 XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                                      `       “       `
                                                                             .           (B.10)
Lemma 15 (General second order equivalence for freely sketched ridge resolvents). Under the
settings of Lemma 14, for any positive semidefinite Ψ with uniformly bounded operator norm, the
following statements hold:

 1. Second-order sketched ridge resolvent (for feature sketch): For all λ ą λ0 ,
                            ˘´1 J                     ˘´1 J
        S SJ n1 XJ XS ` λIq    S ΨS SJ n1 XJ XS ` λIq
         `                          `
                                                         S
                                  `1 J         ˘´1                             ˘´1
                                                   pΨ ` µ1Ψ Ip q n1 XJ X ` µIp
                                                                `
                                » n X X ` µIp                                      , (B.11)
      where µ1Ψ ě 0 is given by:
                                  Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1 J ` 1 J               ˘´1 ‰˘
                       µ1Ψ “ ´         λ SSSJ ´ p tr n X X n X X ` µIp
                                  Bλ
                                                          ˘´2 ‰
                                  ¨ p1 tr Ψ n1 XJ X ` µIp
                                         “ `
                                                                .                           (B.12)

 2. Second-order sketched ridge resolvent (for observation sketch): For all λ ą λ
                                                                                r0 ,

        1   J
              `1 J   J
                              ˘´1 ` 1 J              ˘´1 J
        n TT X n X TT X ` λIp    Ψ n X TTJ X ` λIp       X TTJ
                       `1             ´1 1                              ˘´1
                                                      In q n1 XXJ ` νIn
                                    ˘                     `
                     » n XXJ ` νIn      p n XΨXJ ` νΨ
                                                    1
                                                                            ,               (B.13)
             1
      where νΨ ě 0 is given by:
                               Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1                        ˘´1 ‰˘
                                    λ STTJ ´ n tr n XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                        1
                                                         `
                       νΨ “´
                               Bλ
                                                            ˘´2 ‰
                               ¨ p1 tr n1 XΨXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                                      “       `
                                                                  .                         (B.14)

Proof of Lemma 14. There are two cases two show.

 1. The statement for the feature sketch follows from Theorem 1.
 2. For the statement for the observation sketch, we use the Woodbury matrix identity to write
                p n1 XJ TTJ X ` λIp q´1 XJ TTJ “ XJ Tp n1 TJ XXJ T ` λIm q´1 TJ .
      Now we can use the result from feature sketch with T playing the role of S and XJ playing the
      role of X.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This completes the two cases and finishes the proof.

Proof of Lemma 15. There are again two cases to prove.

 1. We begin with feature sketch. Let Az “ n1 XJ X ` zΨ with corresponding µz from Assump-
    tion A. Following the same strategy as the proof of (LeJeune et al., 2022, Theorem 4.8), the two
    sides of (B.11) are equal to
                           B `                  ˘´1 J        B `              ˘´1
                         ´ S SJ Az S ` λIq         S »´          Az ` µz Ip
                           Bz                               Bz
                              1
    at z “ 0, and therefore µ “ Bµz {Bz at z “ 0. Letting
                                           1
                                              “1 J `1 J                  ˘´1 ‰
                           S 1 “ SSS1
                                      J p´ tr
                                           p    n X X n X X ` µIp             q
      for brevity, and noting that
                                   `           ˘´1     `           ˘´1
                                ´Az Az ` µz Ip     “ µz Az ` µz Ip     ´ 1,
      we differentiate (6) to obtain for z “ 0
                        ´                      ˘´1 ‰                         ˘´2             ‰¯
          µ1 “ λS 1 ¨ µ1 p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp         ´ µ p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp
                               “`                             “`
                                                                                 pΨ ` µ1 Ip q .

      Solving for µ1 , we get
                                                                   ˘´2 ‰
                                   ´λµS 1 p1 tr Ψ n1 XJ X ` µIp
                                               “ `
                 1
               µ “                           ˘´2 ‰                            ˘´1 ‰    .
                   λµS 1 p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp       ´ λS 1 p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp
                              “`                               “`
                                                                                    `1
      Meanwhile, if we take partial derivatives with respect to λ (after dividing by λ on both sides),
          Bµ 1      µ          ´ “`                    ˘´1 ‰                          ˘´2 ‰¯ Bµ
                ´ 2 “ S 1 ¨ p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp              ´ µ p1 tr n1 XJ X ` µIp
                                                                      “`
                                                                                                .
          Bλ λ λ                                                                             Bλ
      Combining these two equations gives the stated result for the feature sketch.
 2. For the observation sketch, we once again use the Woodbury matrix identity to write
             1    J
                      `1 J       J
                                           ˘´1 ` 1 J                ˘´1 J
             n TT X n X TT X ` λIp             Ψ n X TTJ X ` λIp        X TTJ
                                         ˘´1 J                                  ˘´1 J
             “ n1 T n1 TJ XXJ T ` λIm        T XΨXJ T n1 TJ XXJ T ` λIm
                    `                                     `
                                                                                   T .
      The equivalence in (B.13) and the inflation parameter in (B.14) now follow from the second-
      order result for feature sketch by substituting T for S, X for XJ , and n1 XΨXJ for Ψ in
      (B.11).

This finishes the two cases and concludes the proof.

C     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 3
C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Below we first provide the complete statement of Theorem 2, which includes expressions for µ1 and
µ2 that are excluded from the main paper.
Theorem 16 (Squared risk and GCV asymptotics for feature sketch). Suppose Assumption A hold.
Then, for all λ ą λ0 “ ´ lim inf pÑ8 minkPrKs λ`       Jp
                                                 min pSk ΣSk q and all K,
                                    ˘ µ1 ∆                                    2
               R βpλens » R βpµridge `                           p βpridge ` µ ∆ ,
                                                       p βpens » R
                `      ˘   `                             `    ˘    `      ˘
                                                 and   R   λ         µ                           (C.1)
                                       K                                      K
where µ is an implicit regularization parameter that solves (B.8), ∆ “ n1 yJ p n1 XXJ ` µIn q´2 y,
and µ1 ě 0 is an inflation factor in the risk decomposition given by:
            Bµ                                            ˘´1 ‰˘ 1 “ ` 1 J          ˘´2 ‰
    µ1 “ ´ λ2 SSS    1
                         ` 1 “1 J `1 J
                       J  ´ p tr n X X n X X ` µIp               p tr Σ n X X ` µIp      ,  (C.2)
            Bλ

                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


while µ2 ě 0 is an inflation factor in the GCV decomposition given by:
           Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1 J ` 1 J                      ˘´1 ‰˘ 1 “ 1 J ` 1 J          ˘´2 ‰
       ´      λ SSSJ ´ p tr n X X n X X ` µIp                 p tr n X X n X X ` µIp
µ2 “       Bλ                                                                              . (C.3)
                                                                      ˘2
                              1 ´ n1 trr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s
                            `


Proof. The core component of the proof is Lemma 17. We shall break down the proof into two parts:
risk asymptotics and GCV asymptotics. Before proceeding, let us introduce some essential notation
first.
Notation: We decompose the unknown response y0 into its linear predictor and residual. Specifically,
let β0 be the optimal projection parameter given by β0 “ Σ´1 Erx0 y0 s. Then, we can express the
response as a sum of its best linear predictor, xJ β0 , and the residual, y0 ´ xJ
                                                                                0 β0 . Denote the variance
of this residual by σ 2 “ Erpy0 ´ xJ        2
                                      0 β0 q s.


Part 1: Risk asymptotics. It is easy to see that the risk decomposes as follows:
      Rpβpλens q “ E py0 ´ xJ pens 2               k         pens           pens 2
                    “                                  ‰              J
                            0 βλ q | X, y, pSk qk“1 “ pβλ ´ β0 q Σpβλ ´ β0 q ` σ .

Here, we used the fact that py0 ´ xJ                                                    J
                                   0 β0 q is uncorrelated with x0 , that is Erx0 py0 ´ x0 β0 qs “ 0p .
We note that }β0 }2 ă 8 and Σ has uniformly bounded operator norm from Assumption B. Applying
Lemma 17 then yields:
                        Rpβpλens q “ pβpλens ´ β0 qJ Σpβpλens ´ β0 q ` σ 2
                                                                                1
                                                                                µ∆
                                  » pβpµridge ´ β0 qJ Σpβpµridge ´ β0 q ` σ 2 `
                                                                                K
                                                     1
                                                   µ   ∆
                                  “ Rpβpµridge q `       ,
                                                    K
where µ1 is as defined in (C.2). This completes the first part of the proof for the risk asymptotics
decomposition.

Part 2: GCV asymptotics. We will work on the numerator and denominator asymptotics separately,
and combine them to get the final expression for the GCV asymptotics.
Numerator: We start with the numerator. Similar decomposition as the risk yields
              1       pens 2
              n }y ´ Xβλ }2
              “ n1 }Xpβ0 ´ βpλens q ` py ´ Xβ0 q}22
               “ n1 }Xpβ0 ´ βpλens q}22 ` n1 }py ´ Xβ0 q}22 ` n2 py ´ Xβ0 qJ Xpβ0 ´ βpλens q.
From Lemma 14, note that
                    2           J       pens   2           J       pridge q.
                    n py ´ Xβ0 q Xpβ0 ´ βλ q » n py ´ Xβ0 q Xpβ0 ´ βµ

Next we expand
                1         pens 2    pens     J1 J   pens
                n }Xpβ0 ´ βλ q}2 “ pβλ ´ β0 q n X Xpβλ ´ β0 q
                                                                                     µ2num ∆
                                     » pβpµridge ´ β0 qJ n1 XJ Xpβpµridge ´ β0 q `           ,
                                                                                        K
where µ2num is given by:
            Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1 J ` 1 J             ˘´1 ‰˘ 1 “ 1 J ` 1 J          ˘´2 ‰
  µ2num “ ´    λ SSSJ ´ p tr n X X n X X ` µIp        p tr n X X n X X ` µIp      .
            Bλ
Now appealing to Lemma 17, we have
    1       pens 2   pridge ´ β0 qJ 1 XJ Xpβpridge ´ β0 q ` 2 py ´ Xβ0 qJ Xpβ0 ´ βpridge q
    n }y ´ Xβλ }2 » pβµ             n        µ              n                      µ
                                          2
                                         µ     ∆
                    ` n1 }py ´ Xβ0 q}22 ` num .                                          (C.4)
                                                     K


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note also that
            1        pridge }2
            n }y ´ Xβµ       2

            “ n }py ´ Xβ0 q ` Xpβ0 ´ βpµridge q}22
                1


            “ n1 }y ´ Xβ0 }22 ` n2 py ´ Xβ0 qJ Xpβ0 ´ βpµridge q ` n1 }Xpβ0 ´ βpµridge q}22 .    (C.5)
Combining (C.4) and (C.5), we arrive at the following asymptotic decomposition for the numerator:
                                                                   2
                       1         pens 2      1        pridge }2 ` µnum ∆ .
                       n }y ´ Xβλ }2 » n }y ´ Xβµ             2
                                                                     K
                                                                                           (C.6)

Denominator: Next we work on the denominator. For the ensemble smoothing matrix, observe that
                    K
                 1 ÿ 1
       Lens
        λ “              XSk p n1 SJ  J
                                   k X XSk ` λIq q   Sk X » n1 Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 XJ ,
                                                   ´1 J J
                 K k“1 n
where we used Lemma 14 to write the asymptotic equivalence in the last line. Thus, we have
                        trrLens        1 J
                            λ s » trrp n X X ` µIp q
                                                     ´1 1 J          ridge
                                                        n X Xs “ trrLµ     s.                    (C.7)

Therefore, combining (C.6) and (C.7), for the GCV estimator, we obtain
                                         1        pens 2
                            p βpens q “ n }y ´ Xβλ }2
                            Rp  λ             1
                                        p1 ´ n trrLens
                                                   λ sq
                                                        2

                                                                 2
                                            1       pridge }2 ` µnum ∆
                                            n }y ´ Xβµ      2
                                                                   K
                                        »
                                                 p1 ´ n1 trrLens
                                                             λ sq
                                                                 2

                                                                 2
                                            1       pridge }2 ` µnum ∆
                                            n }y ´ Xβµ      2
                                                                   K
                                        »
                                                p1 ´ n1 trrLridge
                                                            µ     sq2
                                          p βpridge q `µ2 ∆
                                        “ Rp  µ             ,
                                                        K
where µ2 is as defined in (C.3). This finishes the second part of the proof for the GCV asymptotics
decomposition and concludes the proof.

H ELPER LEMMA FOR THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Lemma 17 (Quadratic risk decomposition for the ensemble estimator for feature sketch). Assume the
conditions of Lemma 15. Let Ψ be any positive semidefinite matrix with uniformly bounded operator
norm, that is independent of pSk qK               p
                                  k“1 . Let β0 P R be any vector with uniformly bounded Euclidean
                                  K
norm, that is independent of pSk qk“1 . Then, under Assumptions A and B, for λ ą λ0 and all K,
                                                                                     1
                                                                                    µ ∆
             pβpλens ´ β0 qJ Ψpβpλens ´ β0 q » pβpµridge ´ β0 qJ Ψpβpµridge ´ β0 q ` Ψ ,
                                                                                     K
where µ is as defined in (B.8), µ1Ψ is as defied in (B.12), and ∆ is as defined in Theorem 16.

Proof. We start with a decomposition. Observe that
pβpλens ´ β0 qJ Ψpβpλens ´ β0 q
     ˆ ÿ  K             ˙J ˆ ÿ     K        ˙
        1       k               1     k
 “            β ´ β0 Ψ
              p                      β ´ β0
                                     p
       K k“1 λ                  K k“1 λ
          K                   K
     1 ÿ pk J pℓ           2 ÿ J pk
“            p β q Ψ β   ´       β0 Σβλ ` β0 J Σβ0
    K 2 k,ℓ“1 λ        λ
                           K k“1
          K                                                                 K
     1 ÿ pk J pℓ             pridge qJ Ψβpridge ` pβpridge qJ Ψβpridge ´ 2
                                                                           ÿ
“            p β q Ψ β   ´ p β                                                 β0 J Ψβpλk ` β0 J Ψβ0 .
    K 2 k,ℓ“1 λ        λ       µ          µ          µ           µ
                                                                         K k“1


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Lemma 14, note that
                                                 K
                                            1 ÿ pk
                                                 β » βpµridge .
                                            K k“1 λ
                                                                                                  a.s.
Similarly, by two applications of Lemma 14, we know that pβpλk qJ Ψβpλℓ ´ pβpµridge qJ Ψβpµridge ÝÝÑ 0
when k ‰ ℓ since Sk and Sℓ are independent. The remaining K terms where k “ ℓ converge
identically, so
        pβpλens ´ β0 qJ Ψpβpλens ´ β0 q
               ˆ                                                                  ˙
                   ridge        J     ridge          1 ` pJ p     ridge J  ridge
                                                                                 ˘ a.s.
            ´ pβµ p      ´ β0 q Ψpβµp       ´ β0 q `    β Ψβλ ´ pβµ q Ψβµ
                                                                 p        p         ÝÝÑ 0.
                                                     K λ

Thus, it suffices to evaluate the difference βpλJ Ψβpλ ´ pβpµridge qJ Ψβpµridge , which we will do next.
By linearity of the trace, we have
                                                            ”`                        ı
               βpλJ Ψβpλ ´ pβpµridge qJ Ψβpµridge “ n1 tr        X;J  ;    :J  :˘
                                                                  λ ΨXλ ´ Xλ ΨXλ yy
                                                                                    J
                                                                                        ,

where
                                       ˘´1 J J                            ˘´1 J
         X;λ “ ?1n S n1 SJ XJ XS ` λIq    S X and X:λ “ ?1n n1 XJ X ` µIp
                    `                                      `
                                                                             X .
The result now follows by evaluating the second-order asymptotic equivalences from Lemma 15.
This concludes the proof.

C.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

The main ingredient of the proof will be Lemma 18. Comparing the expressions of µ1 and µ2 , it
suffices to show the following equivalence:
                                                1
                                                    “1 J `1 J               ˘´2 ‰
               1
                   “ `1 J           ˘´2 ‰       p tr n X X n X X ` µIp
               p tr Σ n X X ` µIp         »`                                      ‰˘2 .
                                             1 ´ n1 tr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
                                                      “

We show this equivalence in Lemma 18 to finish the proof.
A side remark that is worth stressing about the proof of Theorem 3: The inflation in both the test
error and train errors are such that the same GCV denominator cancels them appropriately! Thus,
while one may expect that the GCV for infinite ensemble may work given the equivalence to the
ridge regression, the fact that GCV works for a single instance of sketch is (even to the authors) quite
remarkable!

H ELPER LEMMA FOR THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 3


Lemma 18 (Equivalence of risk and GCV inflation factors for feature sketch). Under Assumption B,
                                                     p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
 p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 Σp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 »                                                      ‰˘2 . (C.8)
                                                            1 ´ n1 tr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
                                                          `          “


Proof. We will first derive asymptotic equivalents for both the left-hand and right-hand sides of (C.8).
We will then show that the asymptotic equivalents match appropriately.

Asymptotic equivalent for left-hand side. From the second part of Lemma 13, we have
        µ2 p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 Σp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 » p1 ` vrb qpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ,
where the parameter vrb from (B.4) is given by:
                                              γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
                                  vrb “
                                          v ´2 ´ γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s.

                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, note that
                                                          v ´2
                               1 ` vrb “                                    ,
                                           v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
which leads to
                             1 ` vrb   1           v ´2
                                2
                                     “ 2 ´2   1                      .
                               µ      µ v ` γ p trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
Thus, we have that
                  p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 Σp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
                      1                 v ´2
                  »                                       pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 .          (C.9)
                      µ2 v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s

Asymptotic equivalent for right-hand side. From the third part of Lemma 13, we have
      p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 » vrv pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 ,        (C.10)
where the parameter vrv from (B.6) is given by:
                                                          1
                                 vrv “                                      .                  (C.11)
                                         v ´2 ´ γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
From the first of Lemma 13, we have
           1 ´ n1 trr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s “ 1 ´ n1 trrIp ´ µp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s
                                                   “ 1 ´ γ 1 ´ p1 µtrrp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s
                                                           `                               ˘

                                                   » 1 ´ γ 1 ´ p1 trrpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s
                                                           `                       ˘

                                                    “ 1 ´ γ ` γ p1 trrpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s.          (C.12)
Combining (C.10), (C.11), and (C.12), we obtain
                 p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
                                                               ˘2
                        1 ´ n1 trr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s
                      `

                                     1                   pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1
                 »                                   ¨                             ˘ .         (C.13)
                     v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s 1 ´ γ ` γ 1 trrpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s 2
                                                       `
                                                                    p

Matching of asymptotic equivalents. Note from the fixed-point equation (B.2) that
                                  µ “ v ´1 ´ γ p1 trrΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s.
Multiplying by v on both sides yields
                  µv “ 1 ´ γ p1 trrvΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s “ 1 ´ γ ` γ p1 trrpvΣ ` Ip q´1 s.          (C.14)
Thus, combining (C.9), (C.14), and (C.13), we have
  p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 Σp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
      1                 v ´2
  »                                       pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1
      µ2 v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
        1                   1
  “                                          pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1
      pµvq2 v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
                       1                                1
  “                                                                      pvΣ ` Ip q´1 ΣpvΣ ` Ip q´1
      p1 ´ γ ` γ p1 trrpvΣ ` Ip q´1 sq2 v ´2 ` γ p1 trrΣ2 pvΣ ` Ip q´2 s
      p n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1
  »                                                 ˘2 .
             1 ´ n1 trr n1 XJ Xp n1 XJ X ` µIp q´1 s
           `

In the chain above, the first equivalence follows from (C.9), the penultimate equality follows from
(C.14), and the final equivalence follows from (C.13). This finishes the proof.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 4
D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

As mentioned in the main paper, the idea of the proof is to exploit the close connection between
GCV and LOOCV to prove the consistency for general functionals. In particular, we will consider
an intermediate functional, constructed based on LOO-reweighted residuals. We will then connect
the functional constructed based on GCV-reweighted residuals to that based on LOO-reweighted
residuals.

Step 1: LOOCV consistency. Let X´i denote the the feature matrix obtained by removing the i-th
                                                                                             ens
row from X, and y´i is the response vector obtained by removing the i-th entry from y. Let βp´i,λ
denote the LOO ensemble estimator. It is defined using K constituent sketched LOO estimators
  k
βp´i,λ for k P rKs as follows:
                  K
        ens    1 ÿ pk                   k
      βp´i,λ “      β     ,     where βp´i,λ “ n1 Sk p n1 Sk XJ
                                                              ´i X´i Sk ` λIq q
                                                                               ´1 J J
                                                                                 Sk X´i y´i .
               K k“1 ´i,λ

The LOOCV functional is the defined using the predictions of the LOO ensemble estimator as:
                                                n
                                             1 ÿ
                                    Tpλloo “       tpyi , xJ pens
                                                           i β´i,λ q.                             (D.1)
                                             n i“1
                                                                                           a.s.
It follows from the proof of Theorem 3 of Patil et al. (2022) that |Rpβpλens q ´ Tpλloo | ÝÝÑ 0. Next we
                  loo        a.s.
will show that |Tpλ ´ Tpλ | ÝÝÑ 0, where Tpλ is the GCV functional.

Step 2: From LOOCV to GCV consistency. To go from LOOCV to GCV, we first rewrite the LOO
errors. From Woodbury matrix identity, observe that
                                                    yi ´ xJ  pk
                                            pk            i βλ
                                    yi ´ xJ
                                          i β´i,λ “              .
                                                    1 ´ rLkλ sii
This is the so-called exact shortcut for LOO errors for ridge regression, that also works for sketched
ridge regression. In other words, we have
                                                        yi ´ x J  pk
                                       pk                      i βλ
                                    xJ
                                     i β´i,λ “ yi ´             k
                                                                     .
                                                        1 ´ rLλ sii
This implies that
                                                      K           pk
                                   pens            1 ÿ yi ´ xJ i βλ
                                xJ
                                 i β´i,λ “ yi ´                       .
                                                   K k“1 1 ´ rLkλ sii
Thus, we can write the LOO function (D.1) in the shortcut form as follows:
                                       ˜                                ¸
                                   n                  K           J pk
                           loo  1 ÿ                1  ÿ   y i ´ x i β λ
                         Tpλ “        t yi , yi ´                         .
                                n i“1             K k“1 1 ´ rLkλ sii

We will now bound the difference:
        |Tpλloo ´ Tpλ |
                    ˇ ˜                             ¸    ˜                         ¸ˇ
                 n                  K           pk                            pens ˇˇ
              1 ÿ ˇˇ             1 ÿ yi ´ xJ i βλ                    yi ´ x J
                                                                            i βλ
         “          ˇt yi , yi ´                      ´ t yi , yi ´
              n i“1 ˇ            K k“1 1 ´ rLkλ sii                 1 ´ n1 trrLens
                                                                                    ˇ
                                                                               λ s
                                                                                    ˇ
                    ˇ ˜                             ¸    ˜                                ¸ˇ
                 n                  K           pk                      K             pk
              1 ÿ ˇˇ             1 ÿ yi ´ xJ i βλ                   1 ÿ yi ´ x J   i βλ
                                                                                           ˇ
                    ˇt yi , yi ´                      ´ t yi , yi ´                        ˇ.
                                                                                           ˇ
         “                                    k                                  1    ens
              n i“1 ˇ            K k“1 1 ´ rLλ sii                  K k“1 1 ´ n trrLλ s ˇ

The final equality follows from using the definition of the ensemble estimator (2). For notational
simplicity, denote by:


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • rik “ yi ´ xJ pk
                     i βλ for k P rKs and i P rns;
       • dki “ 1 ´ rLkλ sii for k P rKs and i P rns, and d¯ “ 1 ´ n1 trrLens
                                                                         λ s;
                                     k                            k
                          1
                             ř K    ri                   1
                                                           ř K   ri
       • ui “ pyi , yi ´ K     k“1 dk q, vi “ pyi , yi ´ K   k“1 d¯ q.
                                         i


Now, consider the desired difference:
                                    n
                                 1 ÿ
               |Tpλloo ´ Tpλ | “       |tpui q ´ tpvi q|
                                 n i“1
                                        n
                                  1 ÿ
                                ď       Lp1 ` }ui }2 ` }vi }2 qp}ui ´ vi }2 q
                                  n i“1
                                                                ˇ                    ˙ˇˇ
                                     n                              K      ˆ
                                  1 ÿ                           ˇ1 ÿ          1    1
                                        Lp1 ` }ui }2 ` }vi }2 q ˇ      rik       ´ ¯ ˇ.             (D.2)
                                                                ˇ                      ˇ
                                “                                              k
                                  n i“1                         ˇK
                                                                   k“1
                                                                              di   d ˇ
Above, we used Assumption C in the inequality. Using Hölder’s inequality, we can bound
                   ˇ                    ˙ˇˇ
                   ˇ1 ÿK     ˆ                    K                 ˇ         ˇ
                           k    1     1        1 ÿ k                ˇ1     1 ˇˇ
                          ri                         |r | ¨ max
                   ˇ                      ˇ
                                   ´ ¯ ˇď                           ˇ  ´ ¯ˇ
                   ˇK          dki    d ˇ K k“1 i 1ďkďK ˇ dki
                   ˇ
                      k“1
                                                                           d
                                                                  ˇ        ˇ
                                                1                 ˇ  1   1ˇ
                                            ď ? }ri }2 ¨ max ˇˇ k ´ ¯ˇˇ ,                           (D.3)
                                                K         1ďkďK di       d
where we?denote by ri “ pri1 , . . . , riK q for i P rns. In the second inequality, we used the fact that
}ri }1 ď K}ri }2 . Combining (D.2) with (D.3) yields
                       n "                                          ¯*"         ˇ          ˇ*
          loo       1 ÿ                                  ´
                                                            1
                                                                                ˇ1      1 ˇˇ
       |Tλ ´ Tλ | ď
        p     p            Lp1 ` }ui }2 ` }vi }2 q ?K }ri }2              max   ˇ    ´ ¯ˇ
                    n i“1                                                1ďkďK ˇ dk
                                                                                  i     d
                     " ÿ  n                                          *"               ˇ           ˇ*
                       1                                ´
                                                           1
                                                                   ¯                  ˇ1       1 ˇˇ
                  ďL          p1 ` }ui }2 ` }vi }2 q ?K }ri }2           max max      ˇ      ´ ¯ˇ .
                       n i“1                                            1ďiďn 1ďkďK ˇ dk       d
                                                                                         i
Further denote by:
       • u “ p}u1 }2 , . . . , }un }2 q;
       • v “ p}v1 }2 , . . . , }vn }2 q;
       • r “ ?1K p}r1 }2 , . . . , }rn }2 q;
                                  ¯ for i P rns, and δ “ pδ1 , . . . , δn q.
       • δi “ max1ďkďK |1{dki ´ 1{d|
Continuing from above, using the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality on the first term and triangle inequality,
we obtain                          ˆ                 ˙
                   loo                  }u}2    }v}2      }r}2
                |Tλ ´ Tλ | ď L ¨ 1 ` ? ` ?
                 p       p                             ¨ ? ¨ }δ}8 ď C}δ}8 .
                                           n       n        n

From a short calculations, it follows that ?1n }u}2 , ?1n }v}2 , ?1n }r}2 are all eventually almost surely
                                                   a.s.
bounded. We will next show that }δ}8 ÝÝÑ 0.
Sup-norm concentration: We will show that
                           ˇ                                       ˇ
                           ˇ1 ÿ K
                                        1               1          ˇ
                                                                   ˇ a.s.
                      max ˇ                                          ÝÝÑ 0.
                           ˇ
                                           ks
                                                ´     1     ens s ˇˇ
                     1ďiďn ˇ K     1 ´ trrL  ii   1 ´   trrL
                               k“1         λ          n     λ

From Lemma 14, observe that
            K                                  K
         1 ÿ        1                   1 ÿ                            1
                                    “
             K k“1 1 ´ rLkλ sii         K k“1 1 ´ r n1 XSk p n1 SJ
                                                                 k X J XS ` λI q´1 SJ XJ s
                                                                         k    q     k     ii
                                               K
                                        1 ÿ         1              1
                                    »                ridge
                                                           “                 .
                                        K k“1 1 ´ rLµ sii    1 ´ rLridge
                                                                    µ    sii


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, using Lemma 14 again, we also have
                  1                    1
                            “
           1 ´ n1 trrLens         1 1
                                      řK
                      λ   s   1 ´ n K k“1 trrLkλ s
                                                                   1
                             “              řK
                                 1 ´ n1 K
                                        1            1       1 J J
                                             k“1 trr n XSk p n Sk X XSk ` λIq q
                                                                               ´1 SJ XJ s
                                                                                   k
                                             1                             1
                             »              řK                 “                        .
                                 1 ´ n1 K
                                        1            ridge
                                             k“1 trrLµ     s       1 ´ n1 trrLridge
                                                                              µ     s
Thus, we have the desired difference to be
         ˇ                                      ˇ         ˇ                                ˇ
         ˇ1 ÿ K
                       1                 1      ˇ         ˇ       1               1        ˇ
   max ˇ                                             max                                   ˇ.
         ˇ                                      ˇ         ˇ                                ˇ
                          k
                               ´       1    ens
                                                  »                ridge
                                                                         ´           ridge
  1ďiďn ˇ K                                                                    1
                                                ˇ         ˇ
            k“1
                 1 ´ trrLλ sii    1 ´ n trrLλ s ˇ   1ďiďn ˇ 1 ´ rLµ sii    1 ´ n trrLµ s ˇ
From the proof of Theorem 3 of Patil et al. (2022), the right-hand side of the display above almost
surely vanishes. This completes the proof.

D.2    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 5

This is a simple consequence of Theorem 4 using the definition of convergence in Wasserstein W2
metric. See, e.g., Chapter 6 of Villani (2008).

E     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 5

P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6

We begin by noting that when λ “ 0, it suffices to prove the result for i.i.d. Gaussian sketches only.
Consider first any sketch S “ UDVJ where U is a uniformly distributed unitary matrix and D is
invertible. Then
                                  p ´1 SJ “ U UJ ΣU      p ´1 UJ ,
                              `       ˘             `        ˘
                             S SJ ΣS
and so the result does not depend on D and V, and we can choose them to have the same distribution
as in i.i.d. Gaussian sketching. For general free sketching, S may not have U uniformly distributed in
finite dimensions, but the subordination relations in Theorem 1 depend only on the spectrum of SSJ ,
so we can without loss of generality assume that U are uniformly distributed and obtain the exact
same equivalence relationship.
The subordination relation
                                 µ » λSSSJ ´ p1 tr Σ  p ` µIp ´1
                                          `       “ `        ˘ ‰˘
                                                   p Σ

for µ ą 0 and λ “ 0 requires that the the S-transform must go to 8. From Table 4, we know
                                                       α
                                        SSSJ pwq “
                                                     α`w
for i.i.d. sketching, which means that we must send the denominator to 0. Thus we obtain the
condition
                                           ” `         ˘ ı
                                  α “ p1 tr Σ
                                            p Σp ` µIp ´1 .

By letting K Ñ 8, the variance term vanishes, and only the bias term remains, proving the result.

F     P ROOFS IN S ECTION 6

F.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 7

We provide below the complete statement of Proposition 7, which includes expressions for ν 1 and ν 2 .
These are excluded from the main paper.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 19 (Squared risk and GCV asymptotics and GCV inconsistency for observation sketch).
Suppose Assumption A holds for TTJ , and that the operator norm of Σ and second moment of y0
are uniformly bounded in p. Then, for λ ą λ
                                          r0 and any K,

                                    ˘ ν1∆                                       2r
                                                                   r βrridge ` ν ∆ ,
                                        r
               R βrλens » R βrνridge `                   r βrens » R
                `      ˘   `                               `    ˘    `      ˘
                                                  and    R   λ         ν                                 (F.1)
                                       K                                        K
where ν is an implicit regularization parameter that solves (B.10), ∆r “ 1 yJ p 1 XXJ ` νIn q´2 y,
                                                                         n      n
     1
and ν ě 0 is an inflation factor in the risk decomposition given by:
  ν1 “
     Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1                      ˘´1 ‰˘ 1 “ 1                    ˘´2 ‰
        λ STTJ ´ n tr n XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn          tr n XΣXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                           `                               `
  ´                                             p                              , (F.2)
     Bλ
while ν 2 ě 0 is an inflation the GCV decomposition given by:
 ν2 “
   Bµ                                     ˘´1 ‰˘ 1 “ 1                             ˘´2 ‰
 ´ λ2 STT
            ` 1 “1
             ´ n tr n XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn             tr n Xp n1 XJ XqXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
       1
                         `                                           `
          J
   Bλ                                            p
                                                           ˘2                            .
                          1 ´ n1 XXJ p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                        `

                                                                                     (F.3)
                                                                               r βrens q ­» Rpβrens q.
Furthermore, under Assumption B, in general we have ν 1 ­» ν 2 , and therefore Rp  λ            λ


Proof. The proof for the decomposition in (F.1) is similar to the proof of Theorem 16. Our main
workforce will be Lemma 20.
Notation: We will use the same strategy and notation as in the proof of Theorem 16. We will
decompose the unknown response y0 into the linear predictor corresponding to best linear projection
parameter and the residual. Let β0 denote the best projection parameter: β0 “ Σ´1 Erx0 y0 s. We
decompose the response into the best linear predictor xJ β0 and the residual error y0 ´ xJ0 β0 . We
will denote by σ 2 “ Erpy0 ´ xJ     2
                              0 β0 q s.


Part 1: Risk asymptotics. As done in the proof of Theorem 16, we have
                                                                                                 ν1∆
                                                                                                   r
     Rpβrλens q “ pβrλens ´ β0 qJ Σpβrλens ´ β0 q ` σ 2 » pβrµridge ´ β0 qJ Σpβrµridge q ` σ 2 `     ,
                                                                                                  K
where ν 1 is as defined in (F.2). In the second step, we now instead used Lemma 20 to obtain the
desired equivalence. This completes the proof for the risk asymptotics decomposition.

Part 2: GCV asymptotics. We will obtain asymptotic equivalents for the numerator and denominator
of GCV separately below.
Numerator: Similar to the proof of Theorem 16, we first decompose
    1       rens 2  1         rens 2 1               2   2           J       rens
    n }y ´ Xβλ }2 “ n }Xpβ0 ´ βλ q}2 ` n }py ´ Xβ0 q}2 ` n py ´ Xβ0 q Xpβ0 ´ βλ q.

An application of Lemma 14 yields
                  2           J       rens   2           J       rridge q.
                  n py ´ Xβ0 q Xpβ0 ´ βλ q » n py ´ Xβ0 q Xpβ0 ´ βµ

Notice that
              1         rens 2    rens     J1 J   rens
              n }Xpβ0 ´ βλ q}2 “ pβλ ´ β0 q n X Xpβλ ´ β0 q
                                                                                 ν2 ∆r
                                    » pβrµridge ´ β0 qJ n1 XJ Xpβrµridge ´ β0 q ` num ,
                                                                                   K
       2
where νnum is expressed as:
                               Bµ 2 1 ` 1 “ 1                      ˘´1 ‰˘
                                  λ STTJ ´ n tr n XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                    2
                                                     `
                   νnum “´                                                .
                               Bλ

                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using Lemma 17, we get
    1       rens 2   rridge ´ β0 qJ 1 XJ Xpβrridge ´ β0 q ` 2 py ´ Xβ0 qJ Xpβ0 ´ βrridge q
    n }y ´ Xβλ }2 » pβµ             n        µ              n                      µ
                                                    2
                                                   νnum ∆
                                                        r
                        ` n1 }py ´ Xβ0 q}22 `             .                                     (F.4)
                                                      K
On the other hand, we also have
           1
            n}y ´ Xβrridge }2
                       µ     2

            “ n1 }py ´ Xβ0 q ` Xpβ0 ´ βpµridge q}22
            “ n1 }y ´ Xβ0 }22 ` n2 py ´ Xβ0 qJ Xpβ0 ´ βrµridge q ` n1 }Xpβ0 ´ βrµridge q}22 .   (F.5)
Combining (F.4) and (F.5), we deduce that
                                                                2
                                                   rridge }2 ` νnum ∆ .
                                                                    r
                           1       rens 2  1
                           n }y ´ Xβλ }2 » n }y ´ Xβµ      2
                                                                  K
                                                                                                (F.6)

Denominator: We will now derive an asymptotic equivalent for the GCV denominator. By repeated
applications of the Woodbury matrix identity along with the first-order equivalence for observation
sketch from Lemma 14, we get
                                 K
                      r ens “ 1
                                ÿ
                                    1
                      L λ             Xp 1 XJ Tk TJ
                                                  k X ` λIp q
                                                             ´1 J
                                                               X Tk TJ
                                                                     k
                              K k“1 n n
                                    K
                                 1 ÿ 1
                            “            XXJ Tk p n1 TJ   J
                                                      k XX Tk ` λIm q
                                                                     ´1 J
                                                                       Tk
                                 K k“1 n
                            » n1 XXJ p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                            “ n1 Xp n1 XJ X ` νIp q´1 XJ .
In the chain above, we used the Woodbury matrix identity for equality in the second and forth lines,
and Lemma 14 for the equivalence in the third line. Hence, we get
     r ens s » trr 1 Xp 1 XJ X ` νIp q´1 XJ s “ trrp 1 XJ X ` νIp q´1 1 XJ Xs “ trrL
  trrL                                                                             r ridge s. (F.7)
       λ           n    n                            n                n              ν
Therefore, combining (F.6) and (F.7), for the GCV estimator, we obtain
                                               1         rens 2
                                r βrens q “    n }y ´ Xβλ }2
                                Rp  λ
                                                         r ens sq2
                                              p1 ´ n1 trrL λ
                                                                   2
                                                      rridge }2 ` νnum ∆
                                                                       r
                                              1
                                              n }y ´ Xβµ      2
                                                                     K
                                         »
                                                               r ens sq2
                                                    p1 ´ n1 trrL λ
                                                                    2
                                                       rridge }2 ` νnum ∆
                                                                        r
                                              1
                                              n }y ´ X β µ     2
                                         »                            K
                                                           r ridge sq2
                                                p1 ´ n1 trrL ν
                                                           2r
                                          r βrridge q ` ν ∆ ,
                                       “ Rp    µ
                                                          K
       2
where ν is as defined in (F.3). This finishes the proof of the GCV asymptotics decomposition.

Part 3: GCV inconsistency. The inconsistency follows from the asymptotic mismatch of ν 1 and ν 2 .
To show the mismatch, it suffices to show that
                                                1
                                                    “1     1 J        J 1
                                                                       `     J
                                                                                     ˘´2 ‰
        1
            “1     J 1
                     `        J
                                       ˘´2 ‰    p tr n Xp n X XqX        n XX ` νIn
        p tr n XΣX     n XX ` νIn            ­»                                     ˘2     .
                                                      1 ´ n1 XXJ p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                                                    `

This is shown in Lemma 21.
This concludes all the three parts and finishes the proof.


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H ELPER LEMMAS FOR THE PROOF OF P ROPOSITION 7



Lemma 20 (Quadratic risk decomposition for the ensemble estimator for observation sketch). Assume
the conditions of Lemma 15. Let Ψ be any positive semidefinite matrix with uniformly bounded
operator norm, that is independent of pTk qK               p
                                           k“1 . Let β0 P R be any vector with uniformly bounded
                                              K
Euclidean norm, that is independent of pTk qk“1 . Consider the ensemble estimator obtained with
observation sketch as defined in (13). Then, under Assumptions A and B, for λ ą λ
                                                                                r0 and all K,

                                                                                        1 r
                                                                                       νΨ ∆
             pβrλens ´ β0 qJ Ψpβrλens ´ β0 q » pβrνridge ´ β0 qJ Ψpβrνridge ´ β0 q `        ,
                                                                                        K
                                  1
where ν is as defined in (B.10), νΨ is as defined in (B.14), ∆
                                                             r is as defined in Proposition 19.



Proof. The proof follows analogously to the proof of Lemma 17, except now we use the first- and
second-order equivalences from Lemmas 14 and 15 for observation sketch (instead of feature sketch).
We omit the details.


Lemma 21 (Asymptotic non-equivalence of risk and GCV inflation factors for observation sketch).
Under Assumption B,

                    1      1              ´1 1
                                             p n XΣXJ qp n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                       “         J
                                                                              ‰
                    n tr p n XX ` νIn q
                        1      1              ´1 1     p J qp 1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                             “     J
                                                                              ‰
                        n tr p n XX ` νIn q      p n XΣX      n
                    ­»                                                          .                 (F.8)
                                       1 ´ n1 trrΣp  p ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                     `                            ˘
                                                 p Σ



Proof. We will first derive asymptotic equivalents for both the left- and right-hand sides of (F.8).
Then we will show that the difference in their asymptotic equivalents is non-zero.

Asymptotic equivalent for left-hand side. Using Woodbury matrix identity, we can write

                    tr p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1 p n1 XΣXJ qp n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                      “                                                 ‰

                     “ trrpΣ p ` νIp q´1 Σp
                                         p Σp ` νIp q´1 Σs
                          p ` νIp q´1 ΣpIp ´ νpΣ
                    “ trrpΣ                     p ` νIp q´1 qs
                          p ` νIp q´1 Σs ´ νtrrpΣ
                    “ trrpΣ                     p ` νIp q´1 ΣpΣp ` νIp q´1 s.


Asymptotic equivalent for right-hand side. Similarly, the numerator of GCV can be expressed as

                    tr p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1 p n1 XΣX
                                                p J qp 1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                      “                                                ‰
                                                        n
                     “ trrpΣ p ` νIp q´1 Σp
                                         p Σp ` νIp q´1 Σs
                                                        p
                          p ` νIp q´1 Σs
                    “ trrpΣ                    p ` νIp q´1 Σp
                                      p ´ νtrrpΣ           p Σp ` νIp q´1 s.


From Lemma 18, we have that

                                                      p ` νIp q´1 Σp p ` νIp q´1 s
                                p ` νIp q´1 s » νtrrpΣ            p Σ
                  p ` νIp q´1 ΣpΣ
             νtrrpΣ                                                                .
                                                    1 ´ 1 trrΣp p ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                                  `                          ˘
                                                             p Σ
                                                              n


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mismatching of asymptotic equivalents. Observe that
               1
                   “ 1                   ´1 1
                                            p n XΣXJ qp n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                             J
                                                                             ‰
               n tr p n XX ` νIn q
                   1
                     tr p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1 p n1 XΣX  p J qp 1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                       “                                                         ‰
               ´ n                                            n
                                      1 ´ n1 trrΣp p ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                    `                             ˘
                                                p Σ
                                                    1                ´1 p
                          p ` νIp q´1 Σs ´ ` n trrpΣ ` νIp q Σs ˘
                                                           p
               » n1 trrpΣ
                                                 1 ´ n1 trrΣp
                                                            p Σp ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                                               1               ´1 p
                                  1                            n trrpΣ ` νIp q   Σs
                                                                     p
               »         1
                                                  ´ 1  ´                            ˘2
                                                                 1
                                                          `
                   1 ´ n trrΣpΣ ` νIp q s
                               p   p          ´1
                                                            1 ´ n trrΣpΣ ` νIp q´1 s
                                                                     p  p
                      ˜                                    ¸2
                                 1      p ` νIp q´1 Σs
                                   trrp Σ            p
               “´ 1´ n 1                                       .
                              1 ´ trrpΣ
                                   n
                                          p ` νIp q´1 Σsp

The last line is in general not equal to 0, proving the desired asymptotic mismatch. This finishes the
proof.

F.2   C ORRECTION USING ENSEMBLE TRICK FOR GCV WITH OBSERVATION SKETCH

Below we outline a method that corrects GCV for the sketched ensemble estimator with observation
sketch. The idea of the method is to estimate the error term in the mismatch in Lemma 21 using
a combination of the ensemble trick and our second-order sketched equivalences. The correction
takes a complicated form involving both the unsketched and sketched data. We are not aware of any
method that uses only sketched data.

 1. Estimate ν from the data and sketch using the subordination relation (B.10).
 2. Estimate the following two quantities that appear in the inflation of the GCV decomposition:
                                              1
                                                   “ 1                  ´1 1    p J qp 1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                                                           J
                                                                                                       ‰
         1  J  1      J      ´2               n tr  p n XX   `   νI n q   p n X ΣX     n
    ∆
    r “ y p XX `νIn q y and C1 “                                                                         .
         n     n
                                                               1 ´ n1 trrΣp   p ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                                             `                             ˘
                                                                          p Σ

 3. Use ensemble trick as explained in Section 5 on Rp              r βrridge q ` ν 2 ∆
                                                       r βrens q “ Rp
                                                                                   K with K “ 1 and
                                                                                      r
                                                            λ           ν
                       r βrridge q first and then estimate the following component:
    K “ 2 to estimate Rp   ν

                      r “ ´ Bν λ2 S 1 J ´ 1 tr 1 XXJ 1 XXJ ` νIn ´1 C1 ∆.
                                       `      “     `           ˘ ‰˘
                C “ ν2∆            TT     n     n     n
                                                                       r
                            Bλ

 4. Eliminate ∆
              r from C to get an estimate for the following component:

                                Bν 2 1 ` 1 “ 1                      ˘´1 ‰˘
                                   λ STTJ ´ n tr n XXJ n1 XXJ ` νIn
                                                      `
                       C2 “ ´                                              .
                                Bλ
 5. Then use the following equivalence to estimate:
                   C11 “ n1 tr p n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1 p n1 XΣXJ qp n1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                              “                                                  ‰

                          1
                              “ 1                 ´1 1     p J qp 1 XXJ ` νIn q´1
                                       J
                                                                                  ‰
                          n tr p n XX ` νIn q        p n XΣX      n
                       »
                                           1 ´ n1 trrΣp  p ` νIp q´1 s 2
                                         `                            ˘
                                                     p Σ
                               ˜                                  ¸2
                                         1                ´1 p
                                         n trrpΣ ` νIp q    Σs
                                               p
                            ´ 1´                                      .
                                      1 ´ 1 trrpΣ
                                            n
                                                  p ` νIp q´1 Σs
                                                               p

 6. Finally, obtain the corrected estimate for risk using the GCV asymptotics decomposition from
    Proposition 19:
                                                            1 r
                                         r βrridge q ` C2 C1 ∆ .
                                         Rp   ν
                                                           K

                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3   A NISOTROPIC SKETCHING AND GENERALIZED RIDGE REGRESSION

Using structural equivalences to anisotropic sketching matrices and generalized ridge regression,
one can extend our results to anisotropic sketching and generalized ridge regression. Specifically,
let R P Rpˆp be an invertible positive semidefinite matrix with bounded operator norm. Consider
                                                                   r k “ R1{2 Sk for k P rKs:
generalized ridge regression with a anisotropic sketching matrices S

                                                                  r k β ›2 ` λ›G1{2 β ›2 ,
                                                            ›           ›     ›       ›
             βpλk “ S
                    r k βpSr k ,   where βpλSk “ arg min n1 ›y ´ XS
                                            r
                          λ                                              2             2
                                                                                                 (F.9)
                                                    βPRq


where G P Rpˆp is a positive definite matrix with bounded operator norm. Let βpλens be the ensemble
estimator defined analogously as in (2) and GCV defined analogously as in (5). Using Corollary 7.1
of LeJeune et al. (2022), all of our results carry in this case in a straightforward manner.


G     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

All experiments were run in less than 1 hour on a Macbook Air (M1, 2020) and coded in Python
using standard scientific computing packages. CountSketch (Charikar et al., 2004) is implemented
by generating a sparse matrix corresponding to the hash function, and due to rounding of the
size parameters to match theoretical rates, we cannot choose arbitrary sketch sizes and are often
restricted to non-standard sequences. Instead of the SRHT, which requires an implementation of
the fast Walsh–Hadamard transform not readily available and platform-independent in Python (and
also suffers statistically from zero-padding issues as described by LeJeune et al., 2022), we use a
subsampled randomized discrete cosine transform (SRDCT), which is fast, widely available, and does
not suffer the statistical drawbacks. All sketches are normalized such that SSJ » Ip and therefore
1    J   2    1     2
p }S x}2 » p }x}2 .


G.1   GCV PATHS IN F IGURE 1

For this experiment, over 100 trials, we sampled X with each row x „ N p0, Ip q and generated
y “ xJ β ` ξ for β „ N p0, p1 Ip q and independent noise ξ „ N p0, 1q. We have n “ 500 and
p “ 600, and our sketching ensembles have K “ 5. For the left plot, we fix q “ 441, which is an
allowed sketch size for CountSketch. For the right plot, we fix λ “ 0.2 and sweep through the choices
of q which are allowed by CountSketch, which are q P t63, 126, 189, 252, 315, 378, 441, 504, 567u.

G.2   R EAL DATA IN F IGURE 2

For both real data datasets, we fit our sketched ridge regressors on centered sketched data and
responses and then added the mean of the training responses to any outputs. For both datasets, we
sketched using CountSketch, which is among the most computationally efficient sketches, especially
for sparse data as in RCV1. We plot risk on a symlog scale of λ with linear region from ´10 to 10.
For RCV1 (Lewis et al., 2004), we downloaded the data from scikit-learn (Buitinck et al.,
2013). We discarded all labels except for GCAT and CCAT and then discarded all examples that
did not uniquely fall into one of these categories. These became our binary class labels. We then
randomly subsampled 20000 training points and 5000 test points, and discarded any features that took
value 0 for all train and test points. This left 30617 features,
                                                        ?        and we used q “ 515 for CountSketch.
We normalized each data vector x such that }x}2 “ p, preserving sparsity. We then fit ensembles
of size K “ 5, reporting error over 10 random trials.
For RNA-Seq (Weinstein et al., 2013), we downloaded the data from the UCI Machine Learning repos-
itory (Dua & Graff, 2017) at: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/gene+expression+cancer+RNA-
Seq. We discarded all examples that were labeled neither BRCA nor KIRC, the most common classes,
leaving 446 observations, which were split into a training set of 356 and test set of 90. We then
z-scored each of the 20223 features using the training data statistics. We fit ensembles of size K “ 5,
reporting error over 10 random trials.


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3    P REDICTION INTERVALS IN F IGURE 3

For this experiment, we use SRDCT sketches. For each choice of
                        q P t80, 180, 280, 380, 480, 580, 680, 780, 880, 980u ,
we generated data over 30 trials in similar manner to the experiment in Figure 1: for n “ 1500
and p “ 1000 we sampled X with each row x „ N p0, Ip q, but we generated y “ gpxJ βq for
β „ N p0, p1 Ip q and g the soft-thresholding operator:
                                          $
                                          &u ´ 1 if u ą 1
                                  gpuq “ 0          if ´ 1 ď u ď 1 .
                                          %
                                            u ` 1 if u ă ´1
We compute the 95% and 99% prediction intervals by identifying the 2.5% and 0.1% tail intervals of
the GCV corrected residuals py ´ zq : py, zq „ Ppλens and evaluate coverage on 1500 test residuals
y0 ´ xJ   pens                               ens
                                                 (empirical using test points) and Ppλens (using training
       0 βλ . We plot 2D histograms of Pλ
points) on a logarithmic color scale.

G.4    D ETAILS FOR F IGURE 4

For this experiment, we use SRDCT sketches. For n “ 600 and p “ 800, for each trial, we generate
Gaussian data with Σ “ diagpaq, where ai “ 2{p1 ` 30ti q, where ti are p linearly spaced values
                                                        1
from 0 to 1. We generate y “ xJ β ` ξ for β1:80 „ N p0, 80 I80 q and β81: “ 0 and ξ „ N p0, 4q.
We evaluate the mapping from µ ÞÑ λ for feature sketching by inverting the subordination relation
                       µ “ λSSSJ ´ 1 tr SJ ΣS           p ` λIq ´1
                                   `       “        `             ˘ ‰˘
                                                p SJ ΣS
                                            p
for a single random generation of data and sketch. For observation sketching, we do the same but use
the relation                                                               ˘´1 ‰˘
                   µ “ λSSSJ ´ n1 tr n1 XJ TTJ X n1 XJ TTJ X ` λIp
                                `       “             `
                                                                                  .
We evaluate the mapping from µ ÞÑ α using the same method as in feature sketching, except we take
q as 20 values logarithmically spaced between 1 and 800, rounded down to the nearest integer. For
computing the curves where we vary α, we pre-sketch using q “ p and then subsample and normalize
to obtain the sketched data for each desired q.

G.5    V ERIFICATION OF CONVERGENCE RATE FOR SKETCHED ENSEMBLES

We demonstrate that both GCV and risk for sketched ensembles converge at rate 1{K to the equivalent
ridge for sketched ensembles in Figure G.1. For n “ 140 and p “ 200, for a single trial, we generate
Gaussian data with Σ “ Ip and y “ xJ β ` ξ for β „ N p0, p1 Ip q and ξ „ N p0, 1q. We fit 1000
sketched predictors for λ “ 0.1 for each sketch using q “ 156, and then successively build ensembles
of size K by taking the first K predictors. We then subtract the risk of the unsketched predictor at
the equivalent µ, determined numerically to be 0.283 for Gaussian sketching, 0.157 for orthogonal
sketching, 0.281 for CountSketch, and 0.157 for SRDCT.

H     C OMPLEXITY COMPARISONS
If the sketch size is sufficiently small, the ensemble trick in (11) can be more computationally
efficient than computing GCV directly on the unsketched data or using k-fold CV. Memory savings
are straightforward, as we only need to work with the n ˆ q (feature sketching) or m ˆ p (observation
sketching) data matrix, so we focus here on computation time complexity. For concreteness, we
consider dense X. With additional care this could be extended to sparse X and XS, although
computation time improvements are harder to obtain with sketching when comparing to iterative
solvers on very sparse data.
Letting Xr P Rnr ˆpr denote the unsketched, sketched, or k-fold training data depending on context,
and similarly y
              r and λ,r the computations are dominated by computing the following two quantities:
                                                               ” `                         ı
                        r pr ´1 1 X                                            r pr ´1 1 X
           `1 J
                                     r and n1r trrLr λ s “ 1 tr Xr 1X
                            ˘                                                      ˘
      βr “ nr Xr X r ` λI         r Jy                                r JXr ` λI         rJ .
                                n
                                r                          n
                                                           r        n
                                                                    r                  n
                                                                                       r



                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          b β
                    GCV: |R( bens ) − R(
                                      b βbµ
                                          ridge
                                                )|                         bens ) − R(β
                                                                  Risk: |R(β          bµridge
                                                                                              )|
                              λ                                              λ
         0
    10

  10−1

  10−2
                    Gaussian
       −3           Orthogonal
  10
                    CountSketch
  10−4              SRDCT
                    1/K
  10−5
              100         101           102          103   100          101           102           103
                                  K                                             K

Figure G.1: Both GCV and risk converge at rate 1{K to the equivalent ridge for sketched ensembles. See
Appendix G.5 for the setup details.


For the ensemble trick, we must know which value of µ corresponds to the value of λ we use, but this
can be computed using the subordination relation in Theorem 1 and n1r trrLr λ s. In high dimensions,
this trace is well approximated (Hutchinson, 1989) by:
                            1           1 J 1 rJ r     r ´1 1 X
                                           `              ˘
                                                                r J Xz,
                            r trrLλ s « n
                                        rz   r X X ` λIpr
                                 r                                  r
                            n                n                n
                                                              r

where z P Rpˆr pr
                                                            r ă pr, we could use z P Rnr ). Thus, the
                  has i.i.d. Rademacher (˘1) entries (or if n
computations are dominated by solving linear system with the matrix n1r X
                                                                        r J X` r pr (or 1 X
                                                                            r λI          r rJ r r
                                                                                        r X ` λIn
                                                                                        n
if dimensions are preferable). We now specialize to a couple of different solvers that could be used
to solve these systems, assuming that the cost of sketching is amortized or otherwise negligible
compared to solving. In what follows, when we use big O notation, we mean that the rates scale with
universal constants independent of n
                                   r, pr, n, p, m, q, λ.

H.1          D IRECT SOLVER

A direct exact solve of this system has cost Oprnpr min tr
                                                         n, pruq. For unsketched GCV (rn “ n, pr “ p),
we must solve two of these systems, one for the parameter estimator and the other for the randomized
trace, giving a total cost of Op2np min tn, puq. For unsketched k-fold CV, there is only the cost of
computing the parameter estimator on the n  r “ k´1k n data points of dimension p r “ p, which is then
evaluated on the left-out fold, which  is
                                    ␣ k´1 comparatively
                                              (         inexpensive. Since this must be done k times,
the total cost is Oppk ´ 1qnp min k n, p q. For the ensemble trick, we must evaluate GCV on
two separate parameter estimators (r n “ m, pr “ q), for a total cost of Op4mq min tm, quq.

H.2          I TERATIVE SOLVER

An approximate solution is generally acceptable for a risk estimate. Thus, a direct solve is often unnec-
essary, and an iterative solver such as a Krylov subspace method can offer considerablea  computational
gains. In particular, instead of a cost of Opr           n, pruq, the cost becomes Opr
                                                npr min tr                            npr κ rλr log 1ε q to
reach an ϵ-accurate solution, where κ  rλ is the condition number of X  r JXr ` λI
                                                                                r pr.
We can update the computations for the dense solve accordingly, except that for each case (unsketched
GCV, unsketched k-fold CV, ensemble trick) the matrix will have a different condition number, which
we denote as κµ , κµ,k , and κλ,m,q , respectively.

H.3          C OMPARING COMPLEXITIES

We list the computational complexities of the various methods for both direct and iterative solvers.
For the direct solver, the ensemble trick is always beneficial over unsketched GCV as long as q ă p{2
(for feature sketching) or m ă n{2 (for observation sketching), regardless of the relative sizes of n


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Method (regime)      Unsketched GCV            Unsketched k-fold CV                  Ensemble trick
                                             Oppk ´ 1qnp min k´1
                                                             ␣         (
   Direct solver     Op2np min tn, puq                          k  n, p q          Op4mq min tm, quq
                           ?                              ?                            ?
  Iterative solver   Op2np κµ log 1ϵ q        Oppk ´ 1qnp κµ,k log 1ϵ q           Op4mq κµ,m,q log 1ϵ q
                 Table 5: Complexity comparison for risk estimation in ridge regression.


and p. If we also
               ? know that p ă n, then the ensemble trick with feature sketching is beneficial
                                                                                         ?       as
long as q ă p{ 2, and an analogous result holds for observation sketching if m ă n{ 2. If one
were to sketch both observations and features by a factor of α, it suffices to use α ă 2´1{3 « 0.78.
Meanwhile, k-fold CV is never competitive for k “ 5 or 10.
For the iterative solver, in order to compare the complexity, we need to know how the condition
numbers change with sketching, which is not obvious. We can gain some insight, however, by
considering very small sketches. As we observed in Appendix A.3.2, all sketch types seem to have
similar subordination relations for small sketches, so we can specialize to Gaussian sketches for
simplicity. As the sketch size decreases, all eigenvalues of SJ ΣS
                                                                p concentrate around a single value,
                                                Jp
in the extreme limit of q “ 1 converging to s Σs « trrΣs. This means that the condition number
                                                           p
of SJ ΣS
       p ` λIq tends toward 1 as sketches get smaller, meaning that sketching better conditions
the system such that κµ,m,q ď κµ . We then again have the same conclusion as in the direct solver
case, that as long as m ă n{2 or q ă p{2, then using the ensemble trick is beneficial over unsketched
GCV. And similarly, k-fold CV is not competitive.


                                                   36
