Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I DENTIFIABLE L ATENT P OLYNOMIAL C AUSAL M OD -
ELS THROUGH THE L ENS OF C HANGE

 Yuhang Liu1 , Zhen Zhang1 , Dong Gong2 , Mingming Gong3,6 , Biwei Huang4
 Anton van den Hengel1 , Kun Zhang5,6 , Javen Qinfeng Shi1
 1
   Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia
 2
   School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
 3
   School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Australia
 4
   Halicioğlu Data Science Institute (HDSI), University of California San Diego, USA
 5
   Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
 6
   Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
 yuhang.liu01@adelaide.edu.au



                                             A BSTRACT

         Causal representation learning aims to unveil latent high-level causal representa-
         tions from observed low-level data. One of its primary tasks is to provide reliable
         assurance of identifying these latent causal models, known as identifiability. A
         recent breakthrough explores identifiability by leveraging the change of causal in-
         fluences among latent causal variables across multiple environments (Liu et al.,
         2022). However, this progress rests on the assumption that the causal relation-
         ships among latent causal variables adhere strictly to linear Gaussian models. In
         this paper, we extend the scope of latent causal models to involve nonlinear causal
         relationships, represented by polynomial models, and general noise distributions
         conforming to the exponential family. Additionally, we investigate the necessity
         of imposing changes on all causal parameters and present partial identifiability
         results when part of them remains unchanged. Further, we propose a novel empir-
         ical estimation method, grounded in our theoretical finding, that enables learning
         consistent latent causal representations. Our experimental results, obtained from
         both synthetic and real-world data, validate our theoretical contributions concern-
         ing identifiability and consistency.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Causal representation learning, aiming to discover high-level latent causal variables and causal struc-
tures among them from unstructured observed data, provides a prospective way to compensate for
drawbacks in traditional machine learning paradigms, e.g., the most fundamental limitations that
data, driving and promoting the machine learning methods, needs to be independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) (Schölkopf, 2015). From the perspective of causal representations, the changes
in data distribution, arising from various real-world data collection pipelines (Karahan et al., 2016;
Frumkin, 2016; Pearl et al., 2016; Chandrasekaran et al., 2021), can be attributed to the changes of
causal influences among causal variables (Schölkopf et al., 2021). These changes are observable
across a multitude of fields. For instance, these could appear in the analysis of imaging data of
cells, where the contexts involve batches of cells exposed to various small-molecule compounds.
In this context, each latent variable represents the concentration level of a group of proteins (Chan-
drasekaran et al., 2021). An inherent challenge with small molecules is their variability in mecha-
nisms of action, which can lead to differences in selectivity (Forbes & Krueger, 2019). In addition,
the causal influences of a particular medical treatment on a patient outcome may vary depending on
the patient profiles (Pearl et al., 2016). Moreover, causal influences from pollution to health out-
comes, such as respiratory illnesses, can vary across different rural environments (Frumkin, 2016).
Despite the above desirable advantages, the fundamental theories underpinning causal representation
learning, the issue of identifiability (i.e., uniqueness) of causal representations, remain a significant
challenge. One key factor leading to non-identifiability results is that the causal influences among


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


latent space could be assimilated by the causal influences from latent space to observed space, result-
ing in multiple feasible solutions (Liu et al., 2022; Adams et al., 2021). To illustrate this, consider
two latent causal variables case, and suppose that ground truth is depicted in Figure 1 (a). The causal
influence from the latent causal variable z1 to z2 in Figure 1 (a) could be assimilated by the causal
influence from z to x, resulting in the non-identifiability result, as depicted in Figure 1 (b). Efforts
to address the transitivity to achieve the identifiability for causal representation learning primarily
fall into two categories: 1) enforcing special graph structures (Silva et al., 2006; Cai et al., 2019; Xie
et al., 2020; 2022; Adams et al., 2021; Lachapelle et al., 2021), and 2) utilizing the change of causal
influences among latent causal variables (Liu et al., 2022; Brehmer et al., 2022; Ahuja et al., 2023;
Seigal et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023). The first approach usually requires
special graph structures, i.e., there are two pure child nodes at least for each latent causal variable,
as depicted in Figure 1 (c). These pure child nodes essentially prevent the transitivity problem, by
the fact that if there is an alternative solution to generate the same observational data, the pure child
would not be ’pure’ anymore. For example, if the edge from z1 to z2 in Figure 1 (c) is replaced
by two new edges (one from z1 to x2 , the other from z1 to x3 ), x2 and x3 are not ’pure’ child of
z2 anymore. For more details please refer to recent works in Xie et al. (2020; 2022); Huang et al.
(2022). However, many causal graphs in reality may be more or less arbitrary, beyond the special
graph structures. The second research approach permits any graph structures by utilizing the change
of causal influences, as demonstrated in Figure 1 (d). To characterize the change, a surrogate vari-
able u is introduced into the causal system. Essentially, the success of this approach lies in that
the change of causal influences in latent space can not be ‘absorbed’ by the unchanged mapping
from latent space to observed space across u (Liu et al., 2022), effectively preventing the transitivity
problem. Some methods within this research line require paired interventional data (Brehmer et al.,
2022), which may be restricted in some applications such as biology (Stark et al., 2020). Some
works require hard interventions or more restricted single-node hard interventions (Ahuja et al.,
2023; Seigal et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023), which could only model specific
types of changes. By contrast, the work presented in Liu et al. (2022) studies unpaired data, and
employs soft interventions to model a broader range of possible changes, which could be easier to
achieve for latent variables than hard interventions.
The work in Liu et al. (2022) compresses the solution space of latent causal variables up to identifi-
able solutions, particularly from the perspective of observed data. This process leverages nonlinear
identifiability results from nonlinear ICA (Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020; Sorren-
son et al., 2020). Most importantly, it relies on some strong assumptions, including 1) causal rela-
tions among latent causal variables to be linear Gaussian models, and 2) requiring ℓ + (ℓ(ℓ + 1))/2
environments where ℓ is the number of latent causal variables. By contrast, this work is driven by the
realization that we can narrow the solution space of latent causal variables from the perspective of
latent noise variables, with the identifiability results from nonlinear ICA. This perspective enables
us to more effectively utilize model assumptions among latent causal variables, leading to two sig-
nificant generalizations: 1) Causal relations among latent causal variables can be generalized to be
polynomial models with exponential family noise, and 2) The requisite number of environments can
be relaxed to 2ℓ + 1 environments, a much more practical number. These two advancements narrow
the gap between fundamental theory and practice. Besides, we deeply investigate the assumption
of requiring all coefficients within polynomial models to change. We show complete identifiability
results if all coefficients change across environments, and partial identifiability results if only part
of the coefficients change. The partial identifiability result implies that the whole latent space can
be theoretically divided into two subspaces, one relates to invariant latent variables, while the other
involves variant variables. This may be potentially valuable for applications that focus on learning
invariant latent variables to adapt to varying environments, such as domain adaptation or generaliza-
tion. To verify our findings, we design a novel method to learn polynomial causal representations in
the contexts of Gaussian and non-Gaussian noises. Experiments verify our identifiability results and
the efficacy of the proposed approach on synthetic data, image data Ke et al. (2021), and fMRI data.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Due to the challenges of identifiability in causal representation learning, early works focus on learn-
ing causal representations in a supervised setting where prior knowledge of the structure of the causal
graph of latent variables may be required (Kocaoglu et al., 2018), or additional labels are required to
supervise the learning of latent variables (Yang et al., 2021). However, obtaining prior knowledge of


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) Ground Truth        (b) Possible Solution       (c) Special Structure     (d) Change by u

Figure 1: Assume that ground truth is depicted in Figure 1 (a). Due to the transitivity, the graph structure
in Figure 1 (b) is an alternative solution for (a), leading to the non-identifiability result. Figure 1 (c) depicts
a special structure where two ’pure’ child nodes appear. Figure 1 (d) demonstrates the change of the causal
influences, characterized by the introduced surrogate variable u.

the structure of the latent causal graph is non-trivial in practice, and manual labeling can be costly
and error-prone. Some works consider temporal constraint that the effect cannot precede the cause
has been used repeatedly in latent causal representation learning (Yao et al., 2021; Lippe et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2022), while this work aims to learn instantaneous causal relations among latent variables.
Besides, there are two primary approaches to address the transitivity problem, including imposing
special graph structures and using the change of causal influences.
Special graph structures Special graphical structure constraints have been introduced in recent
progress in identifiability (Silva et al., 2006; Shimizu et al., 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2013; Frot
et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; 2022; Lachapelle et al., 2021). One of representative
graph structures is that there are 2 pure children for each latent causal variables (Xie et al., 2020;
2022; Huang et al., 2022). These special graph structures are highly related to sparsity, which
implies that a sparser model that fits the observation is preferred (Adams et al., 2021). However,
many latent causal graphs in reality may be more or less arbitrary, beyond a purely sparse graph
structure. Differing from special graph structures, this work does not restrict graph structures among
latent causal variables, by exploring the change of causal influence among latent causal variables.
The change of causal influence Very recently, there have been some works exploring the change
of causal influence (Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Brehmer et al., 2022; Ahuja et al.,
2023; Seigal et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023). Roughly speaking, these changes
of causal influences could be categorized as hard interventions or soft interventions. Most of them
consider hard intervention or more restricted single-node hard interventions (Ahuja et al., 2023;
Seigal et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023), which can only capture some special
changes of causal influences. In contrast, soft interventions could model more possible types of
change (Liu et al., 2022; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021), which could be easier to achieve in latent
space. Differing from the work in Von Kügelgen et al. (2021) that identifies two coarse-grained
latent subspaces, e.g., style and content, the work in Liu et al. (2022) aims to identify fine-grained
latent variables. In this work, we generalize the identifiability results in Liu et al. (2022), and relax
the requirement of the number of environments. Moreover, we discuss the necessity of requiring all
causal influences to change, and partial identifiability results when part of causal influences changes.


3    I DENTIFIABLE C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS WITH VARYING P OLYNOMIAL
     C AUSAL M ODELS

In this section, we show that by leveraging changes, latent causal representations are identifiable (in-
cluding both latent causal variables and the causal model), for general nonlinear models and noise
distributions are sampled from two-parameter exponential family members. Specifically, we start by
introducing our defined varying latent polynomial causal models in Section 3.1, aiming to facilitate
comprehension of the problem setting and highlight our contributions. Following this, in Section
3.2, we present our identifiability results under the varying latent polynomial causal model. This
constitutes a substantial extension beyond previous findings within the domain of varying linear
Gaussian models (Liu et al., 2022). Furthermore, we delve into a thorough discussion about the
necessity of requiring changes in all causal influences among the latent causal variables. We, addi-
tionally, show partial identifiability results in cases where only a subset of causal influences changes
in Section 3.3, further solidifying our identifiability findings.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1     VARYING L ATENT P OLYNOMIAL C AUSAL M ODELS

We explore causal generative models where the observed data x is generated by the latent causal
variables z ∈ Rℓ , allowing for any potential graph structures among z. In addition, there exist latent
noise variables n ∈ Rℓ , known as exogenous variables in causal systems, corresponding to latent
causal variables. We introduce a surrogate variable u characterizing the changes in the distribution
of n, as well as the causal influences among latent causal variables z. Here u could be environment,
domain, or time index. More specifically, we parameterize the causal generative models by assuming
n follows an exponential family given u, and assuming z and x are generated as follows:
                                            Y      1         X
                          p(T,η) (n|u) :=               exp[   (Ti,j (ni )ηi,j (u))],                      (1)
                                             i
                                                 Zi (u)      j

                                     zi := gi (pai , u) + ni ,                                             (2)
                                     x := f (z) + ε,                                                       (3)
with
                                  gi (z, u) = λTi (u)[z, z⊗z,
                                                          ¯ ..., z⊗...
                                                                  ¯ ⊗z],
                                                                       ¯                                   (4)
where

         • in Eq. 1, Zi (u) denotes the normalizing constant, and Ti,j (ni ) denotes the sufficient statis-
           tic for ni , whose the natural parameter ηi,j (u) depends on u. Here we focus on two-
           parameter (e.g., j ∈ {1, 2}) exponential family members, which include not only Gaussian,
           but also inverse Gaussian, Gamma, inverse Gamma, and beta distributions.
         • In Eq. 2, pai denotes the set of parents of zi .
         • In Eq. 3, f denotes a nonlinear mapping, and ε is independent noise with probability density
           function pε (ε).
         • In Eq. 4, where λi (u) = [λ1,i (u), λ2,i (u), ...)], ⊗¯ represents the Kronecker product with
           all distinct entries, e.g., for 2-dimension case, z1 ⊗z2 = [z12 , z22 , z1 z2 ]. Here λi (u) adheres
                                                                ¯
           to common Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) constraints.

The models defined above represent polynomial models and two-parameter exponential family dis-
tributions, which include not only Gaussian, but also inverse Gaussian, Gamma, inverse Gamma,
and beta distributions. Clearly, the linear Gaussian models proposed in Liu et al. (2022) can be
seen as a special case in this broader framework. The proposed latent causal models, as defined in
Eqs. 1 - 4, have the capacity to capture a wide range of change of causal influences among latent
causal variables, including a diverse set of nonlinear functions and two-parameter exponential fam-
ily noises. This expansion in scope serves to significantly bridge the divide between foundational
theory and practical applications.

3.2     C OMPLETE I DENTIFYABILITY R ESULT

The crux of our identifiability analysis lies in leveraging the changes in causal influences among
latent causal variables, orchestrated by u. Unlike many prior studies that constrain the changes
within the specific context of hard interventions (Brehmer et al., 2022; Ahuja et al., 2023; Seigal
et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023), our approach welcomes and encourages
changes. Indeed, our approach allows a wider range of potential changes which can be interpreted
as soft interventions (via the causal generative model defined in Eqs. 1- 4).

Theorem 3.1 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the causal gen-
erative models defined in Eq. 1 - Eq. 4. Assume the following holds:

       (i) The set {x ∈ X |φε (x) = 0} has measure zero where φε is the characteristic function of
           the density pε ,
       (ii) The function f in Eq. 3 is bijective,


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (iii) There exist 2ℓ + 1 values of u, i.e., u0 , u1 , ..., u2ℓ , such that the matrix
                          L = (η(u = u1 ) − η(u = u0 ), ..., η(u = u2ℓ ) − η(u = u0 ))                  (5)
           of size 2ℓ × 2ℓ is invertible. Here η(u) = [ηi,j (u)]i,j ,
      (iv) The function class of λi,j can be expressed by a Taylor series: for each λi,j , λi,j (u = 0) =
           0,

then the true latent causal variables z are related to the estimated latent causal variables ẑ, which
are learned by matching the true marginal data distribution p(x|u), by the following relationship:
z = Pẑ + c, where P denotes the permutation matrix with scaling, c denotes a constant vector.

Proof sketch First, we demonstrate that given the DAG (Directed Acyclic Graphs) constraint and
the assumption of additive noise in latent causal models as in Eq. 4, the identifiability result in
Sorrenson et al. (2020) holds. Specifically, it allows us to identify the latent noise variables n up
to scaling and permutation, e.g., n = Pn̂ + c where n̂ denotes the recovered latent noise variables
obtained by matching the true marginal data distribution. Building upon this result, we then lever-
age polynomial property that the composition of polynomials is a polynomial, and additive noise
assumption defined in Eq. 2, to show that the latent causal variables z can also be identified up to
polynomial transformation, i.e., z = Poly(ẑ) + c where Poly denotes a polynomial function. Fi-
nally, using the change of causal influences among z, the polynomial transformation can be further
reduced to permutation and scaling, i.e., z = Pẑ + c. Detailed proof can be found in A.2.
Our model assumptions among latent causal variables is a typical additive noise model as in Eq. 4.
Given this, the identifiability of latent causal variables implies that the causal graph is also identified.
This arises from the fact that additive noise models are identifiable (Hoyer et al., 2008; Peters et al.,
2014), regardless of the scaling on z. In addition, the proposed identifiability result in Theorem 3.1
represents a more generalized form of the previous result in Liu et al. (2022). When the polyno-
mial model’s degree is set to 1 and the noise is sampled from Gaussian distribution, the proposed
identifiability result in Theorem 3.1 converges to the earlier finding in Liu et al. (2022). Notably,
the proposed identifiability result requires only 2ℓ + 1 environments, while the result in Liu et al.
(2022) needs the number of environments depending on the graph structure among latent causal
variables. In the worst case, e.g., a full-connected causal graph over latent causal variables, i.e.,
ℓ + (ℓ(ℓ + 1))/2.

3.3     C OMPLETE AND PARTIAL C HANGE OF C AUSAL I NFLUENCES

The aforementioned theoretical result necessitates that all coefficients undergo changes across vari-
ous environments, as defined in Eq. 4. However, in practical applications, the assumption may not
hold true. Consequently, two fundamental questions naturally arise: is the assumption necessary
for identifiability, in the absence of any supplementary assumptions? Alternatively, can we obtain
partial identifiability results if only part of the coefficients changes across environments? In this
section, we provide answers to these two questions.

Corollary 3.2 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the causal
generative models defined in Eq. 1 - Eq. 4. Under the condition that the assumptions (i)-(iii) in
Theorem 3.1 are satisfied, if there is an unchanged coefficient in Eq. 4 across environments, z is
unidentifiable, without additional assumptions.

Proof sketch The proof of the above corollary can be done by investigating whether we can always
construct an alternative solution, different from z, to generate the same observation x, if there is an
unchanged coefficient across u. The construction can be done by the following: assume that there
is an unchanged coefficient in polynomial for zi , we can always construct an alternative solution z′
by removing the term involving the unchanged coefficient in polynomial gi , while keeping the other
unchanged, i.e., zj′ = zj for all j ̸= i. Details can be found in A.3.

Insights 1) This corollary implies the necessity of requiring all coefficients to change to obtain
the complete identifyability result, without introducing additional assumptions. We acknowledge
the possibility of mitigating this requirement by imposing specific graph structures, which is beyond


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the scope of this work. However, it is interesting to explore the connection between the change of
causal influences and special graph structures for the identifiability of causal representations in the
future. 2) In addition, this necessity may depend on specific model assumptions. For instance, if we
use MLPs to model the causal relations of latent causal variables, it may be not necessary to require
all weights in the MLPs to change.
Requiring all coefficients to change might be challenging in real applications. In fact, when part of
the coefficients change, we can still provide partial identifiability results, as outlined below:

Corollary 3.3 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the causal
generative models defined in Eq. 1 - Eq. 4. Under the condition that the assumptions (i)-(iii) in
Theorem 3.1 are satisfied, for each zi ,

     (a) if it is a root node or all coefficients in the corresponding polynomial gi change in Eq. 4,
         then the true zi is related to the recovered one ẑj , obtained by matching the true marginal
         data distribution p(x|u), by the following relationship: zi = sẑj + c, where s denotes
         scaling, c denotes a constant,
     (b) if there exists an unchanged coefficient in polynomial gi in Eq. 4, then zi is unidentifiable.

Proof sketch This can be proved by the fact that regardless of the change of the coefficients, two
results hold, i.e., z = Poly(ẑ) + c, and n = Pn̂ + c. Then using the change of all coefficients in
the corresponding polynomial gi , we can prove (a). For (b), similar to the proof of corollary 3.2,
we can construct a possible solution zi′ for zi by removing the term corresponding to the unchanged
coefficient, resulting in an unidentifiable result.

Insights 1) The aforementioned partial identifiability result implies that the entire latent space
can theoretically be partitioned into two distinct subspaces: one subspace pertains to invariant la-
tent variables, while the other encompasses variant variables. This may be potentially valuable
for applications that focus on learning invariant latent variables to adapt to varying environments,
such as domain adaptation (or generalization) (Liu et al., 2024). 2) In cases where there exists
an unchanged coefficient in the corresponding polynomial gi , although zi is not entirely identifi-
able, we may still ascertain a portion of zi . To illustrate this point, for simplicity, assume that
z2 = 3z1 + λ1,2 (u)z12 + n2 . Our result (b) shows that z2 is unidentifiable due to the constant
coefficient 3 on the right side of the equation. However, the component λ1,2 (u)z12 + n2 may still
be identifiable. While we refrain from presenting a formal proof for this insight in this context, we
can provide some elucidation. If we consider z2 as a composite of two variables, za = 3z1 and
zb = λ1,2 (u)z12 + n2 , according to our finding (a), zb may be identified.

4   L EARNING P OLYNOMIAL C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we translate our theoretical findings into a novel algorithm. Following the work
in Liu et al. (2022), due to permutation indeterminacy in latent space, we can naturally enforce a
causal order z1 ≻ z2 ≻ ..., ≻ zℓ to impose each variable to learn the corresponding latent variables
in the correct causal order. As a result, for the Gaussian noise, in which the conditional distribu-
tions p(zi |pai ), where pai denote the parent nodes of zi , can be expressed as an analytic form, we
formulate the prior distribution as conditional Gaussian distributions. Differing from the Gaussian
noise, non-Gaussian noise does not have an analytically tractable solution, in general. Given this,
we model the prior distribution of p(z|u) by p(λ, n|u). As a result, we arrive at:
                              ℓ                     ℓ
                   
                   p(z |u) Q                         N (µzi (u), δz2i (u)), if n ∼ Gaussian
                                                   Q
                        1        p(zi |z<i , u) =
       p(z|u) =              i=2                  i=1                                              (6)
                    Qℓ Q                        Qℓ
                         i=1   j=1 p(λ  j,i |u)   i=1 p(n i |u),             if n ∼ non-Gaussian

where N (µzi (u), δz2i (u)) denotes the Gaussian probability density function with mean µzi (u) and
variance δz2i (u). Note that non-Gaussian noises typically tend to result in high-variance gradients.
They often require distribution-specific variance reduction techniques to be practical, which is be-
yond the scope of this paper. Instead, we straightforwardly use the PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017)


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


implementation of the method of Jankowiak & Obermeyer (2018), which computes implicit repa-
rameterization using a closed-form approximation of the probability density function derivative. In
our implementation, we found that the implicit reparameterization leads to high-variance gradients
for inverse Gaussian and inverse Gamma distributions. Therefore, we present the results of Gamma,
and beta distributions in experiments.

Prior on coefficients p(λj,i ) We enforce two constraints on the coefficients, DAG constraint and
sparsity. The DAG constraint is to ensure a directed acyclic graph estimation. Current methods
usually employ a relaxed DAG constraint proposed by Zheng et al. (2018) to estimate causal graphs,
which may result in a cyclic graph estimation due to the inappropriate setting of the regularization
hyperparameter. Following the work in Liu et al. (2022), we can naturally ensure a directed acyclic
graph estimation by enforcing the coefficients matrix λ(u)T to be a lower triangular matrix cor-
responding to a fully-connected graph structure, due to permutation property in latent space. In
addition, to prune the fully connected graph structure to select true parent nodes, we enforce a spar-
sity constraint on each λj,i (u). In our implementation, we simply impose a Laplace distribution on
each λj,i (u), other distributions may also be flexible, e.g, horseshoe prior (Carvalho et al., 2009) or
Gaussian prior with zero mean and variance sampled from a uniform prior (Liu et al., 2019).

Variational Posterior We employ variational posterior to approximate the true intractable poste-
rior of p(z|x, u). The nature of the proposed prior in Eq. 6 gives rise to the posterior:
                     (              Qℓ
                        q(z1 |u, x) i=2 q(zi |z<i , u, x),               if n ∼ Gaussian
         q(z|u, x) =     Qℓ Q                          Qℓ                                    (7)
                            i=1    j=1 q(λj,i |x, u)    i=1 q(ni |u, x), if n ∼ non-Gaussian

where variational posteriors q(zi |z<i , u, x), q(λj,i ) and q(ni |u) employ the same distribution as
their priors, so that an analytic form of Kullback–Leibler divergence between the variational poste-
rior and the prior can be provided. As a result, we can arrive at a simple objective:
    max Eq(z|x,u)q(λ|x,u) (p(x|z, u)) − DKL (q(z|x, u)||p(z|u)) − DKL (q(λ|x, u)||p(λ|u)),          (8)
where DKL denotes the KL divergence. Implementation details can be found in Appendix A.6.

5    E XPERIMENTS
Synthetic Data We first conduct experiments on synthetic data, generated by the following pro-
cess: we divide latent noise variables into M segments, where each segment corresponds to one
value of u as the segment label. Within each segment, the location and scale parameters are respec-
tively sampled from uniform priors. After generating latent noise variables, we randomly generate
coefficients for polynomial models, and finally obtain the observed data samples by an invertible
nonlinear mapping on the polynomial models. More details can be found in Appendix A.5.
We compare the proposed method with vanilla VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013), β-VAE (Higgins
et al., 2017), identifiable VAE (iVAE) (Khemakhem et al., 2020). Among them, iVAE is able to iden-
tify the true independent noise variables up to permutation and scaling, with certain assumptions.
β-VAE has been widely used in various disentanglement tasks, motivated by enforcing independence
among the recovered variables, but it has no theoretical support. Note that both methods assume that
the latent variables are independent, and thus they cannot model the relationships among latent vari-
ables. All these methods are implemented in three different settings corresponding to linear models
with Beta distributions, linear models with Gamma noise, and polynomial models with Gaussian
noise, respectively. To make a fair comparison, for non-Gaussian noise, all these methods use the
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) implementation of the method of Jankowiak & Obermeyer (2018)
to compute implicit reparameterization. We compute the mean of the Pearson correlation coeffi-
cient (MPC) to evaluate the performance of our proposed method. Further, we report the structural
Hamming distance (SHD) of the recovered latent causal graphs by the proposed method.
Figure 2 shows the performances of different methods on different models, in the setting where all
coefficients change across u. According to MPC, the proposed method with different model assump-
tions obtains satisfactory performance, which verifies the proposed identifiability results. Further,
Figure 3 shows the performances of the proposed method when part of coefficients change across
u, for which we can see that unchanged weight leads to non-identifiability results, and changing


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1.0                                                       1.0                                                        1.0                                                        7       LinearBeta
                                                                                                                                                                                              LinearGamma
      0.9                                                       0.9                                                        0.9                                                        6       PolyGaussian
                                                                                                                                                                                      5
      0.8                                                       0.8                                                        0.8                                                        4
MPC


                                                          MPC


                                                                                                                     MPC


                                                                                                                                                                                SHD
      0.7                                                       0.7                                                        0.7                                                        3
                                                 iVAE                      iVAE                                                      iVAE
                                                                                                                                                                                      2
      0.6                                        VAE            0.6        VAE                                             0.6       VAE                                              1
                                                   -VAE                      -VAE                                                      -VAE
                                                 Ours                      Ours                                                      Ours                                             0
      0.5                                                       0.5                                                        0.5
            2             3            4            5                  2           3            4            5                   2           3            4            5                  2           3             4            5
                  Number of Latent Causal Variables                        Number of Latent Causal Variables                         Number of Latent Causal Variables                        Numbers of Latent Causal Variables


                LinearBeta                                            LinearGamma                                                PolyGaussian                                                                SHD
Figure 2: Performances of different methods on linear models with Beta noise, linear models with Gamma
noise, and polynomial models with Gaussian noises. In terms of MPC, the proposed method performs better
than others, which verifies the proposed identifiablity results. The right subfigure shows the SHD obtained by
the proposed method in different model assumptions.

                  0.9                                                                     0.9                                                                  0.95
                  0.8                                                                     0.8                                                                  0.90
                  0.7                                                                     0.7
                  0.6                                                                                                                                          0.85
            MPC


                                                                                    MPC


                                                                                                                                                         MPC
                                                                                          0.6
                  0.5                                                                                                                                          0.80
                                                                                          0.5
                  0.4
                                                                                          0.4                                                                  0.75
                  0.3
                                                                                          0.3
                            z1          z2         z3             z4                              z1          z2         z3                   z4                           z1          z2         z3               z4
                                   Latent Causal Variables                                               Latent Causal Variables                                                  Latent Causal Variables

                           z1 → z2                                                                      z2 → z3                                                                           z3 → z4
Figure 3: Performances of the proposed method with the change of part of weights, on linear models with
Beta noise. The ground truth of the causal graph is z1 → z2 → z3 → z4 . From left to right: keeping weight
on z1 → z2 , z2 → z3 , and z3 → z4 unchanged. Those results are consistent with the analysis of partial
identifiability results in corollary 3.3.

weights contribute to the identifiability of the corresponding nodes. These empirical results are
consistent with partial identifiability results in corollary 3.3.
Image Data We further verify the proposed identifiability results and method on images from the
chemistry dataset proposed in Ke et al. (2021), which corresponds to chemical reactions where the
state of an element can cause changes to another variable’s state. The images consist of a number
of objects whose positions are kept fixed, while the colors (states) of the objects change according
to the causal graph. To meet our assumptions, we use a weight-variant linear causal model with
Gamma noise to generate latent variables corresponding to the colors. The ground truth of the
latent causal graph is that the ’diamond’ (e.g., z1 ) causes the ‘triangle’ (e.g., z2 ), and the ‘triangle’
causes the ’square’ (e.g., z3 ). A visualization of the observational images can be found in Figure 4.
Figure 5 shows the MPC obtained by different methods. The proposed method performs better than
others. The proposed method also learns the correct causal graph as verified by intervention results
in Figure 6, i.e., 1) intervention on z1 (’diamond’) causes the change of both z2 (‘triangle’) and z3
(’square’), 2) intervention on z2 only causes the change of z3 , 3) intervention on z3 can not affect
both z1 and z2 . These results are consistent with the correct causal graph, i.e., z1 → z2 → z3 . Due
to limited space, more traversal results on the learned latent variables by the other methods can be
found in Appendix A.7. For these methods, since there is no identifiability guarantee, we found that
traversing on each learned variable leads to the colors of all objects changing.


Figure 4: Samples from the image dataset generated by modifying the chemistry dataset in Ke et al. (2021).
The colors (states) of the objects change according to the causal graph: the ’diamond’ causes the ‘triangle’, and
the ‘triangle’ causes the ’square’, i.e., z1 → z2 → z3 .


                                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       iVAE                              β-VAE                      VAE                   Ours
Figure 5: MPC obtained by different methods on the image dataset, the proposed method performs better than
others, supported by our identifiability.


                             Intervention on z1                Intervention on z2         Intervention on z3
Figure 6: Intervention results obtained by the proposed method on the image data. From left to right: inter-
ventions on the learned z1 , z2 , z3 , respectively. The vertical axis denotes different samples, The horizontal axis
denotes enforcing different values on the learned causal representation.

fMRI Data Following Liu et al. (2022), we further apply the proposed method to fMRI hippocam-
pus dataset (Laumann & Poldrack, 2015), which contains signals from six separate brain regions:
perirhinal cortex (PRC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC), entorhinal cortex (ERC), subiculum (Sub),
CA1, and CA3/Dentate Gyrus (DG). These signals were recorded during resting states over a span
of 84 consecutive days from the same individual. Each day’s data is considered a distinct instance,
resulting in an 84-dimensional vector represented as u. Given our primary interest in uncovering
latent causal variables, we treat the six signals as latent causal variables. To transform them into ob-
served data, we subject them to a random nonlinear mapping. Subsequently, we apply our proposed
method to the transformed observed data. We then apply the proposed method to the transformed
observed data to recover the latent causal variables. Figure 7 shows the results obtained by the
proposed method with different model assumptions. We can see that the polynomial models with
Gaussian noise perform better than others, and the result obtained by linear models with Gaussian
noise is suboptimal. This also may imply that 1) Gaussian distribution is more reasonable to model
the noise in this data, 2) linear relations among these signals may be more dominant than nonlinear.
          0.95

          0.90
    MPC


          0.85

          0.80
                 LinGamma LinBeta LinGau   PolyGau
                               Models


                       MPC                           LinBeta        LinGamma          LinGaussian       PolyGaussian

Figure 7: MPC obtained by the proposed method with different noise assumptions. Blue edges are feasible
given anatomical connectivity, red edges are not, and green edges are reversed.

6            C ONCLUSION

Identifying latent causal representations is known to be generally impossible without certain as-
sumptions. This work generalizes the previous linear Gaussian models to polynomial models with
two-parameter exponential family members, including Gaussian, inverse Gaussian, Gamma, inverse
Gamma, and Beta distribution. We further discuss the necessity of requiring all coefficients in poly-
nomial models to change to obtain complete identifiability result, and analyze partial identifiability
results in the setting where only part of the coefficients change. We then propose a novel method to
learn polynomial causal representations with Gaussian or non-Gaussian noise. Experimental results
on synthetic and real data demonstrate our findings and consistent results. Identifying causal rep-
resentations by exploring the change of causal influences is still an open research line. In addition,
even with the identifiability guarantees, it is still challenging to learn causal graphs in latent space.


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their help in improving the paper. YH was
partially supported by Centre for Augmented Reasoning. DG was partially supported by an ARC
DECRA Fellowship DE230101591. MG was supported by ARC DE210101624. KZ would like to
acknowledge the support from NSF Grant 2229881, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under
Contract R01HL159805, and grants from Apple Inc., KDDI Research Inc., Quris AI, and Infinite
Brain Technology.

R EFERENCES
Jeffrey Adams, Niels Hansen, and Kun Zhang. Identification of partially observed linear causal
   models: Graphical conditions for the non-gaussian and heterogeneous cases. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional causal representa-
  tion learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 372–407. PMLR, 2023.
Animashree Anandkumar, Daniel Hsu, Adel Javanmard, and Sham Kakade.                Learning linear
  bayesian networks with latent variables. In ICML, pp. 249–257, 2013.
Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco Cohen. Weakly supervised causal represen-
  tation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16437, 2022.
Simon Buchholz, Goutham Rajendran, Elan Rosenfeld, Bryon Aragam, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Pradeep Ravikumar. Learning linear causal representations from interventions under general non-
  linear mixing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02235, 2023.
Ruichu Cai, Feng Xie, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Triad constraints for learning
  causal structure of latent variables. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Carlos M Carvalho, Nicholas G Polson, and James G Scott. Handling sparsity via the horseshoe. In
  Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 73–80. PMLR, 2009.
Srinivas Niranj Chandrasekaran, Hugo Ceulemans, Justin D Boyd, and Anne E Carpenter. Image-
  based profiling for drug discovery: due for a machine-learning upgrade? Nature Reviews Drug
  Discovery, 20(2):145–159, 2021.
Miriam K Forbes and Robert F Krueger. The great recession and mental health in the united states.
 Clinical Psychological Science, 7(5):900–913, 2019.
Benjamin Frot, Preetam Nandy, and Marloes H Maathuis. Robust causal structure learning with
  some hidden variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodol-
  ogy), 81(3):459–487, 2019.
Howard Frumkin. Environmental health: from global to local. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
I. Higgins, Loı̈c Matthey, A. Pal, Christopher P. Burgess, Xavier Glorot, M. Botvinick, S. Mohamed,
   and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational
   framework. In ICLR, 2017.
Patrik O Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Bernhard Schölkopf, et al. Nonlinear
  causal discovery with additive noise models. In NeurIPS, volume 21, pp. 689–696. Citeseer, 2008.
Biwei Huang, Charles Jia Han Low, Feng Xie, Clark Glymour, and Kun Zhang. Latent hierarchical
  causal structure discovery with rank constraints. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:5549–5561, 2022.
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
Martin Jankowiak and Fritz Obermeyer. Pathwise derivatives beyond the reparameterization trick.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2235–2244. PMLR, 2018.

                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Samil Karahan, Merve Kilinc Yildirum, Kadir Kirtac, Ferhat Sukru Rende, Gultekin Butun, and
  Hazim Kemal Ekenel. How image degradations affect deep cnn-based face recognition? In 2016
  international conference of the biometrics special interest group (BIOSIG), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2016.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Aniket Didolkar, Sarthak Mittal, Anirudh Goyal, Guillaume Lajoie, Stefan
  Bauer, Danilo Rezende, Yoshua Bengio, Michael Mozer, and Christopher Pal. Systematic
  evaluation of causal discovery in visual model based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.00848, 2021.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoen-
   coders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In AISTAS, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Murat Kocaoglu, Christopher Snyder, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Causalgan:
 Learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. In ICLR, 2018.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodrı́guez López, Yash Sharma, Katie Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
   Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
   new principle for nonlinear ica. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10098, 2021.
Timothy O. Laumann and Russell A. Poldrack, 2015.            URL https://openfmri.org/
  dataset/ds000031/.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Stratis Gavves.
  Citris: Causal identifiability from temporal intervened sequences. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 13557–13603. PMLR, 2022.
Yuhang Liu, Wenyong Dong, Lei Zhang, Dong Gong, and Qinfeng Shi. Variational bayesian dropout
  with a hierarchical prior. In CVPR, 2019.
Yuhang Liu, Zhen Zhang, Dong Gong, Mingming Gong, Biwei Huang, Anton van den Hengel, Kun
  Zhang, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Identifying weight-variant latent causal models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.14153, 2022.
Yuhang Liu, Zhen Zhang, Dong Gong, Mingming Gong, Biwei Huang, Anton van den Hengel, Kun
  Zhang, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Identifiable latent causal content for domain adaptation under
  latent covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14161, 2024.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. In NeurIPS workshop, 2017.
Judea Pearl, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P Jewell. Causal inference in statistics: A primer.
  John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
Jonas Peters, Joris M. Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery with
  continuous additive noise models. JMLR, 15(58):2009–2053, 2014.
Bernhard Schölkopf. Learning to see and act. Nature, 518(7540):486–487, 2015.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
  the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Anna Seigal, Chandler Squires, and Caroline Uhler. Linear causal disentanglement via interventions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16467, 2022.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, and Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of linear non-gaussian acyclic
  models for latent factors. Neurocomputing, 72(7-9):2024–2027, 2009.
Ricardo Silva, Richard Scheines, Clark Glymour, Peter Spirtes, and David Maxwell Chickering.
  Learning the structure of linear latent variable models. JMLR, 7(2), 2006.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter Sorrenson, Carsten Rother, and Ullrich Köthe. Disentanglement by nonlinear ica with general
  incompressible-flow networks (gin). arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04872, 2020.
Stefan G Stark, Joanna Ficek, Francesco Locatello, Ximena Bonilla, Stéphane Chevrier, Franziska
  Singer, Tumor Profiler Consortium, Gunnar Rätsch, and Kjong-Van Lehmann. Scim: universal
  single-cell matching with unpaired feature sets. Bioinformatics, 36, 12 2020.
Burak Varici, Emre Acarturk, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Abhishek Kumar, and Ali Tajer. Score-
  based causal representation learning with interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08230, 2023.
Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2021.
Feng Xie, Ruichu Cai, Biwei Huang, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Generalized
  independent noise condition for estimating latent variable causal graphs. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Feng Xie, Biwei Huang, Zhengming Chen, Yangbo He, Zhi Geng, and Kun Zhang. Identifica-
  tion of linear non-gaussian latent hierarchical structure. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 24370–24387. PMLR, 2022.
Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Xinwei Shen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Causalvae:
 Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder. In CVPR, 2021.
Weiran Yao, Yuewen Sun, Alex Ho, Changyin Sun, and Kun Zhang. Learning temporally causal
 latent processes from general temporal data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05428, 2021.
Weiran Yao, Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. Learning latent causal dynamics. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2202.04828, 2022.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      A PPENDIX
A.1     T HE RESULT IN (L IU ET AL ., 2022)

For comparison, here we provide the main model assumptions and result in the work by (Liu et al.,
2022). It considers the following causal generative models:
                                          ni :∼ N (ηi,1 (u), ηi,2 (u)),                                (9)
                                          zi := λTi (u)(z) + ni ,                                     (10)
                                          x := f (z) + ε                                              (11)

Theorem A.1 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the generative
models defined in Eq. 9- Eq. 11, with parameters (f , λ, η). Assume the following holds:

       (i) The set {x ∈ X |φε (x) = 0} has measure zero (i.e., has at the most countable number of
           elements), where φε is the characteristic function of the density pε .
      (ii) The function f in Eq. 11 is bijective.
      (iii) There exist 2ℓ + 1 distinct points un,0 , un,1 , ..., un,2ℓ such that the matrix
                                Ln = (η(un,1 ) − η(un,0 ), ..., η(un,2ℓ ) − η(un,0 ))                 (12)
           of size 2ℓ × 2ℓ is invertible.
      (iv) There exist k + 1 distinct points uz,0 , uz,1 , ..., uz,k such that the matrix
                               Lz = (ηz (uz,1 ) − ηz (uz,0 ), ..., ηz (uz,k ) − ηz (uz,0 ))           (13)
           of size k × k is invertible.
       (v) The function class of λi,j can be expressed by a Taylor series: for each λi,j , λi,j (0) = 0,

then the recovered latent causal variables ẑ, which are learned by matching the true marginal data
distribution p(x|u), are related to the true latent causal variables z by the following relationship:
z = Pẑ + c, where P denotes the permutation matrix with scaling, c denotes a constant vector.

Here η denote sufficient statistic of distribution of latent noise variables n, ηz denote sufficient
statistic of distribution of latent causal variables z. k denotes the number of the sufficient statistic of
z. Please refer to (Liu et al., 2022) for more details.
Compared with the work in (Liu et al., 2022), this work generalizes linear Gaussian models in
Eq. 10 to polynomial models with two-parameter exponential family, as defined in Eq. 1-2. In
addition, this work removes the assumption (iv), which requires the number of environments highly
depending on the graph structure. Moreover, both the work in (Liu et al., 2022) and this work
explores the change of causal influences, in this work, we provide analysis for the necessity of
requiring all causal influence to change, and also partial identifiability results when part of causal
influences changes. This analysis enables the research line, allowing causal influences to change,
more solid.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2      T HE P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

For convenience, we first introduce the following lemmas.

Lemma A.2 z can be expressed as a polynomial function with respect to n, i.e., z = h(n, u), where
h denote a polynomial, and h−1 is also a polynomial function.

Proof can be easily shown by the following: since we have established that zi depends on its parents
and ni as defined in Eqs. 2 and 4, we can recursively express zi in terms of latent noise variables
relating to its parents and ni using the equations provided in Eqs. 2 and 4. Specifically, without loss
of the generality, suppose that the correct causal order is z1 ≻ z2 ≻ ..., ≻ zℓ , we have:
                                   z1 = n1 ,
                                        |{z}
                                             h1 (n1 )

                                   z2 = g2 (z1 ) + n2 = g2 (n1 , u) + n2 ,
                                                        |       {z     }
                                                                    h2 (n1 ,n2 ,u)

                                   z3 = g3 (z1 , g2 (n1 , u) + n2 , u) + n3 ,                            (14)
                                        |                  {z             }
                                                        h3 (n1 ,n2 ,n3 ,u)

                                   ......,
where h(n, u) = [h1 (n1 , u), h2 (n1 , n2 , u), h3 (n1 , n2 , n3 , u)...]. By the fact that the composition
of polynomials is still a polynomial, and repeating the above process for each zi can show that z can
be expressed as a polynomial function with respect to n, i.e., z = h(n, u). Further, according to the
additive noise models and DAG constraints, it can be shown that the Jacobi determinant of h equals
1, and thus the mapping h is invertible. Moreover, h−1 can be recursively expressed in terms of zi
according to Eq. 14, as follows:
      n1 =        z1 ,
                 |{z}
                h−1
                 1 (n1 )

      n2 = z2 − g2 (n1 , u) = z2 − g2 (z1 , u),
                              |     {z       }
                                  h−1
                                   2 (z1 ,z2 ,u)

      n3 = z3 − g3 (z1 , g2 (n1 , u) + n2 , u) = z3 − g3 (z1 , g2 (z1 , u) + (z2 − g2 (z1 , u))), u) .   (15)
                                                 |                         {z                      }
                                                                             h−1
                                                                              3 (z1 ,z2 ,z3 ,u)

      ......,
Again, since the composition of polynomials is still a polynomial, the mapping h−1 is also a poly-
nomial.

Lemma A.3 The mapping from n to x, e.g., f ◦ h, is invertible, and the Jacobi determinant
| det Jf ◦h | = | det Jf || det Jh | = | det Jf |, and thus | det J(f ◦h)−1 | = | det J−1              −1
                                                                                       f ◦h | = | det Jf |,
which do not depend on u.

Proof can be easily shown by the following: Lemma A.2 has shown that the mapping h, from n to z,
is invertible. Together with the assumption that f is invertible, the mapping from n to x is invertible.
In addition, due to the additive noise models and DAG constraint as defined in Eq. 14, we can obtain
| det Jh | = 1.

Lemma A.4 Given the assumption (iv) in Theorem 3.1, the partial derivative of hi (n1 , ..., ni , u) in
Eq. 14 with respect to ni′ , where i′ < i, equals 0 when u = 0, i.e., ∂hi (n1 ,...,n
                                                                              ∂n ′
                                                                                     i ,u=0)
                                                                                             = 0.
                                                                                                  i



Since the partial derivative of the polynomial hi (n1 , ..., ni , u) is still a polynomial whose coeffi-
cients are scaled by λi (u), as defined in Eq. 14, and by using the assumption (iv), we can obtain the
result.
The proof of Theorem 3.1 is done in three steps. Step I is to show that the identifiability result in
(Sorrenson et al., 2020) holds in our setting, i.e., the latent noise variables n can be identified up


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to component-wise scaling and permutation, n = Pn̂ + c. Using this result, Step II shows that z
can be identified up to polynomial transformation, i.e., z = Poly(ẑ) + c. Step III shows that the
polynomial transformation in Step II can be reduced to permutation and scaling, z = Pẑ + c, by
using Lemma A.4.
Step I: Suppose we have two sets of parameters θ = (f , T, λ, η) and θ̂ = (f̂ , T̂, λ̂, η̂) correspond-
ing to the same conditional probabilities, i.e., p(f ,T,λ,η) (x|u) = p(f̂ ,T̂,λ̂,η̂) (x|u) for all pairs (x, u),
where T denote the sufficient statistic of latent noise variables n. Due to the assumption (i), the
assumption (ii), and the fact that h is invertible (e.g., Lemma A.2), by expanding the conditional
probabilities (More details can be found in Step I for proof of Theorem 1 in (Khemakhem et al.,
2020)), we have:
     log | det J(f ◦h)−1 (x)| + log p(T,η) (n|u) = log | det J(f̂ ◦ĥ)−1 (x)| + log p(T̂,η̂) (n̂|u),        (16)

Using the exponential family as defined in Eq. 1, we have:
                                                                         Y
                  log | det J(f ◦h)−1 (x)| + TT (f ◦ h)−1 (x) η(u) − log

                                                                           Zi (u) =                         (17)
                                                                                    i
                                                                               Y
                  log | det J(f̂ ◦ĥ)−1 (x)| + T̂T (f̂ ◦ ĥ)−1 (x) η̂(u) − log

                                                                                 Ẑi (u),                   (18)
                                                                                    i

By using Lemma A.3, Eqs. 17-18 can be reduced to:
                                                                       Y
                    log | det Jf −1 (x)| + TT (f ◦ h)−1 (x) η(u) − log

                                                                         Zi (u) =
                                                                                i
                                                                            Y
                    log | det Jf̂ −1 (x)| + T̂T (f̂ ◦ ĥ)−1 (x) η̂(u) − log

                                                                              Ẑi (u).                      (19)
                                                                                i

Then by expanding the above at points ul and u0 , then using Eq. 19 at point ul subtract Eq. 19 at
point u0 , we find:
                                    X           Zi (u0 )            ¯
                                                                             X     Ẑi (u0 )
                 ⟨T(n), η̄(u)⟩ +          log            = ⟨T̂(n̂), η̂(u)⟩ +   log           .              (20)
                                      i
                                                Zi (ul )                     i     Ẑi (ul )

Here η̄(ul ) = η(ul ) − η(u0 ). By assumption (iii), and combining the 2ℓ expressions into a single
matrix equation, we can write this in terms of L from assumption (iii),

                                          LT T(n) = L̂T T̂(n̂) + b.                                         (21)
Since LT is invertible, we can multiply this expression by its inverse from the left to get:

                              T (f ◦ h)−1 (x) = AT̂ (f̂ ◦ ĥ)−1 (x) + c,

                                                                                                            (22)
                  T −1    T
Where A = (L ) L̂ . According to lemma 3 in (Khemakhem et al., 2020) that there exist k
distinct values n1i to nki such that the derivative T ′ (n1i ), ..., T ′ (nki ) are linearly independent, and the
fact that each component of Ti,j is univariate, we can show that A is invertible.
Since we assume the noise to be two-parameter exponential family members, Eq. 22 can be re-
expressed as:

                                T1 (n)           T̂1 (n̂)
                                         =A                 + c,                       (23)
                                T2 (n)           T̂2 (n̂)
Then, we re-express T2 in term of T1 , e.g., T2 (ni ) = t(T1 (ni )) where t is a nonlinear mapping. As
a result, we have from Eq. 23 that: (a) T1 (ni ) can be linear combination of T̂1 (n̂) and T̂2 (n̂), and
(b) t(T1 (ni )) can also be linear combination of T̂1 (n̂) and T̂2 (n̂). This implies the contradiction
that both T1 (ni ) and its nonlinear transformation t(T1 (ni )) can be expressed by linear combination
of T̂1 (n̂) and T̂2 (n̂). This contradiction leads to that A can be reduced to permutation matrix P
(See APPENDIX C in (Sorrenson et al., 2020) for more details):
                                                  n = Pn̂ + c,                                              (24)


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where P denote the permutation matrix with scaling, c denote a constant vector. Note that this
result holds for not only Gaussian, but also inverse Gaussian, Beta, Gamma, and Inverse Gamma
(See Table 1 in (Sorrenson et al., 2020)).
Step II:By Lemma A.2, we can denote z and ẑ by:
                                        z = h(n),                                                              (25)
                                          ẑ = ĥ(n̂),                                    (26)
where h is defined in A.2. Replacing n and n̂ in Eq. 24 by Eq. 25 and Eq. 26, respectively, we
have:
                                   h−1 (z) = Pĥ−1 (ẑ) + c,                              (27)
where h (as well as ĥ) are invertible supported by Lemma A.2. We can rewrite Eq. 27 as:
                                       z = h(Pĥ−1 (ẑ) + c).                                                  (28)
Again, by the fact that the composition of polynomials is still a polynomial, we can show:
                                         z = Poly(ẑ) + c′ .                                                   (29)

Step III Next, Replacing z and ẑ in Eq. 29 by Eqs. 24, 25, and 26:


                                     h(Pn̂ + c) = Poly(ĥ(n̂)) + c′                                            (30)

By differentiating Eq. 30 with respect to n̂

                                             Jh P = JPoly Jĥ .                                                (31)
Without loss of generality, let us consider the correct causal order z1 ≻ z2 ≻ ..., ≻ zℓ so that Jh and
Jĥ are lower triangular matrices whose the diagonal are 1, and P is a diagonal matrix with elements
s1,1 , s2,2 , s3,3 , ....

Elements above the diagonal of matrix JPoly Since Jĥ are lower triangular matrices, and P is a
diagonal matrix, JPoly must be a lower triangular matrix.
Then by expanding the left side of Eq. 31, we have:
                                   s1,1               0                            0     ...
                                                                                            
                        s1,1 ∂h2 (n∂n 1 ,n2 ,u)
                                                     s2,2                          0     ... 
              Jh P =                    1
                        s ∂h3 (n1 ,n2 ,n3 ,u) s ∂h3 (n1 ,n2 ,n3 ,u)
                                                                                             ,                (32)
                            1,1      ∂n1         2,2    ∂n2                     s3,3     ... 
                                    .                  .                         .       ...

by expanding the right side of Eq. 31, we have:
                                                                                                                       
                               JPoly1,1                                        0                           0      ...
                   JPoly2,1 + JPoly2,2 ∂ ĥ2 (n∂n
                                                1 ,n2 ,u)
                                                                            JPoly2,2                       0       ... 
                                                                                                                      
JPoly Jĥ =                                                                                                           .
                                                 1
             JPoly + 3 JPoly ∂ ĥi (n1 ,...,ni ,u)
                          P
                                                            JPoly3,2 + JPoly3,3 ∂ ĥ3 (n1∂n
                                                                                          ,...,n3 ,u)
                                                                                                        JPoly3,3 ... 
                   3,1       i=2      3,i          ∂n1                                      2
                                   .                                         .                             .       ...
                                                                                                                (33)

The diagonal of matrix JPoly       By comparison between Eq. 32 and Eq. 33, we have JPolyi,i = si,i

Elements below the diagonal of matrix JPoly           By comparison between Eq. 32 and Eq. 33, and
Lemma A.4, for all i > j we have JPolyi,j = 0.
As a result, the matrix JPoly in Eq. 31 equals to the permutation matrix P, which implies that the
polynomial transformation Eq. 29 reduces to a permutation transformation,


                                               z = Pẑ + c′ .                                                  (34)


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3     T HE P ROOF OF COROLLARY 3.2

To prove the corollary, we demonstrate that it is always possible to construct an alternative solution,
which is different from the true z, but capable of generating the same observations x, if there is an
unchanged coefficient across u. Again, without loss of the generality, suppose that the correct causal
order is z1 ≻ z2 ≻ ..., ≻ zℓ . Suppose that for zi , there is an unchanged coefficient λj,i , related to
the term of polynomial λj,i ϕ across u, where ϕ denotes polynomial features created by raising the
variables related to parent node to an exponent. Note that since we assume the correct causal order,
the term ϕ only includes zj where j < i. Then, we can always construct new latent variables z′ as:
for all k ̸= i, z ′ k = zk , and zi′ = zi − λj,i ϕ. Given this, we can construct a polynomial mapping
M, so that
                                                M(z′ ) = z,                                              (35)
where
                                                     z1′
                                                           
                                                       ′
                                                    z2     
                                                     ..
                                                           
                                         ′
                                      M(z ) =  ′           .                                           (36)
                                                           
                                               zi + λj,i ϕ 
                                               z ′
                                                 i+1 = zi+1
                                                            
                                                     ..
where for all k ̸= i, z ′ k = zk in the right. It is clear the Jacobi determinant of the mapping M
always equals 1, thus the mapping M is invertible. In addition, all the coefficients of the polynomial
mapping M are constant and thus do not depend on u. As a result, we can construct a mapping
f ◦ M as the mapping from z′ to x, which is invertible and do not depend on u, and can create the
same data x generated by f (z). Therefore, the alternative solution z′ can lead to a non-identifiability
result.

A.4     T HE P ROOF OF COROLLARY 3.3

Since the proof process in Steps I and II in A.2 do not depend on the assumption of change of causal
influence, the results in both Eq. 32 and Eq. 33 hold. Then consider the following two cases.

        • For the case where zi is a root node or all coefficients on all paths from parent nodes to zi
          change across u, by using Lemma A.4, i.e., ∂hi (n1 ,...,n
                                                               ∂ni′
                                                                    i ,u=0)
                                                                            = 0 and ∂ ĥi (n1 ,...,n
                                                                                              ∂ni′
                                                                                                     i ,u=0)
                                                                                                             =
          0 for all i′ < i, and by comparison between Eq. 32 and Eq. 33, we have: for all i > j we
          have JPolyi,j = 0, which implies that we can obtain that zi = Ai,i ẑi + c′i .
        • If there exists an unchanged coefficient in all paths from parent nodes to zi across u, then by
          the proof of corollary 3.2, i.e., zi′ can be constructed as a new possible solution to replace
          zi by removing the unchanged coefficient λj,i , resulting in the non-identifiability result.
          This is also can be proved in another way, e.g., a comparison between Eq. 32 and Eq. 33.
          Suppose that the coefficient is λj,i related to the parent node with the index k. Given that,
          we have: ∂ ĥi (n1 ,...,n
                             ∂nk
                                    i−1 ,u)
                                            include a constant term λj,i . Again, by using the Lemma A.4,
          and by comparison between Eq. 32 and Eq. 33, we can only arrive that sk,k λj,i = JPolyi,k .
          As a result, zi will be expressed as a combination of ẑk and ẑi .


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   S YNTHETIC DATA

Data For experimental results on synthetic data, the number of segments is 30, and for each seg-
ment, the sample size is 1000, while the number (e.g., dimension) of latent causal or noise variables
is 2,3,4,5 respectively. Specifically, for latent linear causal models, we consider the following struc-
tural causal model:


                                             B(α, β), if n ∼ Beta
                                 ni :∼                                                             (37)
                                             G(α, β), , if n ∼ Gamma
                                 z1 := n1                                                          (38)
                                 z2 := λ1,2 (u)z1 + n2                                             (39)
                                 z3 := λ2,3 (u)z2 + n3                                             (40)
                                 z4 := λ3,4 (u)z3 + n4                                             (41)
                                 z5 := λ3,5 (u)z3 + n5 ,                                           (42)
                                                                                                   (43)
where both α and β, for both Beta and Gamma distributions, are sampled from a uniform distribution
[0.1, 2.0], and λi,j (u) are sampled from a uniform distribution [−1.0, −0.5] ∪ [0.5, 1.0]. For latent
polynomial causal models with Gaussian noise, we consider the following structural causal model:
                                       ni :∼ N (α, β),                                             (44)
                                       z1 := n1                                                    (45)
                                         z2 := λ1,2 (u)z12 + n2                                    (46)
                                         z3 := λ2,3 (u)z2 + n3                                     (47)
                                         z4 := λ3,4 (u)z2 z3 + n4                                  (48)
                                         z5 := λ3,5 (u)z32 + n5 .                                  (49)
                                                                                                   (50)
where both α and β for Gaussian noise are sampled from uniform distributions [−2.0, 2.0] and
[0.1, 2.0], respectively. λi,j (u) are sampled from a uniform distribution [−1.0, −0.5] ∪ [0.5, 1.0].

A.6   I MPLEMENTATION F RAMEWORK

Figure 8 depicts the proposed method to learn polynomial causal representations with non-Gaussian
noise. Figure 9 depicts the proposed method to learn polynomial causal representations with Gaus-
sian noise. For non-Gaussian noise, since there is generally no analytic form for the joint distribution
of latent causal variables, we here assume that p(z|u) = p(λ(u))p(n|u) as defined in Eq. 6. Note
that this assumption may be not true in general, since it destroys independent causal mechanisms
generating effects in causal systems. For experiments on the synthetic data and fMRI data, the en-
coder, decoder, MLP for λ, and MLP for prior are implemented by using 3-layer fully connected
networks and Leaky-ReLU activation functions. For optimization, we use Adam optimizer with
learning rate 0.001. For experiments on the image data, we also use 3-layer fully connected network
and Leaky-ReLU activation functions for λ and the prior model. The encoder and decoder can be
found in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Input
                         Leaky-ReLU(Conv2d(3, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                         Leaky-ReLU(Conv2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                         Leaky-ReLU(Conv2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                         Leaky-ReLU(Conv2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                            Leaky-ReLU(Linear(32×32×4 + size(u), 30))
                                   Leaky-ReLU(Linear(30, 30))
                                         Linear(30, 3*2)

                                   Table 1: Encoder for the image data.


                                        Latent Variables
                                  Leaky-ReLU(Linear(3, 30))
                                  Leaky-ReLU(Linear(30, 30))
                              Leaky-ReLU(Linear(30, 32 × 32 ×4))
                   Leaky-ReLU(ConvTranspose2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                   Leaky-ReLU(ConvTranspose2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                   Leaky-ReLU(ConvTranspose2d(32, 32, 4, stride=2, padding=1))
                          ConvTranspose2d(32, 3, 4, stride=2, padding=1)

                                   Table 2: Decoder for the image data.


 Figure 8: Implementation Framework to learn polynomial causal representations with non-Gaussian noise.


Figure 9: Implementation Framework to learn polynomial causal representations with Gaussian noise, for
which an analytic form for the prior and posterior of latent causal variables can be provided.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Traversals on z1                     Traversals on z2                     Traversals on z3

Figure 10: Traversal results obtained by β-VAE on the image data. The vertical axis denotes
different samples, The horizontal axis denotes enforcing different values on the learned causal rep-
resentation. The ground truth of the latent causal graph is that the ’diamond’ (e.g., z1 ) causes the
‘triangle’ (e.g., z2 ), and the ‘triangle’ causes the ’square’ (e.g., z3 ). We can see that the change of
each learned variable results in the change of color of all objects.


       Traversals on z1                     Traversals on z2                     Traversals on z3

Figure 11: Traversal results obtained by VAE on the image data. The vertical axis denotes different
samples, The horizontal axis denotes enforcing different values on the learned causal representation.
The ground truth of the latent causal graph is that the ’diamond’ (e.g., z1 ) causes the ‘triangle’ (e.g.,
z2 ), and the ‘triangle’ causes the ’square’ (e.g., z3 ). We can see that the change of each learned
variable results in the change of color of all objects.


A.7    T RAVERSALS ON THE LEARNED VARIABLES BY I VAE, β-VAE, AND VAE

Since there is no theoretical support for both β-VAE and VAE, these two methods can not disentangle
latent causal variables. This can be demonstrated by Figure 10 and Figure 11, which shows that
traversal on each learned variable leads to the change of colors of all objects. It is interesting to
note that iVAE has the theoretical guarantee of learning latent noise variables. And since we assume
additive noise models, e.g., z1 = n1 , iVAE is able to identify z1 . This can be verified from the result
obtained by iVAE shown in Figure 5, which shows that the MPC between recovered z1 and the true
one is 0.963. However, iVAE can not identify z2 and z3 , since these are causal relations among the
latent causal variables. We can see from Figure 12, the changes of z2 and z3 lead to the change of
colors of all objects.

A.8    F URTHER DISCUSSION ON THE PARTIAL IDENTIFIABILITY IN C OROLLARY 3.3.

While demanding a change in all coefficients may pose challenges in practical applications, Corol-
lary 3.3 introduces partial identifiability results. The entire latent space can theoretically be parti-
tioned into two distinct subspaces: an invariant latent subspace and a variant latent subspace. This
partitioning holds potential value for applications emphasizing the learning of invariant latent vari-
ables to adapt to changing environments, such as domain adaptation (or generalization), as discussed


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Traversals on z1                     Traversals on z2                     Traversals on z3

Figure 12: Traversal results obtained by iVAE on the image data. The vertical axis denotes different
samples, The horizontal axis denotes enforcing different values on the learned causal representation.
The ground truth of the latent causal graph is that the ’diamond’ (e.g., z1 ) causes the ‘triangle’ (e.g.,
z2 ), and the ‘triangle’ causes the ’square’ (e.g., z3 ). We can see that the change of each learned
variable results in the change of color of all objects.



in the main paper. However, the impact of partial identifiability results on the latent causal graph
structure remains unclear.
We posit that if there are no interactions (edges) between the two latent subspaces in the ground truth
graph structure, the latent causal structure in the latent variant space can be recovered. This recovery
is possible since the values of these variant latent variables can be restored up to component-wise
permutation and scaling. In contrast, when no interactions exist between the two latent subspaces in
the ground truth graph structure, recovering (part of) the latent causal structure becomes highly chal-
lenging. We believe that the unidentifiable variables in the invariant latent subspace may influence
the latent causal structure in the variant latent subspace.
We hope this discussion can inspire further research to explore this intriguing problem in the future.


A.9    F URTHER DISCUSSION ON MODEL ASSUMPTIONS IN LATENT SPACE .

In our approach, we selected polynomial models for their approximation capabilities and straightfor-
ward expressions, streamlining analysis and facilitating the formulation of sufficient changes. While
advantageous, this choice is not without recognized limitations, notably the challenges introduced by
high-order terms in polynomials during optimization. Overall, we think that model assumptions can
be extended to a broader scope than polynomials, including non-parametric models. This extension
is contingent on deeming changes in causal influences as sufficient. The crucial question in mov-
ing towards more general model assumptions revolves around defining what constitutes sufficient
changes in causal influences.


A.10    U NDERSTANDING ASSUMPTIONS IN T HEOREM

Assumptions (i)-(iii) are motivated by the nonlinear ICA literature (Khemakhem et al., 2020), which
is to provide a guarantee that we can recover latent noise variables n up to a permutation and scaling
transformation. The main Assumption (iii) essentially requires sufficient changes in latent noise
variables to facilitate their identification. Assumption (iv) is derived from the work by Liu et al.
(2022) and is introduced to avoid a specific case: λi,j (u) = λ′i,j (u) + b, where b is a non-zero
constant. To illustrate, if z2 = (λ′1,2 (u) + b)z1 + n2 , the term bz1 remains unchanged across all
u, resulting in non-identifiability according to Corollary 3.3. While assumption (iv) is sufficient for
handling this specific case, it may not be necessary. We anticipate the proposal of a sufficient and
necessary condition in the future to address the mentioned special case.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           A large number of latent variables                  Inverse Gaussian and Gamma noises
Figure 13: Performances of the proposed method on a large number of latent variables and latent linear models
with inverse Gaussian and inverse Gamma noises.


A.11    T HE UNKNOWN NUMBER OF LATENT CAUSAL / NOISE VARIABLES

It is worth noting that most existing works require knowledge of the number of latent variables.
However, this is not a theoretical hurdle in our work. It is due to a crucial step in our results
leveraging the identifiability findings from Sorrenson et al. (2020) to idenitify latent noise variables.
The key insight in Sorrenson et al. (2020) demonstrates that the dimension of the generating latent
space can be recovered if latent noises are sampled from the two-parameter exponential family
members. This assumption is consistent with our assumption on latent noise, as defined in Eq. 1. In
other words, if the estimated latent space has a higher dimension than the generating latent space,
some estimated latent variables may not be related to any generating latent variables and therefore
encode only noise. More details can be found in Sorrenson et al. (2020).

A.12    M ORE R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

In this section, we present additional experimental results conducted on synthetic data to demon-
strate the effectiveness of the proposed method across scenarios involving a large number of latent
variables as well as latent variables characterized by inverse Gaussian and inverse Gamma distribu-
tions. Both scenarios present significant challenges in optimization. The performance on these cases
is depicted in Figure 13. In the left subfigure of Figure 13, for ployGaussian, the presence of numer-
ical instability and exponential growth in polynomial model terms complicates the recovery of latent
polynomial causal models, especially with an increasing number of latent variables. Additionally,
the reparameterization trick for inverse Gaussian and inverse Gamma distributions poses challenges
in recovering latent linear models. Both cases warrant further exploration in future research.


                                                     22
