Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPRESSIVE M ODELING I S I NSUFFICIENT FOR
O FFLINE RL: A T RACTABLE I NFERENCE P ERSPECTIVE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                   A BSTRACT

             A popular paradigm for offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks is to first fit the
             offline trajectories to a sequence model, and then prompt the model for actions that
             lead to high expected return. While a common consensus is that more expressive
             sequence models imply better performance, this paper highlights that tractability,
             the ability to exactly and efficiently answer various probabilistic queries, plays an
             equally important role. Specifically, due to the fundamental stochasticity from the
             offline data-collection policies and the environment dynamics, highly non-trivial
             conditional/constrained generation is required to elicit rewarding actions. While it
             is still possible to approximate such queries, we observe that such crude estimates
             significantly undermine the benefits brought by expressive sequence models. To
             overcome this problem, this paper proposes Trifle (Tractable Inference for Offline
             RL), which leverages modern Tractable Probabilistic Models (TPMs) to bridge the
             gap between good sequence models and high expected returns at evaluation time.
             Empirically, Trifle achieves the most state-of-the-art scores in 9 Gym-MuJoCo
             benchmarks against strong baselines. Further, owing to its tractability, Trifle
             significantly outperforms prior approaches in stochastic environments and safe RL
             tasks (e.g., with action constraints) with minimum algorithmic modifications.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in deep generative models have opened up the possibility of solving offline
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020) tasks with sequence modeling techniques (termed
RvS approaches). Specifically, we first fit the trajectories provided in an offline dataset to a sequence
model. During evaluation, the model is tasked to sample actions with high expected returns given the
current state. Leveraging modern deep generative models such as GPTs (Brown et al., 2020) and
diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), RvS algorithms have significantly boosted the performance on
various discrete/continuous control problems (Ajay et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021).
Despite its appealing simplicity, it is still unclear whether expressive modeling alone guarantees good
performance of RvS algorithms, and if so, on what types of environments. Perhaps surprisingly, this
paper discovers that many common failures of RvS algorithms are not caused by modeling problems.
Instead, while useful information is encoded in the model during training, the model is unable to elicit
such knowledge during evaluation. Specifically, this issue is reflected in two aspects: (i) inability
to accurately estimate the expected return of a state and a corresponding action sequence to be
executed given near-perfect learned transition dynamics and reward functions; (ii) even when accurate
return estimates exist in the offline dataset and are learned by the model, it could still fail to sample
rewarding actions during evaluation.1 At the heart of such inferior evaluation-time performance is
the fact that highly non-trivial conditional/constrained generation is required to stimulate high-return
actions (Paster et al., 2022; Brandfonbrener et al., 2022). Therefore, other than expressiveness, the
ability to efficiently and exactly answer various queries (e.g., computing the expected cumulative
rewards), termed tractability, plays an equally important role in RvS approaches.
Having observed that the lack of tractability is an essential cause of the underperformance of
RvS algorithms, this paper studies whether we can gain practical benefits from using Tractable
Probabilistic Models (TPMs) (Poon & Domingos, 2011; Choi et al., 2020; Kisa et al., 2014), which
    1
        Both observations are supported by empirical evidence as illustrated in Section 3.


                                                          1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by design support exact and efficient computation of certain queries? We answer the question in
its affirmative by showing that we can leverage a class of TPMs that support computing arbitrary
marginal probabilities to significantly mitigate the inference-time suboptimality of RvS approaches.
The proposed algorithm Trifle (Tractable Inference for Offline RL) has three main contributions:
Emphasizing the important role of tractable models in offline RL. This is the first paper that demon-
strates the possibility of using TPMs on complex offline RL tasks. The superior empirical performance
of Trifle suggests that expressive modeling is not the only aspect that determines the performance of
RvS algorithms, and motivates the development of better inference-aware RvS approaches.
Competitive empirical performance. Compared against strong offline RL baselines (including RvS,
imitation learning, and offline temporal-difference algorithms), Trifle achieves the most state-of-the-
art scores on 9 Gym-MuJoCo benchmarks (Fu et al., 2020).
Generalizability to stochastic environments and safe-RL tasks. Trifle can be extended to tackle
stochastic environments as well as safe RL tasks with minimum algorithmic modifications. Specif-
ically, we evaluate Trifle in a stochastic Taxi environment and action-space-constrained MuJoCo
environments, and demonstrate superior performance against all baselines.

2       P RELIMINARIES
Offline Reinforcement Learning In Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent interacts with an
unknown environment at discrete time steps to maximize its cumulative reward. The environment is
defined by a Markov Decision Process (MDP) ⟨S, A, R, P, d0 ⟩, where S is the state space, A is the
action space, R : S × A → R is the reward function, P : S × A → S is the transition dynamics, and
d0 is the initial state distribution. Our goal is to learn a policy π(a|s) that maximizes the expected
          PT
return E[ t=0 γ t rt ], where γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor and T is the maximum number of steps.
Offline RL (Levine et al., 2020) aims to solve RL problems where we cannot freely interact with
the environment. Instead, we receive a dataset of trajectories collected using unknown policies. An
effective learning paradigm for offline RL is to treat it as a sequence modeling problem (termed RL
via Sequence Modeling or RvS methods) (Janner et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Emmons et al., 2021).
Specifically, we first learn a sequence model on the dataset, and then sample actions conditioned on
past states and high future returns. Since the models typically do not encode the entire trajectory, an
estimated value or return-to-go (RTG) (i.e., the Monte Carlo estimate of the sum of future rewards) is
also included for every state-action pair, allowing the model to estimate the return at any time step.
Tractable Probabilistic Models Tractable Probabilistic Models (TPMs) are generative models that
are designed to efficiently and exactly answer a wide range of probabilistic queries (Poon & Domingos,
2011; Choi et al., 2020; Rahman et al., 2014). One example class of TPMs is Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs) (Rabiner & Juang, 1986), which support linear time (w.r.t. model size and input size)
computation of marginal probabilities and more. Recent advancements have extensively pushed
forward the expressiveness of modern TPMs (Liu et al., 2022; 2023; Correia et al., 2023), leading
to competitive likelihoods on natural image and text datasets compared to even strong Variational
Autoencoder (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) and Diffusion model (Kingma et al., 2021) baselines. This
paper leverages such advances and explores the benefits brought by TPMs in offline RL tasks.

Probabilistic Circuits Probabilistic circuits (PCs) (Choi et al., 2020) are a general and unified
computational framework for tractable probabilistic modeling, i.e., a wide class of TPMs can be
represented as a PC. Similar to neural networks, PCs are also computation graphs containing millions
of computation units, where constraints are imposed on their structures to enable efficient computation
of various probabilistic queries. Generally, computing probabilistic queries involves executing specific
feedforward/backward algorithms over the PC-defined computation graph. More details about TPM
and PC are shown in Appx. B and C.

3       T RACTABILITY M ATTERS IN O FFLINE RL
Practical RvS approaches operate in two main phases – training and evaluation. In the training
phase, a sequence model is adopted to learn a joint distribution over trajectories of length T :
{(st , at , rt , RTGt )}Tt=0 .2 During evaluation, at every time step t, the model is tasked to discover an
    2
        To minimize computation cost, we only model truncated trajectories of length K (K < T ) in practice.


                                                        2
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        100
                                                                                                     0.8                                                              100


                                                                   Inference-time Optimality Score
Normalized Actual Returns


                                                                                                                                              Normalized Actual Returns
                            80
                                                                                                     0.6                                                                  80
                                     halfcheetah-MR                                                             DT       TT   Trifle(ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                halfcheetah-MR
                            60       halfcheetah-M                                                                                                                              halfcheetah-M
                                     walker2d-MR                                                                                                                          60    halfcheetah-ME
                                     walker2d-M                                                        walker2d-MR walker2d-M walker2d-ME                                       walker2d-MR
                            40       hopper-MR                                                                                                                                  walker2d-M
                                     hopper-M                                                                                                                             40    walker2d-ME
                                                                                                     0.8
                            20                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                     0.6
                            0
                                                                                                                DT       TT   Trifle(ours)                                0
                                 0     100       200   300   400                                                                                                               0.5     0.6       0.7   0.8   0.9
                                     Average Estimated Returns                                         walker2d-M    hopper-M halfcheetah-M                                    Inference-time Optimality Score
    Figure 1: RvS approaches suffer from inference-time suboptimality. Left: There exists a strong
    positive correlation between the average estimated returns by Trajectory Transformers (TT) and the
    normalized actual returns in 6 Gym-MuJoCo environments (MR, M, and ME are short for medium-
    replay, medium, and medium-expert, respectively), which suggests that the sequence model can
    distinguish rewarding actions from bad ones. Middle: Despite being able to recognize high-return
    actions, both TT and DT (Chen et al., 2021) fail to consistently sample such action, leading to bad
    inference-time optimality; our method Trifle consistently improves the inference-time optimality
    score. Right: We substantiate the relationship between low inference-time optimality scores and
    unfavorable environmental outcomes by showing a strong positive correlation between them.

   action sequence at:T := {aτ }Tτ=t (or just at ) that has high expected return as well as high probability
   in the prior policy p(at:T |st ), which prevents it from generating out-of-distribution actions:

                                               1     p(at:T |st ) if EVt ∼p(·|st ,at ) [Vt ] ≥ v,
                   p(at:T |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) := ·                                                         (1)
                                               Z     0            otherwise,
   where Z is a normalizing constant, Vt is an estimate of the value at time step t, and v is a pre-defined
   scalar whose value is chosen to encourage high-return policies. Depending on the problem, Vt could
   be the labeled RTG from the dataset (e.g., RTGt ) or the sum of future rewards capped with a value
                   PT −1
   estimate (e.g., τ =t rτ + RTGT ) (Emmons et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021).
   The above definition naturally reveals two key challenges in RvS approaches: (i) training-time
   optimality (i.e., “expressivity”): how well can we fit the offline trajectories, and (ii) inference-time
   optimality: whether actions can be unbiasedly and efficiently sampled from Equation (1). While
   extensive breakthroughs have been achieved to improve the training-time optimality (Ajay et al.,
   2022; Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021), it remains unclear whether the non-trivial constrained
   generation task of Equation (1) hinders inference-time optimality. In the following, we present two
   general scenarios where existing RvS approaches underperform as a result of suboptimal inference-
   time performance. We attribute such failures to the fact that these models are limited to answering
   certain query classes (e.g., autoregressive models can only compute next token probabilities), and
   explore the potential of tractable probabilistic models for offline RL tasks in the following sections.
   Scenario #1 We first consider the case where the labeled RTG belongs to a (near-)optimal policy. In
   this case, Equation (1) can be simplified to p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) (choose Vt := RTGt ) since one-step
   optimality implies multi-step optimality. In practice, although the RTGs are suboptimal, the predicted
   values often match well with the actual returns achieved by the agent. Take Trajectory Transformer
   (TT) (Janner et al., 2021) as an example, Figure 1 (left) demonstrates a strong positive correlation
   between its predicted returns (x-axis) and the actual cumulative rewards (y-axis) on six MuJoCo
   (Todorov et al., 2012) benchmarks, suggesting that the model has learned the “goodness” of most
   actions. In such cases, the performance of RvS algorithms depends mainly on their inference-time
   optimality, i.e., whether they can efficiently sample actions with high predicted returns. Specifically,
   let at be the action taken by a RvS algorithm at state st , and Rt := E[RTGt ] is the corresponding
   estimated expected value. We define a proxy of inference-time optimality as the quantile value of
   Rt in the estimated state-conditioned value distribution p(Vt |st ).3 The higher the quantile value, the
   more frequent the RvS algorithm samples actions with high estimated returns.
   We evaluate the inference-time optimality of Decision Transformers (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) and
   Trajectory Transformers (TT) (Janner et al., 2021), two widely used RvS algorithms, on various
                            3                                                     P
         Due to the large action space, it is impractical to compute p(Vt |st ) := at p(Vt |st , at ) · p(at |st ). Instead,
    in the following illustrative experiments, we train an additional GPT model p(Vt |st ) using the offline dataset.


                                                                                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


environments and offline datasets from the Gym-MuJoCo benchmark suite (Fu et al., 2020). Perhaps
surprisingly, as shown in Figure 1 (middle), the inference-time optimality is averaged (only) around
0.7 (the maximum possible value is 1.0) for most settings. And these runs with low inference-time
optimality scores receive low environment returns (Fig. 1 (right)).
Scenario #2 Achieving inference-time optimality becomes even harder when the labeled RTGs
are suboptimal (e.g., they come from a random policy). In this case, even estimating the expected
future return of an action sequence becomes highly intractable, especially when the transition
dynamics of the environment are stochastic. Specifically, to evaluate a state-action pair (st , at ),
                                                                                                     Pt′ −1
since RTGt is uninformative, we need to resort to the multi-step estimate Vtm :=                      τ =t rτ +
RTGt′ (t′ > t), where the actions at:t′ are jointly chosen to maximize the expected return. Take
autoregressive models as an example. Since the variables are arranged following the sequential order
. . . , st , at , rt , RTGt , st+1 , . . . , we need to explicitly sample st+1:t′ before proceed to compute the
rewards and the RTG in Vtm . When the transition dynamics are stochastic, estimating E[Vtm ] could
suffer from high variance as the stochasticity from the intermediate states accumulates over time.
As we shall illustrate in Section 6.2, compared to environments with near-deterministic transition
dynamics (e.g., Fig. 1 (left)), estimating the expected returns in stochastic environments using
intractable sequence models is hard, and Trifle can significantly mitigate this problem with its ability
to marginalize out intermediate states and compute E[Vtm ] in closed-form.

4     E XPLOITING T RACTABLE M ODELS
The previous section demonstrates that apart from modeling, inference-time suboptimality is an-
other key factor that causes the underperformance of RvS approaches. Given such observations, a
natural follow-up question is whether/how more tractable models can improve the evaluation-time
performance in offline RL tasks? While there are different types of tractabilities (i.e., the ability to
compute different types of queries), this paper focuses on studying the additional benefit of exactly
computing arbitrary marginal/condition probabilities. This strikes a proper balance between learning
and inference as we can train such a tractable yet expressive model thanks to recent developments
in the TPM community (Liu et al., 2022; Correia et al., 2023). Note that in addition to proposing
a competitive RvS algorithm, we aim to highlight the necessity and benefit of using more tractable
models for offline RL tasks, and encourage future developments on both inference-aware RvS meth-
ods and better TPMs. As a direct response to the two failing scenarios identified in Section 3, in
the following, we first demonstrate how tractability could help even when the labeled RTGs are
(near-)optimal (Sec. 4.1). We then move on to the more general case where we need to use multi-step
return estimates to account for biases in the labeled RTGs (Sec. 4.2).

4.1    F ROM THE S INGLE -S TEP C ASE ...
Consider the case where the RTGs are optimal. Recall from Section 3 that our goal is to sample actions
from p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) (Vt := RTGt ). Prior works use two typical ways to approximately sample
from this distribution. The first approach directly trains a model to generate return-conditioned actions:
p(at |st , RTGt ) (Chen et al., 2021). However, since the RTG given a state-action pair is stochastic,4
sampling from this RTG-conditioned policy could result in actions with a small probability of getting
a high return, but with a low expected return (Paster et al., 2022; Brandfonbrener et al., 2022).
An alternative approach leverages the ability of sequence models to accurately estimate the expected
return (i.e., E[RTGt ]) of state-action pairs (Janner et al., 2021). Specifically, we first sample from a
prior distribution p(at |st ), and then reject actions with low expected returns. Such rejection sampling-
based methods typically work well when the action space is small (in which we can enumerate
all actions) or the dataset contains many high-rewarding trajectories (in which the rejection rate is
low). However, the action could be multi-dimensional and the dataset typically contains many more
low-return trajectories in practice, rendering the inference-time optimality score low (cf. Fig. 1).
Having examined the pros and cons of existing approaches, we are left with the question of whether a
tractable model can improve sampled actions (in this single-step case). We answer it with a mixture of
positive and negative results: while computing p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) is NP-hard even when p(at , Vt |st )

    4
      This is true unless (i) the policy that generates the offline dataset is deterministic, (ii) the transition dynamics
is deterministic, and (iii) the reward function is deterministic.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


follows a simple Naive Bayes distribution, we can design an approximation algorithm that samples
high-return actions with high probability in practice. We start with the negative result.
Theorem 1. Let at := {ait }ki=1 be a set of k boolean variables and Vt be a categorical variables
with two categories 0 and 1. For some st , assume the joint distribution over at and Vt conditioned on
                                                                      Qk
st follows a Naive Bayes distribution: p(at , Vt |st ) := p(Vt |st ) · i=1 p(ait |Vt , st ), where ait denotes
the ith variable of at . Computing p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) is NP-hard.

The proof is given in Appx. A. While it seems hard to directly draw samples from p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v),
we propose to improve the aforementioned rejection sampling-based method by adding a correction
term to the original proposal distribution p(at |st ) to reduce the rejection rate. Specifically, the prior is
                                                                                      Qk
often represented by an autoregressive model such as GPT: pGPT (at |st ) := i=1 pGPT (ait |st , a<i      t ),
where k is the number of action variables and ait is the ith variable of at . We sample every dimension
of at autoregressively following:
                                                     1                                             ≤i
        ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , k} p̃(ait |st , a<i
                                          t ; v) :=    · pGPT (ait |st , a<i
                                                                          t ) · pTPM (Vt ≥ v|st , at ),   (2)
                                                    Z
where Z is a normalizing constant and pTPM (Vt ≥ v|st , a≤i          t ) is a correction term that leverages
the ability of the TPM to compute the distribution of Vt given incomplete actions. Note that while
Equation (2) is mathematically identical to p(at |st , Vt ≥ v), this formulation gives us the flexibility to
use the prior policy (i.e., pGPT (ait |st , a<i
                                             t )) represented by more expressive autoregressive generative
models. Further, as shown in Figure 1 (middle), compared to using p(at |st ) (as done by TT),
the inference-time optimality scores increase significantly when using the distribution specified by
Equation (2) (as done by Trifle) across various Gym-MuJoCo benchmarks.

4.2     ...T O THE M ULTI -S TEP C ASE

Recall that when the labeled RTGs are suboptimal, our goal is to sample from p(at:t′ |st , E[Vtm ] ≥ v)
                        Pt′ −1
(t′ > t), where Vtm := τ =t rτ + RTGt′ is the multi-step value estimate. However, as elaborated in
the second scenario in Section 3, it is hard even to evaluate the expected return of an action sequence
due to the inability to marginalize out intermediate states st+1:t′ . Empowered by TPMs, we can
readily solve this problem thanks to the linearity of the expectation operator:
                             ′
                               −1
                     m   tX
                 E Vt =           Erτ ∼p(·|st ,at:t′ ) rτ + ERTGt′ ∼p(·|st ,at:t′ ) RTGt′ .
                               τ =t
We are now left with the same problem discussed in the single-step case — how to sample actions
with high expected returns (i.e., E[Vtm ]). Following Equation (2), we sample potentially rewarding
actions by conditioning the action sequence on Vtm ≥ v:
                     t′
                     Y
p̃(at:t′ |st ; v) :=    p̃(aτ |st , a<τ ; v), where p̃(aτ |st , a<τ ; v) ∝ p(aτ |st , a<τ) · p(Vtm ≥ v|st , a≤τ),
                  τ =t
a<τ and a≤τ represent at:τ −1 and at:τ , respectively.5 In practice, while we compute p(Vt ≥
v|st , a≤τ ) using the TPM, p(aτ |st , a<τ ) = Est+1:τ [p(aτ |s≤τ , a<τ )] can either be computed exactly
with the TPM or approximated (via Monte Carlo estimation over st+1:τ ) using an autoregressive
neural network. In summary, we approximate samples from p(at:t′ |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v) by first sampling
from p̃(at:t′ |st ; v), and then rejecting samples whose (predicted) expected return is smaller than v.

5       P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION WITH TPM S
The previous section has demonstrated how to efficiently sample from the expected-value-conditioned
policy (Eq. 1). Based on this sampling algorithm, this section further introduces the proposed
algorithm Trifle (Tractable Inference for Offline RL). The high-level idea of Trifle is to obtain good
action (sequence) candidates from p(at |st , E[V ] ≥ v), and then use beam search to further single
out the most rewarding action. Intuitively, by the definition in Equation (1), the candidates are both
    5
     We approximate p(Vtm ≥ v|st , a≤τ ) by assuming that the variables {rt , . . . , rt′ −1 , RTGt′ } are indepen-
                                                         ′
                                                           −1
dent. Specifically, we first compute {p(rτ |st , a≤τ )}tτ =t  and p(RTGt′ |st , a≤τ ), and then sum up the random
variables assuming that they are independent. This holds strictly for environments with deterministic transition
dynamics and remains a decent approximation for stochastic environments.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Normalized Scores on the standard Gym-MuJoCo benchmarks. The results of Trifle are
averaged over 12 random seeds, and mean as well as standard deviations are reported. Results of
the baselines are acquired from their respective papers. “# Wins of Trifle” denotes the number of
environments out of 9 where Trifle outperforms each baseline. Bold indicates the best result.
                                                RvS                             IL                Offline-TD
 Dataset      Environment
                             Trifle     BR-RCRL DD             TT   DT   BC   10%BC TD3+BC   IQL CQL BEAR
 Med-Expert HalfCheetah 95.1±0.3          95.2     90.6 95.0 86.8 55.2 92.9           90.7 86.7 91.6 53.4
 Med-Expert Hopper      113.0±0.4        112.9    111.8 110.0 107.6 52.5 110.9       98.0 91.5 105.4 96.3
 Med-Expert Walker2d    109.3±0.1        111.0    108.8 101.9 108.1 107.5 109.0      110.1 109.6 108.8 40.1
 Medium       HalfCheetah 49.5±0.2       48.6         49.1 46.9 42.6 42.6     42.5   48.3    47.4 44.0    41.7
 Medium       Hopper      67.1±4.3       78.0         79.3 61.1 67.6 52.9     56.9   59.3    66.3 58.5    52.1
 Medium       Walker2d    83.1±0.8       82.3         82.5 79.0 74.0 75.3     75.0   83.7    78.3 72.5    59.1
 Med-Replay HalfCheetah 45.0±0.3         42.3     39.3 41.9 36.6 36.6         40.6   44.6    44.2 45.5    38.6
 Med-Replay Hopper      97.8±0.3         98.3     100.0 91.5 82.7 18.1        75.9   60.9    94.7 95.0    33.7
 Med-Replay Walker2d    88.3±3.8         80.6     75.0 82.6 66.6 26.0         62.5   81.8    73.9 77.2    19.2
      # Wins of Trifle      Reference     5            7       9    8    9      9     8       8      8         9


rewarding and have relatively high likelihoods in the offline dataset, which ensures the actions are
within the offline data distribution and prevents overconfident estimates during beam search.
Beam search maintains a set of N (incomplete) sequences each starting as an empty sequence.
For ease of presentation, we assume the current time step is 0. At every time step t, beam search
replicates each of the N actions sequences into λ ∈ Z+ copies and appends an action at to ev-
ery sequence. Specifically, for every partial action sequence a<t , we sample an action following
p(at |s0 , a<t , E[Vt ] ≥ v), where Vt can be either the single-step or the multi-step estimate depending
on the task. Now that we have λ · N trajectories in total, the next step is to evaluate their expected
return, which can be computed exactly using the TPM (see Sec. 4.2). The N -best action sequences
are kept and proceed to the next time step. After repeating this procedure for H time steps, we return
the best action sequence. The first action in the sequence is used to interact with the environment.
Another design choice is the threshold value v. While it is common to use a fixed high return
throughout the episode, we follow Ding et al. (2023) and use an adaptive threshold. Specifically, at
state st , we choose v to be the ϵ-quantile value of p(Vt |st ), which is computed using the TPM.
Details of the adopted TPM This paper uses Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) (Choi et al., 2020)
as an example TPM to demonstrate the effectiveness of Trifle. PCs can compute any marginal or
conditional probability in time linear with respect to its size. We use a state-of-the-art PC structure
called HCLT (Liu & Van den Broeck, 2021) and optimize its parameters using the latent variable
distillation technique (Liu et al., 2022). Additional training/inference details are provided in Appx. C.

6     E XPERIMENTS
This section takes gradual steps to study whether Trifle can mitigate the inference-time suboptimality
problem in different settings. First, in the case where the labeled RTGs are good performance
indicators (i.e., the single-step case), we examine whether Trifle can consistently sample more
rewarding actions (Sec. 6.1). Next, we further challenge Trifle in highly stochastic environments,
where existing RvS algorithms fail catastrophically due to the failure to account for the environmental
randomness (Sec. 6.2). Finally, we demonstrate that Trifle can be directly applied to safe RL tasks
(with action constraints) by effectively conditioning on the constraints being satisfied (Sec. 6.3).
Collectively, this section highlights the potential of TPMs on offline RL tasks.

6.1   C OMPARISON WITH THE S TATE OF THE A RT
As demonstrated in Section 3 and Figure 1, although the labeled RTGs in the Gym-MuJoCo (Fu
et al., 2020) benchmarks are accurate enough to reflect the actual environmental return, existing RvS
algorithms fail to effectively sample such actions due to their large and multi-dimensional action
space. Figure 1 (middle) has demonstrated that Trifle achieves better inference-time optimality. This
section further examines whether higher inference-time optimality scores lead to better performance.
Environment setup The Gym-MuJoCo benchmark suite collects trajectories in 3 locomotion
environments (HalfCheetah, Hopper, Walker2D) and constructs 3 datasets (Medium-Expert, Medium,


                                                           6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      s-Trifle                                                TT                                            m-Trifle
                      0                                                      0                                                  0
Actual Returns                                                             50


                                                          Actual Returns


                                                                                                             Actual Returns
                     50                                                                                                       50
                                      R=0.41                               100           R=0.52                                                 R=0.67
                 100                                                                                                          100
                                                                           150
                                                                           200                                                150
                 150
                          200   150     100      50   0                    250 300      200        100   0                           60    40     20     0      20
                          Average Estimated Returns                              Average Estimated Returns                          Average Estimated Returns
 Figure 2: Correlation between average estimated returns and true environmental returns for s-Trifle
 (w/ single-step value estimates), TT, and m-Trifle (w/ multi-step value estimates) in the stochastic
 Taxi domain. R denotes the correlation coefficient. The results demonstrate that (i) multi-step value
 estimates (TT and m-Trifle) are better than single-step estimates (s-Trifle), and (ii) exactly computed
 multi-step estimates (m-Trifle) are better than approximated ones (TT) in stochastic environments.

Medium-Replay) for every environment, which results in 3 × 3 = 9 tasks. For every environment,
the main difference between the datasets is the quality of its trajectories. Specifically, the dataset
“Medium” records 1 million steps collected from a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018)
agent. The “Medium-Replay” dataset contains all samples in the replay buffer recorded during the
training process of the SAC agent. The “Medium-Expert” dataset mixes 1 million steps of expert
demonstrations and 1 million suboptimal steps generated by a partially trained SAC policy or a
random policy. The results are normalized to ensure that the well-trained SAC model has a 100 score
and the random policy has a 0 score.
 Baselines We compare Trifle against three main classes of offline RL methods: (i) RvS approaches
 including Trajectory Transformer (TT) (Janner et al., 2021), Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al.,
 2021), Decision Diffuser (DD) (Ajay et al., 2022), and Bayesian Reprameterized RCRL (BR-RCRL)
 (Ding et al., 2023); (ii) Offline TD learning methods (Offline-TD) including IQL (Kostrikov et al.,
 2021), CQL (Kumar et al., 2020), and BEAR (Kumar et al., 2019a); (iii) Imitation learning methods
 (IL) that do not explicitly encode reward or value information. Specifically, we consider Behavior
 Cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1988), its variant 10% BC which only uses 10% of trajectories with the
 highest return, and TD3+BC (Fujimoto et al., 2019) for comparison.
  Since the labeled RTGs are informative enough about the “goodness” of actions, we implement Trifle
  by adopting the single-step value estimate (i.e., Vt = RTGt ). Moreover, we built Trifle on top of the
  TT (Janner et al., 2021) algorithm, i.e., we directly take pTT (at |st ) derived by TT as our prior policy
  pGPT (at |st ) in Equation (2). See Appx. D.1 for more algorithmic details.
  Empirical Insights Results are shown in Table 1. First, Trifle achieves the most state-of-the-art
  scores and especially performs well in Med-Replay datasets6 which consist of much more suboptimal
  trajectories compared to the two other types of datasets. Next, compared to every individual baseline,
  Trifle achieves better results in 5 to 9 out of 9 benchmarks. To further examine the benefit brought by
  TPMs, we compare Trifle with TT since in this setup, their main algorithmic difference is the use of
  the improved proposal distribution (Eq. 2) for sampling actions. We can see that Trifle outperforms
  TT by a large margin in all environments, indicating that Trifle can robustly sample better actions
  from the high-dimensional action space.7

  6.2                 A S TOCHASTIC E NVIRONMENT: T HE M ODIFIED G YM -TAXI E NVIRONMENT
  This section further challenges Trifle on stochastic environments with highly suboptimal trajectories
  as well as labeled RTGs in the offline dataset. As demonstrated in Section 3, in this case, it is even
  hard to obtain accurate value estimates due to the stochasticity of transition dynamics. Section 4.2
  demonstrates the potential of Trifle to more reliably estimate and sample action sequences under
  suboptimal labeled RTGs and stochastic environments. This section examines this claim by comparing
  the four following algorithms: (i) Trifle that adopts Vt = RTGt (termed single-step Trifle or s-Trifle);
                 6
      Trifle achieves the highest scores averaged over 3 Med-Replay datasets.
                 7
      To perform more comprehensive evaluation, we also implement Trifle on top of the DT algorithm by
  replacing pGPT (at |st ) with pDT (at |st ), the results are discussed in Appx. E.


                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Methods       Episode return   # penalty    P (failure)
                                                  s-Trifle              -99        0.14          0.11
                                                  m-Trifle              -57        0.38          0.02
                                                  TT                   -182        2.57          0.34
                                                  DT                   -388        14.2          0.66
                                                  dataset              -128        2.41            0
  (a) The stochastic Taxi environment.         (b) Empirical performance on the stochastic Taxi environment.
Figure 3: Results on the stochastic Taxi environment. All the reported numbers are averaged over 1000
trials. #penalty denotes the average number of penalties for executing illegal actions in an episode,
and P (failure) denotes the probability of failing to transport the passenger to the destination.
                               Pt′                                                        8
(ii) Trifle equipped with Vt =    τ =t rτ + RTGt (termed multi-step Trifle or m-Trifle); (iii)
                                                  ′

Trajectory Transformers (TT) (Janner et al., 2021); (iv) Decision Transformers (DT) (Chen et al.,
2021). Among the four algorithms, s-Trifle and DT do not compute the “more accurate” multi-step
value, and TT approximates the value by Monte Carlo samples. Therefore, we expect their relative
performance to be DT ≈ s-Trifle < TT < m-Trifle.
Environment setup We create a stochastic variant of the Gym-Taxi Environment (Dietterich, 2000).
As shown in Figure 3a, a taxi resides in a grid world consisting of a passenger and a destination.
The taxi is tasked to first navigate to the passenger’s position and pick them up, and then drop them
off at the destination. There are 6 discrete actions available at every step: (i) 4 navigation actions
(North, South, East, or West), (ii) Pick-up, (iii) Drop-off. Whenever the agent attempts to execute a
navigation action, it has 0.3 probability of moving toward a randomly selected unintended direction.
At the beginning of every episode, the taxi, the passenger, and the destination are randomly initialized
in one of 25, 5, and 4 locations, respectively. The reward function is defined as follows: (i) -1 for
each action undertaken; (ii) an additional +20 for successful passenger delivery; (iii) -4 for hitting the
walls; (iv) -5 for hitting the boundaries; (v) -10 for executing Pick-up or Drop-off actions unlawfully
(e.g., executing Drop-off when the passenger is not in the taxi).
Following the Gym-MuJoCo benchmarks, we collect offline trajectories by running a Q-learning
agent (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) in the above environment and recording the first 1000 trajectories
that successfully drop off the passenger at the desired location.
Empirical Insights We first examine the accuracy of estimated returns for s-Trifle, m-Trifle, and TT.
DT is excluded since it does not explicitly estimate the value of action sequences. Figure 2 illustrates
the correlation between predicted and ground-truth returns of the three methods. First, s-Trifle
performs the worst since it merely uses the inaccurate RTGt to approximate the ground-truth return.
Next, thanks to its ability to exactly compute the multi-step value estimates, m-Trifle outperforms TT,
which approximates the multi-step value with Monte Carlo samples.
We proceed to evaluate their performance in the stochastic Taxi environment. Besides the episode
return, we adopt two metrics to better evaluate the adopted methods: (i) #penalty: the average
number of executing illegal actions within an episode; (ii) P (failure): the probability of failing
to transport the passenger within 300 steps. As shown in Figure 3b, the relative performance of
the four algorithms is DT < TT < s-Trifle < m-Trifle, which largely aligns with the anticipated
results. The only “surprising” result is the superior performance of s-Trifle compared to TT. One
plausible explanation for this behavior is that while TT can better estimate the given actions, the
inferior performance is caused by its inability to efficiently sample rewarding actions.

6.3      ACTION -S PACE -C ONSTRAINED G YM -M U J O C O VARIANTS
This section demonstrates that Trifle can be readily extended to safe RL tasks thanks to the TPM’s
ability to compute conditional probabilities. Specifically, besides achieving high expected returns,
safe RL tasks require additional constraints on the action or future states to be satisfied. Therefore,
define the constraint as c, our goal is to sample actions from p(at |st , E[Vt ] ≥ v, c), which can be
achieved by additionally conditioning on c in the candidate action sampling process.

   8
       Please refer to Appx. D.2 for additional details of m-Trifle.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Normalized Scores on the Action-Space-Constrained Gym-MuJoCo Variants. The results of
Trifle and TT are both averaged over 12 random seeds, with mean and standard deviations reported.
                         Dataset          Environment        Trifle         TT
                         Med-Expert       Halfcheetah        81.9±4.8     77.8±5.4
                         Med-Expert        Hopper           109.6±2.4    100.0±4.2
                         Med-Expert        Walker2d         105.1±2.3    103.6±4.9

Environment setup In MuJoCo environments, each dimension of at represents the torque applied
on a certain rotor of the hinge joints at timestep t. We consider action space constraints in the form
of “value of the torque applied to the foot rotor ≤ A”, where A = 0.5 is a threshold value, for three
MuJoCo environments: Halfcheetah, Hopper, and Walker2d. Note that there are multiple foot joints
in Halfcheetah and Walker2d, so the constraint is applied to multiple action dimensions.9 For all
settings, we adopt the “Medium-Expert” offline dataset as introduced in Section 6.1.
Empirical Insights The key challenge in these action-constrained tasks is the need to account for
the constraints applied to other action dimensions when sampling the value of some action variable.
For example, autoregressive models cannot take into account constraints added to variable ai+1     t
when sampling ait . Therefore, while enforcing the action constraint is simple, it remains hard to
simultaneously guarantee good performance. As shown in Table 2, owing to its ability to exactly
condition on the action constraints, Trifle outperforms TT significantly across all three environments.

7    R ELATED W ORK AND C ONCLUSION
In offline RL tasks, our goal is to utilize a dataset collected by unknown policies to derive an
improved policy without further interactions with the environment. Under this paradigm, we wish to
generalize beyond naive imitation learning and stitch good parts of the behavior policy. To pursue
such capabilities, many recent works frame offline RL tasks as conditional modeling problems that
generate actions with high expected returns (Chen et al., 2021; Ajay et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023) or
its proxies such as immediate rewards (Kumar et al., 2019b; Schmidhuber, 2019; Srivastava et al.,
2019). Recent advances in this line of work can be highly credited to the powerful expressivity
of modern sequence models, since by accurately fitting past experiences, we can obtain 2 types of
information that potentially imply high expected returns: (i) transition dynamics of the environment,
which serves as a necessity for planning in model-based fashion (Chua et al., 2018), (ii) a decent
policy prior which act more reasonably than a random policy to improve from (Janner et al., 2021).
While prior works on model-based RL (MBRL) also leverage models of the transition dynamics
and the reward function (Kaiser et al., 2019; Heess et al., 2015; Amos et al., 2021), the above-
mentioned RvS approaches focus more on directly modeling the correlation between actions and
their end-performance. Specifically, MBRL approaches focus on planning only with the environment
model. Despite being theoretically appealing, MBRL requires heavy machinery to account for
the accumulated errors during rollout (Jafferjee et al., 2020; Talvitie, 2017) and out-of-distribution
problems (Zhao et al., 2021; Rigter et al., 2022). All these problems add a significant burden on
the inference side, which makes MBRL algorithms less appealing in practice. In contrast, while
RvS algorithms can mitigate this inference-time burden by directly learning the correlation between
actions and returns, the suboptimality of labeled returns could significantly degrade their performance.
One potential solution is by combining RvS algorithms with temporal-difference learning methods
that can correct errors in the labeled returns (Zheng et al., 2022; Yamagata et al., 2023).
While also aiming to mitigate the problem caused by suboptimal labeled RTGs, our work takes a
substantially different route — by leveraging TPMs to mitigate the inference-time computational
burden (e.g., by efficiently computing the multi-step estimates). Specifically, we identified two major
problems that are caused by the lack of tractability in the sequence models: one regarding estimating
expected returns and the other for conditionally sampling actions. We show that with the ability to
compute more queries efficiently, we can partially solve both identified problems. In summary, this
work provides positive evidence of the potential benefit of tractable models on RvS algorithms, and
encourages the development of more inference-aware RvS methods.
   9
     We only add constraints to the front joints in the Halfcheetah environment since the performance degrades
significantly for all methods if the constraint is added to all foot joints.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Complete proofs of the theoretical results are provided in Appx. A. For the empirical results, the
model architectures and hyperparameters are documented in Appx. C.3 and Appx. D. We plan to
release our code as open source.

Acknowledgements This work was funded in part by the DARPA PTG Program under award
HR00112220005, the DARPA ANSR program under award FA8750-23-2-0004, NSF grants #IIS-
1943641, #IIS-1956441, #CCF-1837129, and a gift from RelationalAI. GVdB discloses a financial
interest in RelationalAI.

R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
  Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision making? In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Brandon Amos, Samuel Stanton, Denis Yarats, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. On the model-based
  stochastic value gradient for continuous reinforcement learning. In Learning for Dynamics and
  Control, pp. 6–20. PMLR, 2021.
David Brandfonbrener, Alberto Bietti, Jacob Buckman, Romain Laroche, and Joan Bruna. When
  does return-conditioned supervised learning work for offline reinforcement learning? Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1542–1553, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
YooJung Choi, Antonio Vergari, and Guy Van den Broeck. Probabilistic circuits: A unifying
  framework for tractable probabilistic models. oct 2020. URL http://starai.cs.ucla.
  edu/papers/ProbCirc20.pdf.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Alvaro HC Correia, Gennaro Gala, Erik Quaeghebeur, Cassio de Campos, and Robert Peharz.
  Continuous mixtures of tractable probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7244–7252, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Thomas G Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the maxq value function decomposi-
  tion. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 13:227–303, 2000.
Wenhao Ding, Tong Che, Ding Zhao, and Marco Pavone. Bayesian reparameterization of reward-
 conditioned reinforcement learning with energy-based models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11340,
 2023.
Scott Emmons, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Rvs: What is essential for
  offline rl via supervised learning? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Learn-
  ing continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 28, 2015.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Taher Jafferjee, Ehsan Imani, Erin Talvitie, Martha White, and Micheal Bowling. Hallucinating
  value: A pitfall of dyna-style planning with imperfect environment models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.04363, 2020.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:1273–1286, 2021.
Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H Campbell, Konrad
  Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, et al. Model-based
  reinforcement learning for atari. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00374, 2019.
Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021.
Doga Kisa, Guy Van den Broeck, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche. Probabilistic sentential decision
  diagrams. In Fourteenth International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation
  and Reasoning, 2014.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169, 2021.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019a.
Aviral Kumar, Xue Bin Peng, and Sergey Levine. Reward-conditioned policies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.13465, 2019b.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1179–1191, 2020.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Anji Liu and Guy Van den Broeck. Tractable regularization of probabilistic circuits. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:3558–3570, 2021.
Anji Liu, Honghua Zhang, and Guy Van den Broeck. Scaling up probabilistic circuits by latent
 variable distillation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Xuejie Liu, Anji Liu, Guy Van den Broeck, and Yitao Liang. Understanding the distillation process
  from deep generative models to tractable probabilistic circuits. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 21825–21838. PMLR, 2023.
Keiran Paster, Sheila McIlraith, and Jimmy Ba. You can’t count on luck: Why decision transformers
  and rvs fail in stochastic environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  38966–38979, 2022.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Hoifung Poon and Pedro Domingos. Sum-product networks: a new deep architecture. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 337–346, 2011.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lawrence Rabiner and Biinghwang Juang. An introduction to hidden markov models. ieee assp
  magazine, 3(1):4–16, 1986.
Tahrima Rahman, Prasanna Kothalkar, and Vibhav Gogate. Cutset networks: A simple, tractable,
  and scalable approach for improving the accuracy of chow-liu trees. In Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2014, Nancy, France,
  September 15-19, 2014. Proceedings, Part II 14, pp. 630–645. Springer, 2014.
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. Rambo-rl: Robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:16082–16097,
 2022.
Juergen Schmidhuber. Reinforcement learning upside down: Don’t predict rewards–just map them to
  actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02875, 2019.
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Pranav Shyam, Filipe Mutz, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Training agents using upside-down reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02877,
  2019.
Erin Talvitie. Self-correcting models for model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Taku Yamagata, Ahmed Khalil, and Raul Santos-Rodriguez. Q-learning decision transformer:
  Leveraging dynamic programming for conditional sequence modelling in offline rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 38989–39007. PMLR, 2023.
Mingde Zhao, Zhen Liu, Sitao Luan, Shuyuan Zhang, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. A
 consciousness-inspired planning agent for model-based reinforcement learning. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 34:1569–1581, 2021.
Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. In international
  conference on machine learning, pp. 27042–27059. PMLR, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Supplementary Material
A         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
To improve the clarity of the proof, we first simplify the notations in Thm. 1: define X as the boolean
action variables at := {ait }ki=1 , and Y as the variable Vt , which is a categorical variable with two
categories 0 and 1. We can equivalently interpret Y as a boolean variable where the category 0
corresponds to F and 1 corresponds to T. Dropping the condition on st everywhere for notation
simplicity, we have converted the problem into the following one:
                                       k
AssumeQ boolean variables X := {Xi }i=1 and Y follow a Naive Bayes distribution: p(x, y) :=
p(y) · i p(xi |y). We want to prove that computing p(x|E[y] ≥ v), which is defined as follows, is
NP-hard.

                                           1 p(x) if Ey∼p(·|x) [y] ≥ v,
                       p(x|E[y] ≥ v) :=                                                      (3)
                                          Z 0        otherwise.
By the definition of Y as a categorical variable with two categories 0 and 1, we have
                        Ey∼p(·|x) [y] = p(y = T|x) · 1 + p(y = F|x) · 0 = p(y = T|x).
Therefore, we can rewrite p(x|E[y] ≥ v) as
                                                 1
                               p(x|E[y] ≥ v) :=     · p(x) · 1[p(y = T|x) ≥ v],
                                                Z
where 1[·] is the  Pindicator function. In the following, we show that computing the normalizing
constant Z := x p(x) · 1[p(y = T|x) ≥ v] is NP-hard by reduction from the number partition
problem, which is a known NP-hard problem. Specifically, for a set of k numbers n1 , . . . , nk (∀i, ni ∈
Z+ ), the number partition problem aims to decide whether there exists a subset P    S ⊆P     [k] (define
[k] := {1, . . . , k}) that partition the numbers into two sets with equal sums: i∈S ni = j̸∈S nj .
For every number partition problem {ni }ki=1 , we define a corresponding Naive Bayes distribution
p(x, y) with the following parameterization: p(y = T) = 0.5 and10
                                          1 − e−ni                                 ni    1 − e−ni
           ∀i ∈ [k], p(xi = T|y = T) =            −n
                                                       and   p(x i = T|y = F) =  e    ·            .
                                         e i −e i
                                          n                                             eni − e−ni
It is easy to verify that the above definitions lead to a valid Naive Bayes distribution. Further, we have
                                   p(xi = T|y = T)              p(xi = F|y = T)
                   ∀i ∈ [k], log                   = ni and log                 = −ni .                (4)
                                   p(xi = T|y = F)              p(xi = F|y = F)
We pair every partition S in the number partition problem with an instance x such that ∀i, xi = T if
i ∈ S and xi = F otherwise. Choose v = 2/3, the normalizing constant Z can be written as
                                         p(x) · 1 p(y = T|x) ≥ 2/3 .
                                    X
                             Z=                                                                  (5)
                                        x∈val(X)

Recall the one-to-one correspondence between S and x, we rewrite p(y = T|x) with the Bayes
formula:
                                                        Q
                                           p(y = T) i p(xi |y = T)
               p(y = T|x) =            Q                           Q               ,
                              p(y = T) i p(xi |y = T) + p(y = F) i p(xi |y = F)
                                       1
                            =              p(x |y=T)
                                                      ,
                                   − i log p(xi |y=F)
                                     P
                              1+e             i

                                         1
                            =        P         P         ,
                              1 + e−( i∈S ni − j̸∈S nj )
where the last equation follows from Equation (4). After some simplifications, we have
                         1 p(y = T|x) ≥ 2/3 = 1
                                                       X        X
                                                           ni −   nj ≥ 1 .
                                                              i∈S       j̸∈S

    10
         Note that we assume the naive Bayes model is parameterized using log probabilities.


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Plug back to Equation (5), we have
                                   p(x) · 1
                                X            X      X
                           Z=                  ni −   nj ≥ 1 ,
                                 S⊆[k]           i∈S         j̸∈S
                                  1 X
                                           p(x) · 1
                                                     X          X
                               =                          ni −       nj ̸= 0 ,
                                  2
                                     S⊆[k]           i∈S        j̸∈S
                                                                    P           P
where the last equation follows from the fact that (i) if x satisfy i∈S ni − j̸∈S nj ≥ 1 then x̄ has
P           P                                          P             P
  i∈S ni −     j̸∈S nj ≤ −1 and vise versa, and (ii)       i∈S ni −     j̸∈S nj must be an integer.
                                                                        P           P
Note that for every solution S to the number partition problem, i∈S ni − j̸∈S nj = 0 holds.
Therefore, there exists a solution to the defined number partition problem if Z < 12 .              □

B     T RACTABLE P ROBABILISTIC M ODELS (TPM)
A probabilistic model can be seen as a black box to answer queries about the quantities of interest of
the joint probability distribution, such as computing marginal probability and performing maximum-
a-posterior inference given some evidence. Tractable probabilistic models provide more guarantees
when answering probabilistic queries: (i) it can perform exact inference to the model’s distribution
and no approximations are required. (ii) the query computation can be carried out efficiently, that is,
in time polynomial (linear in many cases) in the size of the model. Notably, tractability is defined
for a family of models only w.r.t. a class of queries and not an absolute property. Indeed, a tractable
representation for one query class might not admit polynomial time inference for another query class.

C     P ROBABILISTIC C IRCUITS (PC)
C.1   D EFINITION OF PC

                                    X1                 0.8
                                                       0.2
                          X2       ¬X2                 1.0
                                                                      0.5
                          X3       ¬X3                 1.0            0.5
                                                       0.6
                          X4       ¬X4                 0.4

                                      Figure 4: An example PC.

Probabilistic circuits (PCs) represent a wide class of TPMs that model probability distributions with
a parameterized directed acyclic computation graph (DAG). Specifically, a PC p(X) defines a joint
distribution over a set of random variables X by a single root node nr . A PC contains three kinds of
computational nodes: input, sum, and product. As illustrated in Figure 4, the example PC in Figure 4
defines a joint distribution over 4 random variables X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 . Each leaf node in the DAG
serves as an input node that encodes a univariate distribution (e.g., Guassian, Categorical), while
sum nodes or product nodes are inner nodes, distinguished by whether they are doing mixture or
factorization over their child distributions (denoted in(n)). A PC defines a probability distribution in
the following recursive way:
                                
                                fP
                                    n (x)                   if n is an input unit,
                      pn (x) :=        c∈in(n) θn,c · pc (x) if n is a sum unit,
                                Q
                                
                                              p  (x)         if n is a product unit,
                                      c∈in(n) c

wherePθn,c represents the parameter corresponding to edge (n, c) in the DAG. For sum units, we
have c∈in(n) θn,c = 1, θn,c ≥ 0, and we assume w.l.o.g. that a PC alternates between the sum and
product layers before reaching its inputs.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2     T RACTABILITY AND E XPRESSIVITY

Definition 1 (Decomposability). A PC is decomposable if for every product unit n, its children have
disjoint scopes:
                         ∀c1 , c2 ∈ in(n) (c1 ̸= c2 ), ϕ(c1 ) ∩ ϕ(c2 ) = ∅.
Definition 2 (Smoothness). A PC is smooth if for every sum unit n, its children have the same scope:
                                  ∀c1 , c2 ∈ in(n), ϕ(c1 ) = ϕ(c2 ).

Similar to neural networks, a large PC contains millions of computation units which enables expressive
modeling. However, to guarantee the desired tractability, i.e., the ability to answer numerous proba-
bilistic queries, some properties have to be imposed on their DAG structures. For instance, smoothness
together with decomposability ensure that a PC can compute arbitrary marginal/conditional prob-
abilities in linear time w.r.t. its size, i.e., the number of edges in its DAG. These are properties of
the variable scope ϕ(n) of PC unit n, that is, the variable set comprising all its descendent nodes.
Here we introduce how we execute marginalization inference in practice on a decomposable and
smooth PC. Take the example PC in Figure 4 as an example, if we want to acquire pn (X1 , X2 , X3 )
by marginalizing out X4 , we only need to set the output probability of X4 ’s input nodes to 1 and
follow the same forward process as computing pn (X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 ).
Notably, such structural constraints raise higher requirements for PC optimizers to acquire a compa-
rably expressive PC. Thankfully, recent advancement achieved in PC modeling largely bridges this
gap and makes it possible to model distributions of more complex data including the offline RL data.

C.3     T RAINING DETAILS OF THE ADOPTED PC

C.3.1     T HE EM PARAMETER LEARNING ALGORITHM
As mentioned above, a PC takes as input a sample x and outputs the corresponding probability
pn (x). Given a dataset D, the PC optimizer takes the PC parameters (consisting of sum edge
parameters and input node/distribution parameters) as input and aims to maximize the MLE objective
P
   x∈D log pn (x). Since PCs can be deemed as latent variable models with hierarchically nested
latent space, the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is usually the default choice for PC
parameter learning. Specifically, considering gradient-based EM, the feedforward computation of
PCs which involves computing the log-likelihood log pn (x) is differentiable and can be modeled by
a computation graph. Therefore, we can efficiently compute its gradient w.r.t. each parameter via the
backpropagation algorithm. Given a mini-batch of samples, the backpropagation algorithm is used to
accumulate gradients for each parameter.

C.3.2     T RAINING PC WITH Q UANTILE - DISCRETIZED M U J O C O DATASET
For the PC implemented in Trifle, we adopt the Hidden Chow-Liu Tree (HCLT) structure (Liu &
Van den Broeck, 2021) and categorical distributions for its input nodes. We use the same quantile
dataset discretized from the original Gym-MuJoCo dataset as TT, where each raw continuous variable
is divided into 100 categoricals, and each categorical represents an equal amount of probability mass
under the empirical data distribution (Janner et al., 2021).
During training, we first derive an HCLT structure given the data distribution and then utilize the
latent variable distillation technique (LVD) to do parameter learning (Liu et al., 2022). Specifically,
the neural embeddings used for LVD are acquired by a BERT-like Transformer (Devlin et al., 2018)
trained with the Masked Language Model task. To acquire the embeddings of a subset of variables ϕ,
we feed the Transformer with all other variables and concatenate the last Transformer layer’s output
for the variables ϕ. Please refer to the original paper for more details.

D     A DDITIONAL A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS OF T RIFLE
D.1     G YM -M U J O C O

Sampling Details. We take the single-step value estimate by setting Vt = RTGt and sample at
from Equation (2). When training the GPT used for querying pGP T (ait |st , a<i
                                                                             t ), we adopt the same


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model specification and training pipeline as TT. When computing pT P M (Vt ≥ v|st , a≤i    t ), we first
use the learned PC to estimate p(Vt |st ) by marginalizing out intermediate actions at:t′ and select the
ϵ-quantile value of p(Vt |st ) as our prediction threshold v for each inference step. Empirically we
fixed ϵ for each environment and ϵ ranges from 0.1 to 0.3.
Beam Search Hyperparameters. The maximum beam width N and planning horizon H that Trifle
uses across 9 MuJoCo tasks are 15 and 64, respectively.

D.2    S TOCHASTIC TAXI E NVIRONMENT

Except for s-Trifle, the sequence length K modeled by TT, DT, and m-Trifle is all equal to 7. The
inference algorithm of TT follows that of the MuJoCo experiment and DT follows its implementation
in the Atati benchmark. Notably, during evaluation, we condition the pretrained DT on 6 different
RTGs ranging from -100 to -350 and choose the best policy resulting from RTG=-300 to report in
Figure 3b. Beam width N = 8 and planning horizon H = 3 hold for TT and m-Trifle.

E     T RIFLE BUILT ON D ECISION T RANSFORMER

                Table 3: Normalized Scores on the Standard Gym-MuJoCo Benchmarks.
                         Dataset        Environment         Trifle         DT
                         Med-Expert      Halfcheetah       91.9±1.9      86.8±1.3
                         Medium          Halfcheetah       44.2±0.7      42.6±0.1
                         Med-Replay      Halfcheetah       39.2±0.4      36.6±0.8
                         Med-Expert       Walker2d        108.6±0.3     108.1±0.2
                         Medium           Walker2d         81.3±2.3        74±1.4

We choose TT as our base policy for its simple yet effective nature as well as its competitive
performance. However, we highlight that by replacing pGP T (at |st ) (cf. Equation (1)) with better
prior distributions (generated by other RvS algorithms), Trifle could still yield a decent performance
gain. To verify this, we adopt Trifle on top of the DT algorithm by replacing pGP T (at |st ) with
pDT (at |st ) and run experiments on the Gym-Mujoco benchmarks. Results are provided in Table 3
As shown in Table 3, adding the TPM correction term to DT could also boost DT’s performance,
which lives up to our expectations. Specifically, the architecture and hyperparameters of Trifle based
on DT follow that of Trifle built on TT, while the results of DT are obtained from the original paper
(we adopt the same number of seeds as the DT paper).

F     S TANDARD DEVIATION OF ALL RV S BASELINES

                          Table 4: Standard deviation of all RvS baselines.
      Dataset         Environment      Trifle     BR-RCRL             DD            TT        DT
      Med-Expert      Halfcheetah      95.1±0.3      95.2±0.8      90.6±1.3      95.0±0.2    86.8±1.3
      Med-Expert       Hopper         113.0±0.4     112.9±0.9     111.8±1.8     110.0±2.7   107.6±1.8
      Med-Expert       Walker2d       109.3±0.1     111.0±0.4     108.8±1.7     101.9±6.8   108.1±0.2
      Medium          Halfcheetah      49.5±0.2        48.6±1.1      49.1±1.0    46.9±0.4    42.6±0.1
      Medium           Hopper          67.1±4.3        78.0±1.3      79.3±3.6    61.1±3.6    67.6±1.0
      Medium           Walker2d        83.1±0.8        82.3±1.7      82.5±1.4    79.0±2.8    74.0±1.4
      Med-Replay      Halfcheetah      45.0±0.3        42.3±3.3      39.3±4.1    41.9±2.5    36.6±0.8
      Med-Replay       Hopper          97.8±0.3        98.3±2.6       100±0.7    91.5±3.6    82.7±7.0
      Med-Replay       Walker2d        88.3±3.8        80.6±2.5        75±4.3    82.6±6.9    66.6±3.0

The standard deviation numbers for all RvS baselines are shown in Table 4. Trifle achieves relatively
lower standard deviations than other baselines, indicating that Trifle performs more robustly. Notably,


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the results of different baselines are averaged over different numbers of random seeds. In general,
we evaluate Trifle on 12 random seeds. However, towards a more reliable evaluation, we improved
the number of random seeds to 20 for tasks with relatively high standard deviation. The number of
evaluation seeds for BR-RCRL, DD, TT, and DT are 4, 5, 15, and 3, respectively.


                                                17
