Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SSESSING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
ON C LIMATE I NFORMATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Understanding how climate change affects us and learning about available solu-
         tions are key steps toward empowering individuals and communities to mitigate
         and adapt to it. As Large Language Models (LLMs) rise in popularity, it is nec-
         essary to assess their capability in this domain. In this study, we present a com-
         prehensive evaluation framework, grounded in science communication principles,
         to analyze LLM responses to climate change topics. Our framework emphasizes
         both the presentational and epistemological adequacy of answers, offering a fine-
         grained analysis of LLM generations. Spanning 8 dimensions and 30 distinct
         issues, the task is a real-world example of a growing number of challenging prob-
         lems where AI can complement and lift human performance. We introduce a
         novel, practical protocol for scalable oversight that relies on AI Assistance and
         raters with relevant education. We evaluate several recent LLMs on a set of pop-
         ular climate questions. Our results point to a significant gap between surface and
         epistemological quality of LLMs in the realm of climate communication.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As concerns around climate change continue to intensify (Poushter et al., 2022; WHO, 2021), more
and more people turn to digital media as their primary source of information (Newman et al., 2021).
However, in spite of ubiquitous access to information, there remains a considerable gap in public
climate literacy, exacerbated by the spread of mis- and disinformation (Leiserowitz et al., 2022).
The challenge of conveying climate data arises from the nature of scientific communication itself:
science, as an evolving domain, is laden with specialized knowledge, technical complexity, and
inherent uncertainties (Moser, 2016). The digital media landscape, characterized by limited attention
spans and adversarial dynamics, further compounds these challenges (Pearce et al., 2019).
We explore the potential of AI in curating and presenting climate information in an accessible man-
ner. While AI’s promise in addressing global climate challenges is evident through its applications
in climate modeling, energy optimization, and disaster management (Rolnick et al., 2022), its in-
tersection with Natural Language Processing (NLP) is still under-explored. Recent advancements
in LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023) have captured the attention
of the scientific community and the general public for their performance on standard benchmarks,
and their broad approachability as information technology. Given their tremendous potential, there
is hope that LLMs may support us in addressing climate information challenges.
However, using LLMs to address science-related information needs raises safety concerns, due to
their limitations in assessing factuality (Weidinger et al., 2021; Birhane et al., 2023). Fluent, gram-
matical responses and advanced linguistic dialogue behaviors are preferred and trusted by users,
even in the absence of trustworthy information (Chiesurin et al., 2023). This makes evaluating
LLMs, especially with non-expert human raters, treacherous. Research on how to evaluate systems
that may achieve or exceed human abilities, or scalable oversight (Amodei et al., 2016) is so far
mostly theoretical (Irving et al., 2018; Leike et al., 2018; Christiano et al., 2018).
Our work contributes to this growing field. We have meticulously developed a framework based
on Science Communication research, tailored to the responses of LLMs within the climate change
context. Research points out the importance of how information is presented (Jamieson et al., 2017).
Drawing on the wealth of scientific knowledge, we examine relevant principles and best practices to
propose an implementation of a human assessment framework that delivers high-quality results with


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                      InstructGPT (davinci-002)
                                                                                          4.75
                                                                                                                      InstructGPT (davinci-003)
                                                                                           4.5


                                                              Mean Rating (1-5), 95% CI
                                                                                                                      InstructGPT (turbo)
                                                                                          4.25                        ChatGPT
                                                                                            4                         PaLM-2 (text-bison)
                                                                                                                      GPT4
                                                                                          3.75
                                                                                                                      Falcon (180B-Chat)
                                                                                           3.5
                                                                                          3.25
                                                                                            3
                                                                                          2.75
                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                          2.25
                                                                                                 Avg Presentational   Avg Epistemological



(a) Example of a question, answer, AI Assistance and (b) Aggregated (simple average) presentational and
human rating.                                        epistemological ratings.

                       Figure 1: Rated example and average results for several LLMs.


educated (but non-expert) raters. We present results from an empirical study on a set of 300 questions
concerning popular, as well as long-debated, topics on climate change. We systematically assess
presentational properties such as style, clarity, linguistic correctness, and tone. More importantly,
we also assess epistemological issues: accuracy, specificity, completeness, and uncertainty.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce a principled evaluation framework for
LLMs on climate information,1 developed through a rigorous interdisciplinary approach. (2) To
improve rating performance, we introduce a novel protocol for scalable oversight that uses AI As-
sistance (cf. Figure 1a) and relies on raters with relevant educational background. (3) Our experi-
ments involve the most recent and prominent LLMs to demonstrate the relevance of the evaluation.
(4) Results (Figure 1b) suggest that, while exceptionally fluent, current LLMs have much room for
improvement regarding content quality on climate information. Thus, our framework provides con-
crete directions for improving future LLMs for communicating scientific information. (5) Finally,
we analyze the relation of these dimensions to attribution-based evaluations of LLMs (Rashkin et al.,
2022) and find that they emerge as mostly orthogonal and complementary aspects.
We also emphasize that our experiments are the first on this topic. As such, our analysis and its
conclusions are limited to the current setting. For instance, we don’t apply model-specific prompt
engineering or reasoning methods, which are known to be effective. More generally, we highlight
two challenging questions that this work leaves unanswered: 1) the way individual dimensions
should be combined in single metrics, e.g., for model selection, and, 2) how to model and alleviate
the bias introduced by the AI Assistance. The former problem involves value-based choices that
may require a task-specific setting. The latter will be one of the main focuses of our future work.


2       E VALUATIVE D IMENSIONS FOR C LIMATE I NFORMATION

Scholarship on science communication – originating from disciplines such as communication sci-
ence, sociology, psychology, human geography, and education, among others (Trench & Bucchi,
2021; Nisbet et al., 2018; Jamieson et al., 2017) – offers conceptual arguments and empirical evi-
dence for appropriately disseminating scientific information, e.g., on climate change, to the general
public (König et al., 2023; Lewis Jr. & Wai, 2021). Two basic dimensions have to be distinguished
here. (1) Presentational features of the messages that contain the information, such as their compre-
hensibility (Lang, 2000), to ensure that recipients can receive, understand, memorize, and retrieve
such information. We conceive this dimension as presentational adequacy. (2) The conveyed infor-
mation must represent the current state of scientific knowledge as adequately and comprehensively
as possible while being specific and appropriately communicating associated uncertainties (Fähnrich
et al., 2023). We conceive this dimension as epistemological adequacy.

    1
        To aid reproducibility, we provide the exact evaluation protocols and all prompts used to generate data.


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1     P RESENTATIONAL A DEQUACY

An adequate presentation should comply with three criteria (Jamieson et al., 2017): (1) be compre-
hensible, (2) aid understanding through layout and visualizations, and (3) use appropriate sources
and references. Here we focus primarily on comprehensibility. We return to sources and refer-
ences in Section 4 and discuss visualization in Section 5. The comprehensibility of a text can be
conceptualized along four criteria: style, clarity, linguistic correctness, and tone.
Style. The language style should not be too informal or colloquial (Mazer & Hunt, 2008), as this
can undermine the credibility of information and cause users to rely on their own rather than ex-
pert judgements (Scharrer et al., 2012). Moreover, texts should not be too short, because exposure
to brief snippets of scientific information may lead recipients to get a “feeling of knowing” from
reading messages that contain insufficient information (Leonhard et al., 2020). Long texts, however,
require high motivation and cognitive resources that readers may not want to invest (Lang, 2000).
In addition, some stylistic dimensions can be borrowed from the Multidimensional Quality Metrics
(MQM) framework, which was designed to assess the quality of (machine) translated texts (Lom-
mel et al., 2013). One of the MQM’s core dimensions is ‘terminology’, referring to the correct and
consistent use of (in this case scientific) terminology.
Clarity. Climate-related messages should be clearly formulated (Maibach et al., 2023). Risk and
health communication research also support the efficacy of concise and clear language, as less
detailed texts require less cognitive effort and are preferred by users (Fagerlin & Peters, 2011;
Neuhauser & Paul, 2011). The use of jargon should be avoided (Baram-Tsabari & Lewenstein,
2013; Baram-Tsabari et al., 2020), as technical terms can inhibit readers’ ability to process informa-
tion (Bullock et al., 2019; Brooks, 2017; Shulman et al., 2020). Clarity seems particularly relevant
for individuals with lower numeracy skills (Bruine de Bruin & Bostrom, 2013). If numbers are used,
the presentation should be tailored to the recipient’s numeracy level (Fagerlin & Peters, 2011).
Correctness. MQM (Lommel et al., 2013) emphasizes that messages should adhere to linguistic
quality criteria to be comprehensible: One of its core components is adherence to linguistic con-
ventions, i.e., the correct use of punctuation, spelling, and grammar.2 Violating these criteria can
damage the perceived credibility of the message or its sender (Berger, 2020) and has been shown to
influence behavior (e.g., Mollick, 2014). Accordingly, linguistic correctness is an important aspect
of the presentational adequacy of science communication (Mercer-Mapstone & Kuchel, 2017).
Tone. The tone of a message is essential. It concerns the neutrality of the tone, its persuasiveness and
its positivity or negativity. Messages should not adopt or lean towards a certain valence, worldview,
or ideological conviction in order to be effective (Blanton & Ikizer, 2019; Yuan & Lu, 2020). In
climate-related messages a neutral tone can be more effective than a persuasive tone (Kerr et al.,
2022; Munoz-Carrier et al., 2020). Likewise, messages should not use too positively or negatively
valenced language, particularly if the goal is to convey factual information (Palm et al., 2020).

2.2     E PISTEMOLOGICAL A DEQUACY

The epistemological adequacy of climate-related messages is of greatest importance. This entails
several aspects: (1) accuracy, (2) specificity, (3) completeness, (4) the degree of (un)certainty, and
(5) the presentation of methods and methodology. We focus on the first four dimensions here,
leaving the latter for future work (cf. also the discussion in Section 5).
Accuracy. A basic principle is that scientific information – such as climate change information
presented by LLMs – should be accurate (Kelesidou & Chabrol, 2021). Incorrect, wrong, or self-
contradictory information that takes scientific findings or anecdotal evidence out of context should
be prevented. (Hinnant et al., 2016). This is particularly important when considering known accu-
racy issues of LLMs such as hallucination (Schäfer, 2023; Ji et al., 2023).
Specificity. Information that is important to the audience should not be missed, while ignoring
irrelevant information. Communication should address the regional and temporal contexts of target
audiences. In other words, it should be relevant to the respective audience, i.e., should fit their
personal contexts spatially and temporally. Research shows that specific, local information leads to
a higher perceived relevance among recipients (Leiserowitz & Smith, 2017; Lee et al., 2015). For
   2
       https://themqm.info/typology


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


an answer to have high temporal fit, it should address the time frame mentioned in the question.
For questions where a specific time frame is not specified, the answer should generally be based on
information and data that is up to date. Research has also shown that “here & now” associations can
be powerful in science communication (Holmes et al., 2020).
Completeness. Answers should be complete. Rather than only referring to a part of the ques-
tion posed, the answer should be formulated in a way that addresses all parts of the question in
full (Bergquist et al., 2022; Leiserowitz & Smith, 2017). At the same time, to answer all aspects
of the question, the information given should reflect the depth and breadth of relevant scientific
knowledge available regarding the topic(s) addressed by the question (Kelesidou & Chabrol, 2021).
Uncertainty. Communicating the level of agreement and certainty for scientific findings can be
crucial to adequately informing the audience (Budescu et al., 2012; Howe et al., 2019). Likewise,
when the level of agreement or quantified certainty is unknown, the audience should be informed
about the uncertainty and/or isolation of the supporting evidence (Keohane et al., 2014). This is par-
ticularly important in climate communication (Chinn & Hart, 2021; Goldberg et al., 2022; Maertens
et al., 2020), as the scientific consensus on climate change has been found to function as a “gateway
belief”, implying that perceived scientific agreement can positively influence the belief in human-
caused climate change and motivate public action (van der Linden et al., 2015).

3       P RESENTATIONAL AND E PISTEMOLOGICAL A DEQUACY E VALUATION
3.1      S COPE

We experiment with our evaluative dimensions using a human rating framework. A comprehensive
evaluation of LLMs on climate information should cover a broad spectrum of information needs, in-
cluding the basics of climate science, mitigation, adaptation etc. Context-specific information needs
are also necessary; e.g., to address the concerns of more vulnerable or under-resourced communities.
This is not an easy problem as no standardized tests exist to assess climate-related knowledge. We
begin by focusing on a set of popular topics and long-debated questions. For this purpose, we turn to
search engines, popular climate forums and Wikipedia. These are by no means the most important,
or most useful, or hardest questions on the topic. But they provide a reasonable starting point that
allows us to build a framework that can hopefully support delving into deeper topics.

3.2      DATA

Questions. We collect a diverse set of 300 questions from three different sources. For the first set,
we use GPT-4 to generate questions from the English Wikipedia articles. First, we select articles
that are related to climate change, then we feed in the paragraphs of each of the selected articles
to GPT-4 and task the model to generate questions that can be answered by the paragraph. For the
second set, we turn to Skeptical Science, a website that publishes authoritative information about
climate science. We take the list of debated myths3 and manually rephrase them as questions. For
the third set, we use Google Trends, a tool that provides data on public interest in specific search
terms and topics.4 We collect the most popular questions, by search volume, from the U.S., for the
topics ‘Climate Change’ and ‘Global Warming’. We post-process all questions to remove duplicates,
questions that are not related to climate change, and questions that are taken out of context. Finally,
we sample 100 questions from each set. Please see Appendix C.1 for the details.
Answers. There are many ways to get answers from LLMs. The quality can vary greatly depending
on prompt engineering, reasoning schemes, in-context learning etc. However, a straight question is
the most common way for users to get answers from LLMs. As such it provides a solid baseline,
reducing variance due to individual LLM’s skills and the challenge of finding local optima in the
absence of pre-existing data. Thus, we intentionally focus on a plain prompt, leaving more advanced
techniques to future work. We prompt each LLM with the instruction: You are an expert on climate
change communication. Answer each question in a 3-4 sentence paragraph. We include the answer
length information to anchor the expected answer form on an objective value, thus reducing answer
structure variance and possible cascading confounding factors at evaluation time.
    3
        https://skepticalscience.com/argument.php
    4
        https://trends.google.com/trends/.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Keypoints. To find supporting evidence for an answer, for AI Assistance and attribution evaluations
(Section 4), we extract keypoints from each answer. To do so, we instruct GPT-4 to examine all the
statements in the answer, and identify 1 to 3 key statements that are made to answer the question.
Evidence. We fetch evidence for each keypoint in the answer. Given the question and the answer, we
first ask GPT-4 to provide URL(s) of Wikipedia articles that support the answer. We limit evidence
to Wikipedia because GPT-4 is fairly consistent in generating relevant, valid Wikipedia URLs, while
the quality is lower for other web sources. Furthermore, Wikipedia is uniform in style and quality
as it adheres to established guidelines. We break down each article into its paragraphs. For each
keypoint, we ask the model to rank the paragraphs based on their relevance to the keypoint and the
question, and pick the 3 highest ranking as the evidence. Table 7 shows an example. We found
that using keypoints, in combination with URL generation and evidence selection, is a simple and
effective solution, compared to a paired retrieval components, for our current setup.
AI Assistance. To assist human raters, we use GPT-4 to generate assistance along the dimensions
introduced in Section 2. For each dimension, we ask the model to express its agreement or dis-
agreement that the information is presented well according to that dimension. For epistemological
dimension, we also provide the retrieved evidence and instruct the model to use that verbatim to
support its disagreement (if any). Please refer to Table 4 for a complete list of prompts used to
generate the data, and to Appendix E for some statistics of the generated answers.

3.3     R ATING F RAMEWORK AND R ATERS

Our rating task involves evaluating an answer based on the four presentational (Section 2.1) and the
four epistemological dimensions (Section 2.2). Screenshots of the template can be found in Ap-
pendix M.4. We select candidate raters with relevant educational background (see Appendix M.1).
To be admitted to the task, after finishing a brief tutorial, the raters need to pass an admission test that
evaluates their performance on three full examples (see Appendix M.3). A summary of the broad
demographics of raters that participated can be found in Appendix M.1. Each answer is assessed by
three human raters. We compute agreement metrics for all experiments and report the numbers in
Appendix H. We don’t forbid or discourage consulting external sources, but specify that this should
be done nimbly, to clarify specific points and not for extensive research.

3.4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In Figure 1b we provide a synthetic view of the results by averaging within the presentational and
epistemological dimensions, to illustrate the main take-home that LLMs overall are much better in
the presentational dimensions. Otherwise, we only report individual dimensions result. We inten-
tionally avoid suggesting ways of combining the individual dimensions into single metrics. How
to combine the scores in appropriate ways is an important, and non-trivial, problem for making
decisions, but it’s besides the scope of this work.
High-level view. Figure 1b provides an overview of the rating results for the following LLMs:
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), ChatGPT-3.5, InstructGPT (turbo), InstructGPT (text-davinci-003),
InstructGPT (text-davinci-002)5 , as well as PaLM2 (text-bison) (Anil et al., 2023) and
Falcon-180B-Chat6 . For a full summary of results, for all the individual dimensions, see Figure 2.
All models, except for InstructGPT (text-davinci-002), perform well on presentation (Figure 1b and
Table 1). This demonstrates how far LLMs have come in terms of surface form quality, seemingly
after the introduction of learning from human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022). We note, however,
a marked performance drop for tone (cf. Figure 2). This dimension captures more subtle challenges
for LLMs, touching on aspects related to Pragmatics (Levinson, 1983). Table 23 shows an example,
while Appendix B elaborates on the subject in the broader context of argumentative style.
The epistemological evaluation reveals lower performance on all systems. Except for accuracy (Fig-
ure 2), performance is consistently below average, especially for completeness and uncertainty. We
also note that the latter epistemological dimensions may be difficult to satisfy in short 3-4 sentence
answers. Being comprehensive in such a short space is harder than being accurate. On the other
   5
       https://platform.openai.com/docs/models.
   6
       https://falconllm.tii.ae/falcon.html.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                   4                                  InstructGPT (davinci-002)
                            4.5
                                                                                                                      InstructGPT (davinci-003)
Mean Rating (1-5), 95% CI                                                                                             InstructGPT (turbo)
                                                                                  3.5                                 ChatGPT
                             4                                                                                        PaLM-2 (text-bison)
                                                                                                                      GPT4
                                                                                   3                                  Falcon (180B-Chat)
                            3.5


                                                                                  2.5
                             3



                            2.5                                                    2

                                  Style        Clarity   Correctness   Tone             Accuracy   Specificity   Completeness     Uncertainty



                                          Figure 2: Results for all presentational and epistemological dimensions.


hand, we notice that LLMs can also waste space on generic statements (cf. Appendix B). Overall,
on climate information, current top-of-the-line LLMs have significant headroom for improvement.
For examples, please see Tables 24 to 27. Table 2 reports complete results and confidence intervals.

Resolution and Range. Our evaluation has often sufficient resolution to tell models apart on specific
dimensions, indicate where they differ and suggest trends. For instance, ChatGPT is the best amongst
the LLMs tested in the presentation dimensions, except tone, but ranks between position 4 and last
on the epistemological scores (Figure 2). This brings up the hypothesis of tradeoffs between presen-
tational and epistemological properties. In fact, GPT-4 is always better than ChatGPT on the episto-
mological evals but worse on most presentational ones. Noticeably, the most competitive model on
the epistemological dimensions is a recent open model, Falcon-180B-Chat. Falcon-180B-Chat’s
performance may be related to its large size, but we can only speculate as this information is not
generally available for all models. More generally, the difference between the best LLM and the
worst in specific dimensions – e.g., Falcon-180B-Chat and InstructGPT (text-davinci-002) on the
epistemological ones, and, respectively, ChatGPT and InstructGPT (text-davinci-002) on the first
three presentational ones – is large compared to the estimated standard deviation, providing evidence
that the evaluation has sufficient dynamic range.
Impact of AI Assistance. Raters should identify more (real) issues with assistance, because it may
make them aware of additional issues. We find supporting evidence in two separate experiments.
Figure 3a reports the number of issues detected for each dimension on GPT-4 answers in three differ-
ent settings, each with a different degree of the raters’ exposure to assistance. The setting ‘Without
AI Assistance’ refers to a setting where a pool of raters is never provided with assistance. The sec-
ond setting ‘Without AI Assistance, but previous exposure’ refers to a setting where no assistance
was shown, but the raters have worked on previous studies that included assistance.7 Lastly, ‘With
AI Assistance’ denotes the standard setting where assistance is shown anytime is available. Results
suggest that the presence of assistance is key for detecting more issues. This is consistent with the
results from Saunders et al. (2022), who found improved rater performance with assistance. Raters
with extensive previous exposure to assistance are in an interesting “middle” position: They detect
more issues than the assistance-unaware group, but less than the group provided with specific assis-
tance for the experiment. This suggests that raters learn from repeated exposure to assistance, and
show improved performance even when no assistance is present.
Further evidence of the usefulness of AI Assistance comes from our validation experiments (cf.
Appendix G for more details). Similar to Saunders et al. (2022), we want to determine if assistance
helps surface real issues, without general access to gold truth in our data. To do this, the authors
manually generated 30 different examples, each exhibiting a particular issue. We found that the
majority of three raters detected 77% of issues when shown assistance, while the majority of three
raters only detected 60% of the issues when not shown assistance. The data we collected on the
   7
     We do make sure that the raters have not worked on the same examples before and have never seen assis-
tance for the specific examples they are working on.


                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                             6
              800      Without AI assistance.
                       Without AI assistance, but previous exposure.
              700                                                                                            5
                       With AI assistance.
              600
Issue Count

                                                                                                             4
              500


                                                                                               Helpfulness
              400
                                                                                                             3
              300

              200                                                                                            2

              100
                                                                                                             1
                0
                    Sty     Cla       Co       To      Ac      Sp       Co        Un
                       l       rity     rre       ne     cur     e         mp        c
                        e                  ctn              acy cifici        lete ertain                    0
                                              ess                      ty         nes     ty
                                                                                      s                          1   2     3         4         5
                                                                                                                         Rating

(a) Number of issues detected depending on                                                     (b) The relationship between rating and reported help-
AI Assistance exposure.                                                                        fulness of the AI assistance (on the same scale).

                                                 Figure 3: Evidence of the impact of AI Assistance.


helpfulness of assistance suggests that when raters do not find assistance helpful, they give higher
ratings (see Figure 3b). This indicates that the raters can think critically about the assistance and
do not follow it blindly. These experiments provide evidence that the AI Assistance helps the raters
find real issues that they would not have otherwise been discovered.
Other Findings. Comparing the rating outcome by source of the question – Skeptical Science,
GTrends, and synthetic questions based on Wikipedia paragraphs – we find no major differences,
with a slight trend that Wikipedia questions tend to be more specific and thus harder to answer. In
particular, we see no evidence that GPT-4 performs better on questions that were generated with
GPT-4 compared to the other sources. Similarly, the topic of the question does not show a strong
correlation with answer quality. See Appendix I for additional discussion and figures. In prelim-
inary experiments, we also find that describing the evaluation criteria in the prompt can improve
performance on the difficult dimensions, cf. Appendix A.1. Interestingly, this comes at the cost of
degraded performance on the presentational dimensions.


4               E PISTEMOLOGICAL A DEQUACY AND ATTRIBUTION

Audiences of science and climate communication are more likely to trust information if the source
is perceived as credible, engaged and concerned about the audience’s interests (Brown & Bruhn,
2011; Maibach et al., 2023; Hayhoe, 2018). An adequate presentation of climate information should
include curated references. To address the factuality limitations of LLMs, researchers have proposed
Attribution to Identified Source (AIS) as a dedicated evaluation (Rashkin et al., 2022; Dziri et al.,
2022). An attributable answer must include an explicit quote, from an existing document, in order
to support its claims and reduce hallucination (Menick et al., 2022; Bohnet et al., 2023).
Evaluating the ability of LLMs to properly reference the statements they make goes beyond the
scope of this paper. For instance, as proposed by Liu et al. (2023), this may involve evaluating gen-
erative search engines. However, we started examining the relationship between attribution and the
epistemological dimensions with an AIS experiment. We run this experiment only on GPT-4. In our
data, each answer is associated with a set of keypoints which, in turn, are used to identify Wikipedia
articles that are likely to contain supporting evidence. For 87.7% of the questions, GPT-4 produces a
valid Wikipedia article from which evidence passages can be extracted. We evaluate the attribution
of each keypoint individually by asking the annotators whether a keypoint is fully, partially or not
supported by the evidence. 66.79% of keypoints are either fully or partially supported. At the an-
swer level, 46.08% of the answers are fully or partially supported by the evidence. While far from
perfect, the data suffices for a first analysis (cf. Appendix F for details).
Figure 4 compares the distribution of average epistemological ratings, with respect to the attribu-
tion of answers, revealing interesting trends. In both the accuracy and specificity dimensions, we
observe that answers that are fully attributed have higher minimum ratings compared to answers


                                                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Accuracy                                            Specificity
                                                                               5
                           4                                                   4

                           3                                                   3

                                                                               2
                           2
          Average Rating
                               Not Supported    Partially    Fully                 Not Supported    Partially     Fully


                                               Uncertainty                                         Completeness

                           4
                                                                               4
                           3                                                   3
                           2                                                   2

                           1                                                   1
                               Not Supported    Partially    Fully                 Not Supported    Partially     Fully
                                                                         AIS


    Figure 4: Comparing AIS ratings with average ratings of the 4 epistemological dimensions.


that are only partially attributed, or not attributed at all. Interestingly, we see an opposite pattern
in the completeness dimension: Answers that are fully attributed have lower minimum ratings on
completeness. This result highlights a blind spot for attribution methods; AIS can only consider
what is included in the answers, and not what important information is missing. In the uncertainty
dimension, we observe that there are more answers with low uncertainty ratings among the answers
that are not attributed, compared to answers that are either partially or fully attributed.
More generally, there does not seem to be any correlation between AIS and epistemological re-
sults. The Spearman’s coefficient between AIS and the 3-raters mean rating value for accuracy,
specificity, uncertainty and completeness are, respectively: 0.03, −0.06, 0.002, −0.02, with corre-
sponding p-values: 0.65, 0.31, 0.97, 0.78. We interpret this as evidence that AIS and epistemological
assessments are orthogonal and complementary. We provide more qualitative support in Table 8. At
a high level, this suggests that attribution, either human or model-based, is not a reliable proxy for
epistemological quality. On the other hand, grounding in authoritative sources is required of good
science communication. We leave it to future work to extend our framework to include references
in a principled way.


5   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Our rating dimensions inherently have a subjective component, introducing noise when evaluating
at the answer-level. However, our findings suggest that the evaluation is robust at the system level.
Another limitation of our work is that we do not have access to gold ratings. As procuring reliable
human judgements becomes unfeasible and/or uneconomical, especially for complex and difficult
tasks, such a setting is likely to become more common in the future. Hence, this poses an excit-
ing challenge for future studies, and we envision evaluation frameworks of the kind proposed here
serving as a valuable testbed to develop new protocols for scalable oversight. A related topic is the
role of LLMs as raters. Preliminary experiments are promising (Appendix L). We found that, as
with humans, LLMs benefit from AI Assistance and that humans and LLM raters tend to agree on
major points. What bias gets introduced by assistance (and rating), and how to measure and control
it properly, is a significant open question that needs to be addressed. This links this research to the
broader AI alignment field. How to model and alleviate the bias introduced by the AI Assistance
will be one of the main focuses of our future work.
Ideally, an answer would be tailored towards the audience, and take into account their specific at-
tributes (Hendriks et al., 2016; Klinger & Metag, 2021). Unless specifically prompted, LLMs do
not do this. We explore in Appendix B how the kind of arguments LLMs seem to gravitate towards
may hurt their efficacy with some audiences, and leave further exploration to future work. Research
also provides abundant evidence on the importance of supplementing textual information with visual


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aids in the form of cartoons, charts, pictographs and videos (Flemming et al., 2018; Brown & Bruhn,
2011). Visual complements can be especially useful for understanding quantitative data (Fagerlin &
Peters, 2011) and in the case of limited literacy (Wolf et al., 2010). The abstract nature of climate
change, and its distant implications, makes visualization particularly challenging (Schäfer, 2020).

6       R ELATED W ORK
Evaluating LLMs. While LLMs can generate fluent text, responses are not always adequately
grounded, attributable to reliable sources, and complete. For instance, Liu et al. (2023) assess four
generative search engines and report that, although responses are perceived as high quality, only half
are fully supported. Their findings reveal an inverse correlation between fluency/utility and eviden-
tial support. Xu et al. (2023) advocate for expert-level human evaluations in question answering,
cautioning against over-reliance on single metrics instead of comprehensive assessments. Another
domain that needs expert-level evaluation is the medical domain. Singhal et al. (2023) propose
Med-PaLM, an LLM for medical information, and introduces a clinical evaluation framework.These
cover criteria like alignment with scientific consensus, potential harm, and comprehension. Evalu-
ating LLMs on climate information is another domain that can benefit from expert-level evaluation.
However, prior work mainly emphasizes text classification (Diggelmann et al., 2020; Varini et al.,
2020) and sustainability report analysis (Webersinke et al., 2022; Bingler et al., 2022). This study
aims to fill this gap by providing a comprehensive evaluation framework for climate change.
Scalable Oversight. This area, introduced by Amodei et al. (2016), studies the question of how
to scale human oversight, especially in the setting where evaluating (or supervising) models be-
comes increasingly difficult. Contributions have initially focused on theoretical proposals for how
AI can help humans supervise models that exceed their abilities (Irving et al., 2018; Leike et al.,
2018; Christiano et al., 2018). Following Irving et al. (2018), one can see our AI Assistance as a
single-turn debate, where the human annotator is shown the answer proposed by the model and a
single response to that answer.8 Two recent studies provide interesting proofs of concepts for AI
Assistance: Bowman et al. (2022) study sandwiching, an approach where non-experts align a model
with the help of a model while experts provide validation. They show that non-expert raters per-
form better on an (artificially) difficult multiple-choice task when interacting with a dialogue agent.
Saunders et al. (2022) report that human raters of summarization tasks produce more critiques when
given the opportunity to accept or edit critiques written by a model. Our work contributes a study of
a scalable oversight protocol to improve rating quality in a realistic setting.
AI Ratings. Recent studies explore the feasibility of evaluations performed by AI. Kocmi & Fed-
ermann (2023) indicate that LLMs can perform state-of-the-art quality assessment of translations,
even without references. Their work has been extended to automatic MQM annotation by Fernandes
et al. (2023). Gilardi et al. (2023) reports that ChatGPT has a higher agreement with expert-level
raters than with less qualified ones. Chiang & Lee (2023) argue that humans and LLMs ratings
are correlated but point out LLM’s factuality and bias limitations. Instead of replacing human raters
entirely, in our work we demonstrate the effectiveness of using AI Assistance to aid educated raters.

7       C ONCLUSION
We introduce an evaluation framework informed by science communication research and assess
LLMs on a first set of common climate information needs. The task is difficult for human raters. To
support them, an important part of our framework relies on a novel and practical protocol for scal-
able oversight that leverages AI Assistance. It is important to realize that these are the first results of
this kind and more research is needed. In particular: we cover only a small set of general informa-
tion needs, and while there is evidence that AI Assistance is valuable in evaluating LLMs on such
tasks, we need to develop a framework to understand and mitigate the bias it carries. Overall, our
results suggest that, while presentationally adequate, current LLMs have much room for improve-
ment regarding the epistemological qualities of their outputs. More research is needed to improve
these aspects of LLMs. We hope our framework will not only directly be used to evaluate LLMs on
climate information, but also inspire other researchers to come up with better and more principled
evaluations in general.
    8
        In the setting of Irving et al. (2018), this corresponds to the second level of the polynomial hierarchy ΣP
                                                                                                                  2 .



                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

The details of our study design, including compensation rates, were reviewed by an independent eth-
ical review committee. All raters provided informed consent prior to completing tasks and received
fair compensation with respect to local markets. It is our policy that researchers must pay work-
ers/participants at least the living wage for their location. No personally identifiable information
(PII) was collected or will be released.
We conducted the experiments in English, therefore we do not claim generalization of our findings
across languages. However, we believe that the proposed methods could be transferred to other
languages.
LLMs are already an important source of information for many people, and it is important to as-
sess whether they can adequately address information needs around climate change. Our work
contributes to this effort and sheds light on both the potential and the limitation of LLMs in this
domain.


R EFERENCES
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul F. Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
  Concrete problems in AI safety. CoRR, abs/1606.06565, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1606.06565.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Brad-
  bury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christo-
  pher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa De-
  hghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu
  Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy
  Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy
  Hurwitz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy,
  Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li,
  Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Mar-
  cello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary
  Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex
  Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros,
  Aurko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov,
  David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli,
  Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yun-
  han Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang
  Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.

Ayelet Baram-Tsabari and Bruce V. Lewenstein. An instrument for assessing scientists’ written
  skills in public communication of science. Science Communication, 35(1):56–85, 2013. ISSN
  1075-5470. doi: 10.1177/1075547012440634.

Ayelet Baram-Tsabari, Orli Wolfson, Roy Yosef, Noam Chapnik, Adi Brill, and Elad Segev. Jar-
  gon use in public understanding of science papers over three decades. Public Understanding of
  Science, 29(6):644–654, 2020. ISSN 0963-6625. doi: 10.1177/0963662520940501.

Charles R. Berger. Planning strategic interaction: Attaining goals through communicative action.
  Routledge, 2020. ISBN 9781003064190. doi: 10.4324/9781003064190.

Parrish Bergquist, Jennifer R Marlon, Matthew H Goldberg, Abel Gustafson, Seth A Rosenthal, and
  Anthony Leiserowitz. Information about the human causes of global warming influences causal
  attribution, concern, and policy support related to global warming. Thinking & Reasoning, 28(3):
  465–486, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Julia Anna Bingler, Mathias Kraus, Markus Leippold, and Nicolas Webersinke. Cheap talk and
  cherry-picking: What climatebert has to say on corporate climate risk disclosures. Finance
  Research Letters, 47, 2022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1544612322000897.
Abeba Birhane, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, David Leslie, and Sandra Wachter. Science in the age of
  large language models. Nature Reviews Physics, 5, 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s42254-023-00581-4.
Hart Blanton and Elif G. Ikizer. Elegant science narratives and unintended influences: An agenda
  for the science of science communication. Social Issues and Policy Review, 13(1):154–181, 2019.
  ISSN 17512395. doi: 10.1111/sipr.12055.
Bernd Bohnet, Vinh Q. Tran, Pat Verga, Roee Aharoni, Daniel Andor, Livio Baldini Soares,
  Massimiliano Ciaramita, Jacob Eisenstein, Kuzman Ganchev, Jonathan Herzig, Kai Hui, Tom
  Kwiatkowski, Ji Ma, Jianmo Ni, Lierni Sestorain Saralegui, Tal Schuster, William W. Cohen,
  Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das, Donald Metzler, Slav Petrov, and Kellie Webster. Attributed
  question answering: Evaluation and modeling for attributed large language models, 2023.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamilė
  Lukošiūtė, Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
  McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Daniela Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal
  Ndousse, Liane Lovitt, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas Joseph, Noemı́ Mercado,
  Nova DasSarma, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan,
  Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. Measuring
  progress on scalable oversight for large language models, 2022.
Catherine F. Brooks. Student identity and aversions to science. Journal of Language and Social
  Psychology, 36(1):112–126, 2017. ISSN 0261-927X. doi: 10.1177/0261927X16663259.
M. Brown and C. Bruhn. Chapter 11: Information and persuasion. In Baruch Fischhoff, Noel T.
 Brewer, and Julie S. Downs (eds.), Communicating risks and benefits: An evidence-based user’s
 guide, pp. 101–109. US Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., 2011.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
  R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Wändi Bruine de Bruin and Ann Bostrom. Assessing what to address in science communication.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 Suppl 3
 (Suppl 3):14062–14068, 2013. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1212729110.
David V Budescu, Han-Hui Por, and Stephen B Broomell. Effective communication of uncertainty
  in the ipcc reports. Climatic Change, 113:181–200, 2012.
Olivia M. Bullock, Daniel Colón Amill, Hillary C. Shulman, and Graham N. Dixon. Jargon as a
  barrier to effective science communication: Evidence from metacognition. Public Understanding
  of Science, 28(7):845–853, 2019. ISSN 0963-6625. doi: 10.1177/0963662519865687.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human
  evaluations? In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15607–15631, Toronto, Canada, July 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.870.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sabrina Chiesurin, Dimitris Dimakopoulos, Marco Antonio Sobrevilla Cabezudo, Arash Eshghi,
  Ioannis Papaioannou, Verena Rieser, and Ioannis Konstas. The dangers of trusting stochastic
  parrots: Faithfulness and trust in open-domain conversational question answering. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 947–959, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.60. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.60.

Sedona Chinn and P Sol Hart. Effects of consensus messages and political ideology on climate
  change attitudes: inconsistent findings and the effect of a pretest. Climatic Change, 167(3-4):47,
  2021.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.

Paul F. Christiano, Buck Shlegeris, and Dario Amodei. Supervising strong learners by amplifying
  weak experts. CoRR, abs/1810.08575, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.08575.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416.

Thomas Diggelmann, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Jannis Bulian, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Markus
  Leippold. Climate-fever: A dataset for verification of real-world climate claims. In NeurIPS
  2020 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning, 2020.

Nouha Dziri, Hannah Rashkin, Tal Linzen, and David Reitter. Evaluating attribution in dialogue
  systems: The begin benchmark. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  10:1066–1083, 2022.

A. Fagerlin and E. Peters. Chapter 7: Quantitative information. In Baruch Fischhoff, Noel T. Brewer,
  and Julie S. Downs (eds.), Communicating risks and benefits: An evidence-based user’s guide,
  pp. 53–64. US Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., 2011.

Birte Fähnrich, Emma Weitkamp, and J. Frank Kupper. Exploring ’quality’ in science communi-
  cation online: Expert thoughts on how to assess and promote science communication quality in
  digital media contexts. Public Understanding of Science, 32(5):605–621, 2023. ISSN 0963-6625.
  doi: 10.1177/09636625221148054.

Patrick Fernandes, Daniel Deutsch, Mara Finkelstein, Parker Riley, André F. T. Martins, Graham
  Neubig, Ankush Garg, Jonathan H. Clark, Markus Freitag, and Orhan Firat. The devil is in the
  errors: Leveraging large language models for fine-grained machine translation evaluation, 2023.

Danny Flemming, Ulrike Cress, Sophia Kimmig, Miriam Brandt, and Joachim Kimmerle. Emo-
  tionalization in science communication: The impact of narratives and visual representations on
  knowledge gain and risk perception. Frontiers in Communication, 3:3, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd workers for
  text-annotation tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(30):e2305016120,
  2023. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2305016120. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
  2305016120.
Matthew H Goldberg, Abel Gustafson, Sander van der Linden, Seth A Rosenthal, and Anthony
 Leiserowitz. Communicating the scientific consensus on climate change: diverse audiences and
 effects over time. Environment and Behavior, 54(7-8):1133–1165, 2022.
Katharine Hayhoe. When facts are not enough. Science, 360(6392):943–943, 2018. doi: 10.1126/
  science.aau2565. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aau2565.
Friederike Hendriks, Dorothe Kienhues, and Rainer Bromme. Trust in science and the science
  of trust. In Bernd Blöbaum (ed.), Trust and communication in a digitized world, pp. 143–159.
  Springer, Cham, 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-28059-2.
Amanda Hinnant, Roma Subramanian, and Rachel Young. User comments on climate stories: im-
 pacts of anecdotal vs. scientific evidence. Climatic Change, 138(3-4):411–424, 2016. ISSN
 0165-0009. doi: 10.1007/s10584-016-1759-1.
K. J. Holmes, B. A. Wender, R. Weisenmiller, P. Doughman, and M. Kerxhalli-Kleinfield. Cli-
  mate assessment moves local. Earth’s Future, 8(2), 2020. ISSN 2328-4277. doi: 10.1029/
  2019EF001402.
Lauren C Howe, Bo MacInnis, Jon A Krosnick, Ezra M Markowitz, and Robert Socolow. Acknowl-
  edging uncertainty impacts public acceptance of climate scientists’ predictions. Nature Climate
  Change, 9(11):863–867, 2019.
Geoffrey Irving, Paul F. Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate. CoRR, abs/1805.00899,
  2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.00899.
Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Dan M. Kahan, and Dietram A. Scheufele. The Oxford Handbook of the
  Science of Science Communication. Oxford University Press, 2017. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190497620.001.0001.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3571730.
Fani Kelesidou and Elodie Chabrol (eds.). A comprehensive guide to Science Communication. Hin-
  dawi, 2021.
Robert O. Keohane, Melissa Lane, and Michael Oppenheimer. The ethics of scientific communi-
  cation under uncertainty. Politics, Philosophy & Economics, 13(4):343–368, 2014. ISSN 1470-
  594X. doi: 10.1177/1470594X14538570.
John R. Kerr, Claudia R. Schneider, Alexandra L. J. Freeman, Theresa Marteau, and Sander van der
  Linden. Transparent communication of evidence does not undermine public trust in evidence.
  PNAS nexus, 1(5):pgac280, 2022. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac280.
Kira Klinger and Julia Metag. Media effects in the context of environmental issues. In Bruno
  Takahashi, Julia Metag, Jagadish Thaker, and Suzannah Evans Comfort (eds.), The Handbook of
  International Trends in Environmental Communication, pp. 31–49. Routledge, New York, 2021.
  ISBN 9780367275204.
Tom Kocmi and Christian Federmann. Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of
  translation quality, 2023.
Laura M König, Marlene S Altenmüller, Julian Fick, Jan Crusius, Oliver Genschow, and Melanie
  Sauerland. How to communicate science to the public? recommendations for effective written
  communication derived from a systematic review, Aug 2023. URL psyarxiv.com/cwbrs.
Annie Lang. The limited capacity model of mediated message processing. Journal of Communica-
  tion, 50(1):46–70, 2000. ISSN 0021-9916. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2000.tb02833.x.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tien Ming Lee, Ezra M Markowitz, Peter D Howe, Chia-Ying Ko, and Anthony A Leiserowitz.
  Predictors of public climate change awareness and risk perception around the world. Nature
  Climate Change, 5(11):1014–1020, 2015.
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable
  agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. CoRR, abs/1811.07871, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07871.
A. Leiserowitz, E. Maibach, S. Rosenthal, J. Kotcher, L. Neyens, J. Marlon, J. Carman, K. Lacroix,
  and M Goldberg. Global warming’s six Americas, 2022.
Anthony Leiserowitz and Nicholas Smith. Affective imagery, risk perceptions, and climate change
  communication. In Anthony Leiserowitz and Nicholas Smith (eds.), Oxford research encyclo-
  pedia of climate science. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017. ISBN 9780190228620. doi:
  10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.307.
Larissa Leonhard, Veronika Karnowski, and Anna Sophie Kümpel. Online and (the feeling of be-
  ing) informed: Online news usage patterns and their relation to subjective and objective polit-
  ical knowledge. Computers in Human Behavior, 103:181–189, 2020. ISSN 07475632. doi:
  10.1016/j.chb.2019.08.008.
Stephen C. Levinson. Pragmatics. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University
  Press, 1983. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511813313.
Neil A. Lewis Jr. and J. Wai. Communicating what we know and what isn’t so: Science commu-
  nication in psychology. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(6):1242–1254, 2021. doi:
  10.1177/1745691620964062.
Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines,
  2023.
Arne Lommel, Aljoscha Burchardt, and Hans Uszkoreit. Multidimensional quality metrics: a flexi-
  ble system for assessing translation quality. In Proceedings of Translating and the Computer 35,
  London, UK, November 28-29 2013. Aslib. URL https://aclanthology.org/2013.tc-1.6.
Rakoen Maertens, Frederik Anseel, and Sander van der Linden. Combatting climate change mis-
  information: Evidence for longevity of inoculation and consensus messaging effects. Journal of
  Environmental Psychology, 70, 2020. ISSN 02724944. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2020.101455.
Edward W. Maibach, Sri Saahitya Uppalapati, Margaret Orr, and Jagadish Thaker. Harnessing the
  power of communication and behavior science to enhance society’s response to climate change.
  Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 51(1):53–77, 2023. ISSN 0084-6597. doi:
  10.1146/annurev-earth-031621-114417.
Joseph P. Mazer and Stephen K. Hunt. “cool” communication in the classroom: A preliminary ex-
  amination of student perceptions of instructor use of positive slang. Qualitative Research Reports
  in Communication, 9(1):20–28, 2008. ISSN 1745-9435. doi: 10.1080/17459430802400316.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nat McAleese.
  Teaching language models to support answers with verified quotes, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2203.11147.
Lucy Mercer-Mapstone and Louise Kuchel. Core skills for effective science communication: A
  teaching resource for undergraduate science education. International Journal of Science Educa-
  tion, Part B, 7(2):181–201, 2017. ISSN 2154-8455. doi: 10.1080/21548455.2015.1113573.
Ethan Mollick. The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. Journal of Business Ventur-
  ing, 29(1):1–16, 2014. ISSN 08839026. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2013.06.005.
S. Moser. Reflections on climate change communication research and practice in the second decade
   of the 21st century: what more is there to say? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change
   7(3), 345-369, 2016.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gala Munoz-Carrier, Dana Thomsen, and Gary J. Pickering. Psychological and experiential factors
  affecting climate change perception: learnings from a transnational empirical study and implica-
  tions for framing climate-related flood events. Environmental Research Communications, 2(4),
  2020. doi: 10.1088/2515-7620/ab89f9.
L. Neuhauser and K. Paul. Chapter 14: Readability, comprehension, and usability. In Baruch
  Fischhoff, Noel T. Brewer, and Julie S. Downs (eds.), Communicating risks and benefits: An
  evidence-based user’s guide, pp. 129–148. US Department of Health and Human Services, Wash-
  ington, D.C., 2011.
N. Newman, R. Fletcher, A. Schulz, S. Andi, C. T. Robertson, and R. K. Nielsen. Reuters institute
  digital news report 2021, 2021.
Matthew C. Nisbet, Shirley S. Ho, Ezra Markowitz, Saffron O’Neill, Mike S. Schäfer, and Jagadish
 Thaker (eds.). The Oxford encyclopedia of climate change communication. Oxford University
 Press, New York, 2018. ISBN 9780190498986. doi: 10.1093/acref/9780190498986.001.0001.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2023.
R. Orchinik, R. Dubey, S. J. Gershman, D. Powell, and R. Bhui. Learning from and about climate
  scientists, 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/ezua5.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Risa Palm, Toby Bolsen, and Justin T Kingsland. “don’t tell me what to do”: Resistance to climate
  change messages suggesting behavior changes. Weather, Climate, and Society, 12(4):827–835,
  2020.
W. Pearce, S. Niederer, S. M. Özkula, and N. Sánchez Querubı́n. The social media life of cli-
  mate change: Platforms, publics and future imaginaries. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: Climate
  change, 10(2), e569., 2019.
J. Poushter, M. Fagan, and S. Gubbala. Climate change remains top global threat across 19-country
   survey, 2022.
Hannah Rashkin, Vitaly Nikolaev, Matthew Lamm, Lora Aroyo, Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das,
  Slav Petrov, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Iulia Turc, and David Reitter. Measuring attribution in natural
  language generation models, 2022.
David Rolnick, Priya L. Donti, Lynn H. Kaack, Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran,
  Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, Alexan-
  dra Sasha Luccioni, Tegan Maharaj, Evan D. Sherwin, S. Karthik Mukkavilli, Konrad P. Kording,
  Carla P. Gomes, Andrew Y. Ng, Demis Hassabis, John C. Platt, Felix Creutzig, Jennifer Chayes,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Tackling climate change with machine learning. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(2),
  2022. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3485128.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators, 2022.
Mike S. Schäfer. Introduction to visualizing climate change. In David C. Holmes and Lucy M.
 Richardson (eds.), Research handbook on communicating climate change, Elgar handbooks in
 energy, the environment and climate change, pp. 127–130. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham,
 UK, 2020. ISBN 9781789900392.
Mike S. Schäfer. The notorious GPT: Science communication in the age of artificial intelligence.
 Journal of Science Communication, 22(2), 2023. ISSN 1824-2049. doi: 10.22323/2.22020402.
Mike S. Schäfer, Tobias Füchslin, Julia Metag, Silje Kristiansen, and Adrian Rauchfleisch. The
 different audiences of science communication: A segmentation analysis of the swiss population’s
 perceptions of science and their information and media use patterns. Public Understanding of
 Science, 27(7):836–856, 2018. doi: 10.1177/0963662517752886. URL https://doi.org/10.
 1177/0963662517752886.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lisa Scharrer, Rainer Bromme, M. Anne Britt, and Marc Stadtler. The seduction of easiness: How
  science depictions influence laypeople’s reliance on their own evaluation of scientific information.
  Learning and Instruction, 22(3):231–243, 2012. ISSN 09594752. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.
  2011.11.004.
Hillary C. Shulman, Graham N. Dixon, Olivia M. Bullock, and Daniel Colón Amill. The ef-
  fects of jargon on processing fluency, self-perceptions, and scientific engagement. Journal of
  Language and Social Psychology, 39(5-6):579–597, 2020. ISSN 0261-927X. doi: 10.1177/
  0261927X20902177.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. Nature, pp. 1–9, 2023.
Brian Trench and Massimiano Bucchi (eds.). Routledge handbook of public communication of sci-
  ence and technology. Routledge, Abingdon and New York, 2021. ISBN 9781003039242. doi:
  10.4324/9781003039242.
Sander L. van der Linden, Anthony A. Leiserowitz, Geoffrey D. Feinberg, and Edward W. Maibach.
  The scientific consensus on climate change as a gateway belief: experimental evidence. PloS
  One, 10(2):e0118489, 2015. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118489.
Francesco S. Varini, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Markus Leippold. Clima-
  Text: A dataset for climate change topic detection. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on Tackling
  Climate Change with Machine Learning, 2020.
Nicolas Webersinke, Mathias Kraus, Julia Bingler, and Markus Leippold. ClimateBERT: a pre-
  trained language model for climate-related text. In Proceedings of AAAI 2022 Fall Symposium:
  The Role of AI in Responding to Climate Challenges, 2022.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang,
  Myra Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, Zac Kenton, Sasha Brown, Will
  Hawkins, Tom Stepleton, Courtney Biles, Abeba Birhane, Julia Haas, Laura Rimell, Lisa Anne
  Hendricks, William S. Isaac, Sean Legassick, Geoffrey Irving, and Iason Gabriel. Ethical
  and social risks of harm from language models. CoRR, abs/2112.04359, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2112.04359.
WHO. 2021 World Health Organization: health and climate change global survey report, 2021.
Michael S. Wolf, Terry C. Davis, Patrick F. Bass, Laura M. Curtis, Lee A. Lindquist, Jennifer A.
 Webb, Mary V. Bocchini, Stacy Cooper Bailey, and Ruth M. Parker. Improving prescription drug
 warnings to promote patient comprehension. Archives of internal medicine, 170(1):50–56, 2010.
 doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.454.
Fangyuan Xu, Yixiao Song, Mohit Iyyer, and Eunsol Choi. A critical evaluation of evaluations for
  long-form question answering. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3225–3245, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.181. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.181.
Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Amin Ahmad, Mandy Guo, Jax Law, Noah Constant, Gustavo Hernan-
  dez Abrego, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. Multilin-
  gual universal sentence encoder for semantic retrieval. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 87–94, On-
  line, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-demos.12.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-demos.12.
Shupei Yuan and Hang Lu. “It’s global warming, stupid”: Aggressive communication styles and po-
  litical ideology in science blog debates about climate change. Journalism & Mass Communication
  Quarterly, 97(4):1003–1025, 2020.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     M AIN R ESULTS

See Figure 1b for a comparison along the main dimensions and Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 2 for
detailed results for all evaluated models.

 System                                     style              clarity          correctness             tone
 ChatGPT                               4.54 [4.50, 4.58]   4.56 [4.52, 4.60]   4.58 [4.54, 4.61]   3.06 [2.99, 3.13]
 InstructGPT (davinci-003)             4.15 [4.08, 4.22]   4.43 [4.38, 4.47]   4.47 [4.42, 4.52]   3.20 [3.12, 3.28]
 InstructGPT (davinci-002)             3.22 [3.13, 3.31]   3.63 [3.55, 3.70]   3.82 [3.74, 3.90]   3.17 [3.09, 3.24]
 InstructGPT (turbo)                   4.37 [4.32, 4.42]   4.40 [4.36, 4.45]   4.46 [4.42, 4.51]   3.41 [3.33, 3.48]
 PaLM-2 (text-bison)                   4.34 [4.28, 4.40]   4.48 [4.43, 4.53]   4.57 [4.53, 4.61]   3.19 [3.11, 3.27]
 GPT4                                  4.35 [4.30, 4.40]   4.34 [4.28, 4.39]   4.38 [4.34, 4.41]   3.26 [3.19, 3.34]
 Falcon (180B-Chat)                    4.36 [4.31, 4.41]   4.39 [4.35, 4.44]   4.41 [4.36, 4.45]   3.37 [3.30, 3.45]
 GPT4, no assistance, prev. exposure   4.59 [4.54, 4.63]   4.63 [4.59, 4.68]   4.66 [4.63, 4.70]   3.24 [3.16, 3.32]
 GPT4, no assistance                   4.45 [4.41, 4.50]   4.57 [4.53, 4.61]   4.74 [4.70, 4.77]   4.35 [4.29, 4.42]

       Table 1: Results along the presentational dimensions, with 95% confidence intervals.


 System                                   accuracy           specificity       completeness         uncertainty
 ChatGPT                               3.48 [3.41, 3.55]   2.71 [2.63, 2.78]   2.26 [2.20, 2.31]   2.05 [2.00, 2.09]
 InstructGPT (davinci-003)             3.52 [3.44, 3.60]   2.89 [2.81, 2.97]   2.43 [2.36, 2.50]   2.18 [2.11, 2.25]
 InstructGPT (davinci-002)             2.81 [2.73, 2.88]   2.49 [2.42, 2.56]   2.32 [2.26, 2.39]   2.35 [2.29, 2.41]
 InstructGPT (turbo)                   3.65 [3.58, 3.73]   2.79 [2.71, 2.86]   2.43 [2.37, 2.50]   2.24 [2.19, 2.30]
 PaLM-2 (text-bison)                   3.47 [3.39, 3.55]   2.81 [2.73, 2.89]   2.57 [2.50, 2.65]   2.25 [2.18, 2.32]
 GPT4                                  3.67 [3.61, 3.73]   3.13 [3.05, 3.21]   2.61 [2.53, 2.68]   2.21 [2.15, 2.27]
 Falcon (180B-Chat)                    3.81 [3.74, 3.87]   3.15 [3.07, 3.23]   2.73 [2.65, 2.80]   2.55 [2.47, 2.62]
 GPT4, no assistance, prev. exposure   3.86 [3.79, 3.93]   3.43 [3.35, 3.52]   3.30 [3.21, 3.39]   2.78 [2.69, 2.87]
 GPT4, no assistance                   4.49 [4.44, 4.55]   4.41 [4.35, 4.48]   4.32 [4.25, 4.39]   3.38 [3.29, 3.46]

      Table 2: Results along the epistemological dimensions, with 95% confidence intervals.


A.1   D IMENSION - AWARE P ROMPTS

In our base case scenario we use the simplest question answering prompt. One interesting question
concerns the inclusion of our evaluation criteria in the instructions; e.g., provided as part of the
prompt. We run a preliminary experiment in this mode by adding a description of the criteria to the
prompt for GPT-4:

          You are an expert on climate change communication. Answer the question in a 3-4
          sentence paragraph. The answer should be concise and tailored for a general au-
          dience. It must be clear, and easy to understand. The answer should be presented
          in a neutral, unbiased tone without any negative connotations or attempts to per-
          suade. The answer should be factually accurate. The answer should be specific
          to the question and avoid irrelevant, generic, or vague statements. The answer
          should comprehensively address all aspects of the question. Where scientific un-
          certainty exists, the answer should appropriately reflect this, conveying the range
          of scientific perspectives or the limitations of current knowledge.

As a control we re-run the base prompt experiment with GPT-4. The results are summarized in
Table 3.
First, we notice that, even with the base prompt, the performance of GPT-4 has improved across the
board with respect to the results in Table 1 and Table 2. This is probably due to the fact that the


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Dimension         Basic prompt     Augmented prompt
                        Style                 4.33                 4.10
                        Clarity               4.34                 4.24
                        Correctness           4.43                 4.29
                        Tone                  3.34                 3.59
                        Accuracy              3.77                 3.92
                        Specificity           3.29                 3.46
                        Completeness          2.72                 2.97
                        Uncertainty           2.73                 2.92

Table 3: Comparing GPT-4’s performance with and without the inclusion of a description of the
evaluation criteria in the prompt.


experiments were run almost two months apart, and the latest were carried out after a major new
release9 .
Interestingly, the addition of the evaluation criteria helps the LLM provide better answers for the
most difficult presentation dimension, Tone, and all the epistemological ones. We notice also that
the improvement on the difficult dimensions comes at the cost of degraded performance on the pre-
sentational dimensions, supporting the idea that there may be unavoidable trade-offs between surface
and epistemological content quality. This direction needs further research and experimentation but
already seems promising.


B    A RGUMENTATIVE PATTERNS

What is typical of LLMs’ answers, and how may gold standard answers differ, if they were available?
While we cannot fully answer this question yet, the findings from our evaluation provide some
additional insights. One interesting aspect emerges with respect to the argumentative structure of
LLMs’ answers. We use two examples from one of the models tested, to ground the discussion, but
similar arguments hold for all models.
Example 1. LLMs often spend a substantial part of the answer on generic, cautionary, sometimes
preachy, reminders; e.g., see the highlighted text in the example below:

Question          Is global warming caused by the Pacific decadal oscillation?
LLM               No, global warming is not caused by the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO). The
                  PDO is a long-term ocean temperature fluctuation in the Pacific Ocean that shifts
                  between warm and cool phases approximately every 20 to 30 years. While these
                  shifts can influence regional climate patterns and marine ecosystems, they do not
                  cause global warming. Global warming is primarily caused by human activities,
                  particularly the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil, and gas, which increase the
                  concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and trap heat.
It is not clear whether the highlighted part contributes to answering the question for all audiences.
For example, the result may be sub-optimal cooperative conversation, in a Gricean’s sense (Levin-
son, 1983). Specifically, one could argue the maxim of quantity is being violated (do not provide
more information than required). A person who is asking a very specific question about climate
change can be assumed to already be familiar with its basic mechanism. Another maxim that may
be violated is the maxim of manner (be relevant): the question asks specifically about ‘decadal os-
cillation’, so the answer should be specific to that. In addition, the presentation style may not appeal
to the different audiences of science communication and possibly lead to diminished interest and
fatigue (Schäfer et al., 2018).

    9
      The augmented prompt experiment, and control, were performed after the OpenAI announcements on Nov
6, cf. https://openai.com/blog/new-models-and-developer-products-announced-at-devday.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The provided answers are different to similar questions by specialized websites that list carefully
compiled human answers.10 These answers tend to rely very much on direct and specific evidence
from multiple sources such as land, atmospheric and ocean data for temperature trends.11
Example 2. A related argumentative pattern can be also observed frequently, illustrated by the
example below:

Question          Are we heading towards an ice age?
LLM               No, we are not heading towards an ice age. The current scientific consensus is
                  that human activities, particularly the emission of greenhouse gases, are causing
                  the planet to warm at an unprecedented rate. This rapid warming is leading to
                  a variety of climate changes, including more frequent and severe heatwaves, ris-
                  ing sea levels, and changes in precipitation patterns. While natural processes have
                  triggered ice ages in the past, these are very slow processes that take thousands of
                  years, and the current rapid warming trend is not consistent with the onset of a new
                  ice age.
Similar observations could be made, as in the previous example, regarding the pragmatics aspects
of effective conversation, for the choices of arguments made in the answer. But the answer above
relies crucially, although generically, on the notion of scientific consensus; which happens relatively
frequently in our data. Besides the possibility of being superficially interpreted as relying primarily
on ‘arguments from authority’, research suggests that the ‘consensus’ argument can be surprisingly
ineffective in some cases. Orchinik et al. (2023) show that there is a complex belief system under-
lying how such arguments are interpreted. This depends, among other factors, on how scientists are
perceived in terms of credibility and skills. Orchinik et al. (2023) argue that perceived credibility,
which in turn may depend on general worldview, affects how consensus-based messages are received
and receptiveness to future messaging. From this perspective, addressing some audiences, simple
consensus messaging may be not only sub-optimal from a Gricean perspective, but also ineffective.
We do not know how the current style of presentation and argumentation emerges in LLMs, but the
LLMs we study are similar in this respect. Our framework captures these aspects in the tone and
specificity dimensions, but one should consider assessing this directly in the future.


C        Q UESTIONS

In this section we explain the pipeline used for selection, generation, post-processing and sampling
climate change related questions. The question set consists of 300 questions, with 100 questions
gathered from 3 sources each: i) Synthetic questions generated based on Wikipedia articles, ii)
Manually rephrased questions based on Skeptical Science website, and iii) questions taken from
Google Trends.


C.1      S YNTHETIC Q UESTIONS FROM W IKIPEDIA

We started by gathering a set of Wikipedia articles related to climate change. We followed 3 strate-
gies to select climate related articles from Wikipedia. Following the first strategy (REF.), we gather
all the Wikipedia articles that are referenced in the main “Climate Change” article.12 In the sec-
ond strategy (CAT.), we select all the articles that are directly listed in the climate change category.
Finally, to cover regional articles (REG .), we manually curate a list of articles with titles “Climate
Change in [country/region]”. From a pool of articles gathered following these 3 strategies, we se-
lected paragraphs within an article if the paragraph consists of more than 500 characters. In total,
we obtained 1969 paragraphs from Wikipedia. The following table reports a break-down of number
of paragraphs based on the selection strategy:

    10
       E.g., https://climatefeedback.org/ or https://skepticalscience.com/.
    11
       They are also heavily backed by visual quantitative data.
    12
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate change


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Strategy    # Articles   # Paragraphs
                                REF.           35             858
                                CAT.           46             434
                                REG .          48             677
                                Total          129           1969

We then input each selected paragraph in GPT-4. We ask the model to generate as many questions
as possible that can be answered using the paragraph. The model is instructed to only generate
questions that are salient and related to climate change. This process resulted in 15265 questions.
We post process the questions and remove undesirable ones with 4 filters that we explain next.

Climate Change Filter. We remove all questions that are not climate change related. We use the
climate-bert (Webersinke et al., 2022) classifier and label each question with two labels: climate
related and not climate related. We remove 2647 questions that are not classified as climate-related
questions.

Duplicate Filter. We remove questions that are a duplicate of another question. To this end, we
embed all questions using a universal sentence encoder (Yang et al., 2020).13 We consider two ques-
tions as duplicates if the cosine similarity between their embeddings is greater than 0.85. Therefore,
we remove 1188 questions that are duplicates of other questions.

Context Dependent Filter. We filter out questions that are taken out of context. The reason that
this filter is necessary is that we generate questions from paragraphs, therefore, some questions
are nonsensical when they are not accompanied by the corresponding Wikipedia paragraph. An
example of such a question is: “What are the two classes of climate engineering discussed in the
study?”; without knowing which study is referred to, this question cannot be answered. To develop
this filter, we build a dedicated classifier. Specifically, we manually annotate 100 questions with
two labels: context dependent, and not context dependent. Next, contextualize the question with
the instruction “Write Yes if the query is taken out of context, write No otherwise.” and extract
the last layer’s representations of a flan-xxl encoder (Chung et al., 2022). Finally, we train a
logistic regression classifier on the representations to detect context dependent questions. We find
the context dependency filter to be 97% accurate on 100 manually annotated validation questions.
Using this classifier, we detect 552 context dependent questions.

Specificity Filter. We remove questions that are asking about a very specific and narrow topic.
In our study, we aim to evaluate large language models on a set of challenging and multifaceted
questions that target information needs of users related to climate change. Therefore, questions that
ask for a specific detail are not the target of this study and are typically easy to answer. An example
of such question is: “What was the reason for shutting down reactor number one of the Fessenheim
Nuclear Power Plant on 4 August 2018?” To remove such specific questions, we again build a
light-weight logistic regression classifier on top of flan-xxl representations. We contextualize
each question with the instruction: “Write Yes if the following query is asking about a specific
subject, write No otherwise”. We then extract the contextualized representations from the last layer
of flan-xxl and feed that to a logistic regressor. We find the specificity filter to be 84% accurate on
a sample of 100 annotated validation questions. We detect and remove 5472 specific questions.
After applying all 4 filters, the final post-processed question set consists of 5404 questions. The
question set that is rated in our evaluation framework consists of 100 questions from each source.
This means that we need to sample 100 diverse questions from this pool of ≈ 5k questions. To make
sure that we cover different topics and type of questions, we first label each question with the topic
and properties of the question, and then sample a 100 validation questions, where different topics
and properties are equally presented. Next, we explain the classifiers that are developed for labeling
the questions.

Topic Classifier. We use the approach as above and train a logistic regression classifier on top of
flan-xxl encoder to classify questions based on the topics. Inspired by IPCC chapters, we con-
  13
       We use universal-sentence-encoder-qa/3 model.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                               Causal / Predictions?
                                                                                         0.6
         Land-Ocean-Food-Water
             Emissions-Pollutants                                                        0.5
          Cities-Settlements-Infra
                                                                                         0.4


                                                                           Probability
             Weather-Temperature
    Society-Livelihoods-Economy                                                          0.3
    Policies-Mitigation-Adaptation
                                                                                         0.2
                           Energy
                  Health-Nutrition                                                       0.1
                      Biodiversity
                                                                                          0
                                     0   5   10   15    20                                     Yes              No



Figure 5: Left: Distribution of the topic of the synthetic questions. The x axis shows the percentage
of questions in each topic. The most frequent topic is “Weather-Temperature” topic. Right: Distri-
bution of the causal feature of synthetic questions. There are more questions that are asking causal
questions, or questions about predicting the future compare to the rest of the questions.


sider the following 9 topics: “Energy”, “Emissions-Pollutants”, “Policies-Mitigation-Adaptation”,
“Weather-Temperature”, “Land-Ocean-Food-Water”, “Society-Livelihoods-Economy”, “Health-
Nutrition”, “Biodiversity”, “Cities-Settlements-Infra”. We find this classifier to be 75% accurate
on a sample of 100 annotated validation questions. The distribution of predicted questions’ topics is
depicted in Figure 5.

Causal Prediction Classifier. An important and challenging type of questions that one can ask
about climate change is about causes or effects of climate change, or predictions about the future.
To detect this type of questions, we classify questions into two classes: causal-prediction class and
others. The instruction that is used for contextualizing the questions is: “Write Yes if the following
query is asking about causes or effects of something, or is asking about predictions about the future.
write No otherwise”. We find this classifier to be 93% accurate on a sample of 100 annotated
validation questions. The distribution of predictions is shown in Figure 5
For synthetic Wikipedia questions, we sample 108 questions, 6 from each of the 18 possible combi-
nations of topic and causal-prediction features. We sample an equal number of questions from the
other two sources, Skeptical Science and GTrends. We manually inspect all questions from all the 3
different sources. The final question set used in the evaluations consists of 300 questions, i.e., 100
questions from each source.


D     P ROMPTS

Please refer to Table 4 for an extensive list of prompts used to generate the data used throughout the
paper.


E    A NSWER S TATISTICS

We report the average number of sentences and the average number of words per sentence for
all models evaluated in Table 5. Although in the prompts used for answer generation we ex-
plicitly instruct the model to only use 3 to 4 sentences to answer the question, we observe that
most models generate between 4 to 5 sentences. Furthermore, InstructGPT (turbo), GPT-4, and
Falcon-180B-Chat, generate longer sentences compared to the other models.

   14
      We found that we have used “an statement” instead of “a statement” in our experiments. We did not rerun
the experiments as we believe that LLMs are quite robust to minor typos and results should not be significantly
affected by it. Also, doing otherwise would be wasteful.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Function                         Prompt
Answer Generation                You are an expert on climate change communication. Answer each question
                                 in a 3-4 sentence paragraph.

Obtain URL                       Please provide a Wikipedia article that supports your answer. Just state the
                                 url, do not include additional text. If there is no Wikipedia url supporting
                                 the answer just say “No URL”.

Extract Keypoints                Now go through all the statements made in the answer. Mention 1 to 3 key
                                 statements that are made to answer the question. If you can not provide key
                                 statement/statements, only write No Keypoints. It is very important to copy
                                 the statements verbatim from the answer.

Rate Passages                    You are given a statement14 and a passage from Wikipedia. Rate how useful
                                 the passage is for evaluating the statement on a scale from 0 (completely
                                 irrelevant) to 100 (supports or contradicts the statement). Rate the passage
                                 high only if it supports or contradicts the statement. Just state the numbers
                                 in one line, nothing else. Statement: [keypoint] Passage: [par]
Presentational AI Assistance     Given the following question and answer, express your disagreement with
                                 the statement in a concise sentence in a single line. You may be provided
                                 with relevant paragraphs from Wikipedia, if so, you must use those verbatim
                                 to support your critique. If you fully agree with the statement, state “No
                                 Critique”. Question: [question] Answer: [answer] Statement: [statement]

Style Statement                  The information is presented well for a general audience. In particular, the
                                 answer is not too long or too short, there is no repetition in the text, and the
                                 answer is not too informal or too technical.

Clarity Statement                The answer is clear and easy to understand. For example, if there are num-
                                 bers and formulae in the answer, they are easy to understand. Furthermore,
                                 sentences are not too long or too short.

Correctness Statement            The language in the answer does not contain mistakes. In particular, there
                                 are no grammatical, spelling, or punctuation errors.

Tone Statement                   The tone of the answer is neutral and unbiased. In particular, the tone is not
                                 negative and the answer does not try to convince the reader of an opinion or
                                 belief.
Epistemological AI Assistance    Given the following question and answer, express your disagreement with
                                 the statement in a concise sentence in a single line. You may be provided
                                 with relevant paragraphs from Wikipedia, if so, you must use those verbatim
                                 to support your critique. If you fully agree with the statement, state “No
                                 Critique”. Question: [question] Answer: [answer] Statement: [statement].

Accuracy Statement               The answer is accurate. In particular, it does not take scientific findings out
                                 of context, does not contradict itself, does not rely on anecdotal evidence,
                                 and does not misuse key terms or scientific terminology.

Specificity Statement            There is no irrelevant statement with respect to the question in the answer,
                                 and there is no vague or generic statement in the answer.

Completeness Statement           The answer addresses everything the question asks for. In particular, it does
                                 not miss any part of the question and provides enough necessary details,
                                 e.g., numbers, statistics, and details. If the question asks for a specific time
                                 range or region, the answer correctly provides that information.

Uncertainty Statement            If there is an uncertainty involved in the scientific community, the answer
                                 appropriately conveys that uncertainty. Note that it may be appropriate not
                                 to mention uncertainty at all.

                Table 4: Prompts used to generate answers, AI Assistance and evidence.

                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           InstructGPT                    ChatGPT     PaLM-2         GPT4    Falcon
                             davinci-002     davinci-003    turbo                     text-bison             180B-Chat

 # Sentences                    4.99            3.11        3.42            4.07          4.47        4.33     3.81
 # Words per sentence          14.3            18.68       21.49           20.66         19.67       21.52    22.03

Table 5: Average number of sentences and words per sentence for each model. We observe 4 out of
7 models generate 4 to 5 sentences, and Falcon-180B-Chat generates longer sentences compared
to the other models in the batch.

                                                 Per Example                       Per Keypoint
                                            Percentage %        Count        Percentage %          Count
                 Fully Supports                  6.95               16               12            124
                 Partially Supports             39.13                90            54.79           566
                 No Support                     53.91               124            32.81           339
                 Contradicts                       0                 0              0.38            4
                 Total                           100                230            100             1033

Table 6: AIS results for GPT-4 generations. We report the results both at example level, where an
example can consist of multiple keypoints, and at keypoint level. We observe that the majority of
keypoints are only partially supported, and only around 7% of examples are fully supported.


F    AIS E VALUATION

In our AIS evaluation we ask human raters to assess whether each keypoint is, fully, partially, or not
supported by its corresponding top 3 retrieved passages. At the keypoint level, as shown in Figure 4,
the majority of keypoints are partially supported, while only 12% of keypoints are fully supported
by their corresponding evidence. We further ask the raters whether the top 3 passages jointly provide
support for the keypoint. We then aggregate this result in the following way. We consider an answer
to be fully attributed if all its keypoints are supported. An answer is not supported if all its keypoints
are not supported. Otherwise, the answer is partially supported. An example is given in Table 7. We
observe (Figure 4) that only 6.95% of answers are fully supported.

G     VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS

To validate our evaluation framework, we manually created a set of 30 questions and answers, each
exhibiting a specific issue from our full list of issues. We pose this as a task to our raters in two
settings: with and without AI Assistance, each replicated three times.
We found (cf. Table 9) that without assistance, most of the issues (83%) were found by at least one
rater, but only 60% of issues by the majority of raters.
With the help of assistance, more issues were detected (93.33% were detected by at least one rater,
76.67% by the majority of raters). There was just one issue not detected by any rater: anecdotal
evidence15 .

H     I NTER -R ATER AGREEMENT

We first measure the agreement among raters when rating each dimension on the likert scale. In
particular, we report two metrics of agreement:
Pairwise distance. We measure the average pairwise distance between the ratings. More specifi-
cally, for any 2 raters (out of 3 raters) rating the same example, we compute the absolute distance
  15
     All raters did correctly rate the dimension (‘accuracy’ as 1 or 2), but highlighted only the ’incorrect’ issue.
The answer was incorrect, based on anecdotal evidence.


                                                           23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Question         How could pests and diseases spread more easily under warmer conditions caused by
                  climate change?
 Answer           Climate change, particularly global warming, can facilitate the spread of pests and dis-
                  eases more easily. Warmer conditions can extend the breeding seasons of pests, increase
                  their population growth, and expand their geographical range. For instance, mosquitoes,
                  which are vectors for diseases like malaria and dengue, thrive in warmer climates and
                  can reproduce and mature more quickly under such conditions. Additionally, warmer
                  temperatures can also accelerate the lifecycle of pathogens, making diseases more vir-
                  ulent and their transmission more efficient.
 1st Keypoint     Warmer conditions can extend the breeding seasons of pests, increase their population
                  growth, and expand their geographical range.
 Pragraph 1.      Infectious diseases that are sensitive to climate can be grouped into: vector-borne
                  diseases (transmitted via mosquitos, ticks etc.), water-borne diseases (transmitted via
                  viruses or bacteria, e.g.: E. Coli) and food-borne diseases (e.g.: Salmonella). Climate
                  change is affecting the distribution of these diseases due to the expanding geographic
                  range and seasonality of these diseases and their vectors.
 Pragraph 2.      Mosquito-borne diseases that are sensitive to climate include malaria, elephantiasis,
                  Rift Valley fever, yellow fever, dengue fever, Zika virus, and chikungunya. Scientists
                  found in 2022 that rising temperatures are increasing the areas where dengue fever,
                  malaria and other mosquito-carried diseases are able to spread. Warmer temperatures
                  are also advancing to higher elevations, allowing mosquitoes to survive in places that
                  were previously inhospitable to them. This risks malaria making a return to areas where
                  it was previously eradicated.
 Pragraph 3.      Ticks are changing their geographic range because of rising temperatures, and this puts
                  new populations at risk. Ticks can spread lyme disease and tick-borne encephalitis.
                  It is expected that climate change will increase the incidence of these diseases in the
                  Northern Hemisphere. For example, a review of the literature found that ”In the USA,
                  a 2°C warming could increase the number of Lyme disease cases by over 20% over
                  the coming decades and lead to an earlier onset and longer length of the annual Lyme
                  disease season”.
 Rating           Not Supported
   nd
 2 Keypoint       Mosquitoes, which are vectors for diseases like malaria and dengue, thrive in warmer
                  climates and can reproduce and mature more quickly under such conditions.
 Paragraphs       ...
 Rating           Supported
 3rd Keypoint     Warmer temperatures can also accelerate the lifecycle of pathogens, making diseases
                  more virulent and their transmission more efficient.
 Paragraphs       ...
 Rating           Supported
 Overall Rating   Partially Supported

Table 7: An example of the AIS task with ratings. Overall, the answer is only partially supported,
as the first keypoint is not supported by the evidence.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Question. When did the general public become aware of carbon dioxide’s effects on climate?
     Answer. The general public became signifi-               AI Assistance. While the answer provides a
     cantly aware of carbon dioxide’s effects on cli-         general timeline of public awareness of carbon
     mate change around the late 20th century. The            dioxide’s effects on climate change, it fails to
     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change                mention key milestones such as the warnings
     (IPCC) was established in 1988, and its assess-          of the climate crisis by Glenn T. Seaborg in
     ments, which highlighted the role of carbon              1966, or John Sawyer’s study in 1972, which
     dioxide in global warming, were widely dis-              summarized the knowledge of the science at the
     seminated and discussed in the media. How-               time and accurately predicted the rate of global
     ever, it’s important to note that the scien-             warming for the period between 1972 and 2000.
     tific understanding of carbon dioxide’s impact           These events significantly contributed to the
     on climate predates this public awareness by             public’s understanding of the issue before the
     many decades, with initial theories and evi-             establishment of the IPCC in 1988.
     dence emerging as early as the late 19th century.
     AIS. Fully attributable                                  Average completeness rating. 1.6
     Question. How do elevated carbon dioxide levels affect the mineral density of crops and wild
     plants?
     Answer. Elevated carbon dioxide levels can               AI Assistance. The statement fails to acknowl-
     significantly affect the mineral density of crops        edge the uncertainty in the potential positive im-
     and wild plants. While higher CO2 levels can             pacts of elevated CO2 levels, such as higher
     stimulate plant growth, they can also reduce the         crop yields due to CO2 fertilization, and the
     concentration of essential minerals in a variety         possibility of more arable land becoming avail-
     of crops and wild plants. This phenomenon,               able as frozen land thaws.
     known as ”CO2 dilution effect”, results in crops
     with lower nutritional value, including reduced
     levels of protein, iron, zinc, and other essen-
     tial nutrients. Therefore, while plants may grow
     larger in response to increased CO2, their nu-
     tritional quality can be significantly compro-
     mised.
     AIS. Fully attributable                                  Average uncertainty rating. 1.6
     Question. Can climate sensitivity be ignored because too low?
     Answer. Climate sensitivity, which refers to the temperature change associated with a doubling
     of the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, cannot be ignored even if it is low.
     This is because even a small increase in global temperatures can have significant impacts on the
     Earth’s climate system. For instance, it can lead to more frequent and severe weather events,
     such as hurricanes and droughts, and cause sea levels to rise, which can result in coastal flood-
     ing. Therefore, understanding and addressing climate sensitivity is crucial in climate change
     mitigation and adaptation strategies.
     AIS. Not Supported                                 Average accuracy rating. 4.7
     Question. Is global warming caused by the pacific decadal oscillation?
     Answer. No, global warming is not caused by the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO). The PDO
     is a long-term ocean temperature fluctuation in the Pacific Ocean that shifts between warm
     and cool phases approximately every 20 to 30 years. While these shifts can influence regional
     climate patterns and marine ecosystems, they do not cause global warming. Global warming is
     primarily caused by human activities, particularly the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil, and
     gas, which increase the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and trap heat.
     AIS. Not Supported                                 Average specificity rating. 5

Table 8: Examples highlighting the differences between attribution scores and epistemological rat-
ings under our framework.


                                                         25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Without AI Assistance (3x)        With AI assistance (3x)
                  Any           83.33 %                           93.33 %
                  Majority      60.00 %                           76.67 %
                  All           33.33 %                           43.33 %

Table 9: Validation results. The percentage of the (30) issues recognized by any rater, the majority
of raters or all of the raters.


between the values they chose from the likert scale16 and report the average for each dimension
in Table 11. In general, we observe a reasonably high agreement among the raters, as the average
distance is close to or below 1 in most dimensions. Notably, we observe a higher agreement in the
presentational dimensions style, clarity, and correctness.
Krippendorff’s alpha. In addition to pairwise distances, we compute Krippendorff’s alpha. Krip-
pendorff’s alpha measures 1 − D De , where Do is the observed disagreement, and De is the expected
                                 o


disagreement by chance. Values are in [−1, 1] range, where 1 means complete agreement and −1
means complete systematic disagreement. Numbers in Table 12 suggest a similar trend to pairwise
distance, where in most dimensions the agreement is medium to high, and the agreement in most
presentational dimensions is higher compared to epistemological dimensions.
Furthermore, we measure the agreement among raters when choosing issues. A rater might select
or not select a given issue for a given answer, therefore, the value of interest is a binary variable. As
above report two metrics of agreement:
Pairwise agreement. We look at the agreement among raters when selecting or not selecting a given
issue. Particularly, we consider 2 raters to agree with each other on a certain issue for a given answer
if they both select or both not select that issue. We then report the percentage of pairwise agreement
per issue in Table 13. For the majority of issues we observe a high agreement among raters. As one
might expect, issues such as “not enough detail”, “vague”, “uncertainty missing”, and “biased” are
more controversial and we see a lower agreement among the raters.
Krippendorff’s alpha. Similarly, we compute the Krippendorff’s alpha for agreement on issues
and observe a similar trend in Table 14.
Looking at Table 10 we note that some issues are rarely chosen by raters and thus pairwise agreement
numbers might be artificially high. For a deeper understanding regarding how well raters are able
to agree on a specific issue we compute Krippendorff’s alpha only for low ratings, i.e. cases where
raters are required to select one or more issues. We report these numbers for a subset of dimensions
with higher incidence counts in Table 15. As hinted by incidence prevalence in Table 10, we find
that when raters agree on a low rating for an epistemological dimension, they also exhibit medium
to high agreement on what the specific issue is. One exception is accuracy:incorrect which might
be too generic as an issue.
Overall, agreement on specific issues is not high enough to recommend our 3-rater setup for eval-
uation of individual answers but for comparing and highlighting the strengths and shortcomings of
models on a system level, as indicated by the fairly tight error bars in Figure 2.


I   B REAKDOWN OF R ATINGS P ER Q UESTION T YPE

We compare the presentational and epistemological adequacy of GPT-4 answers, based on the ques-
tion source, type, and causal-prediction dimension, as described in Appendix C.1. Generally, there
isn’t a significant difference between the ratings based on the topic of the question as shown in Fig-
ure 6. However, we observe that questions in the “Policies-Mitigation-Adaptation” category receive
lower ratings in most of the epistemological dimensions, and particularly in the tone dimension.
We further look at the difference in average ratings based on the source of the question (Wikipedia,
Skeptical Science, or GTrends), and causality of the question. The source of the question does not
   16
      In our interface the raters agree with a statement (see Table 19) on a 5-point scale between disagree com-
pletely to neither to agree completely which we map to 1 . . . 5. See Figure 15 for a screenshot.


                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Issue                                            InstructGPT             ChatGPT   PaLM-2       GPT4    Falcon
                                    davinci-002     davinci-003   turbo             text-bison           180B-Chat

 style
 inconsistent                          4.88            1.00        0.33     0.00      1.11        0.22     0.45
 repetitive                           20.15            3.11        0.11     0.56      1.45        1.11     0.33
 too informal                          4.11            1.11        0.22     0.11      1.78        1.44     0.89
 too long                              1.03            1.67        0.33     0.89      2.12        2.11     0.89
 too short                            10.14            8.56        0.22     0.22      2.56        0.33     1.11
 other                                 2.95            1.00        0.22     0.00      0.78        0.67     0.45
 clarity
 hard math                             1.67            0.44        1.67     0.33      0.67        1.56     0.00
 sentences too long                    1.80            1.33        0.11     0.22      1.67        3.11     1.22
 too technical                         3.59            1.00        0.33     0.44      1.22        2.56     0.56
 other                                 8.60            1.00        0.33     0.11      1.56        0.44     0.78
 correctness
 incomplete sentence                   3.47            2.44        0.78     0.00      0.00        0.00     0.00
 incorrect grammar                     6.29            0.33        0.33     0.11      0.11        0.11     0.67
 incorrect punctuation                 2.18            0.44        0.56     0.00      0.11        0.22     0.56
 incorrect spelling                    0.77            0.00        0.11     0.11      0.22        0.00     0.11
 other                                 3.98            1.11        0.00     0.11      0.45        0.11     0.78
 tone
 biased                               28.50           34.44       24.78    42.38     33.85       30.33    23.72
 negative                              1.28            1.78        1.56     1.00      5.01        3.00     1.89
 persuasive                            2.57            8.00        4.80     7.68     10.69        8.00     4.45
 other                                 0.39            0.67        0.22     0.11      0.45        2.00     0.22
 accuracy
 anecdotal                            10.78            1.33        3.35    19.24      5.90        2.56     3.01
 incorrect                            20.92           10.78        5.58     3.23     11.69        4.44     4.57
 science out of context                9.37            6.11        5.69     2.67      5.35        3.78     2.56
 self contradictory                    2.70            0.89        0.11     0.11      0.89        0.44     0.33
 wrong use of terms                    1.93            1.22        1.00     0.33      1.45        0.44     0.22
 other                                 3.34            3.00        1.90     1.89      2.00        5.67     0.78
 specificity
 irrelevant info                      15.15            4.56        3.79     5.12      8.69        8.89     4.01
 vague                                49.42           44.78       48.88    58.40     51.67       39.11    35.86
 other                                 1.67            3.44        1.45     0.56      2.12        1.67     1.34
 completeness
 does not address main parts          29.91           22.56       11.16     9.79     15.92        8.78     9.47
 does not address region               3.34            2.67        0.78     0.56      1.34        1.78     1.22
 does not address time                 2.05            4.11        1.90     0.67      0.67        2.78     0.67
 ignores science                       9.11           14.11        6.92     5.01     10.47        5.44     3.01
 not enough detail                    52.89           60.22       64.06    79.53     58.13       61.22    51.89
 other                                 1.16            0.89        0.45     0.11      0.89        2.78     1.11
 uncertainty
 consensus missing                    19.77           14.89       21.99     9.34     12.14        9.89     9.80
 contradicting evidence missing        4.11            6.33        2.57     2.00      4.23        3.56     2.90
 uncertainty missing                  57.25           75.00       72.88    87.65     71.94       76.78    58.02
 other                                 0.90            1.11        0.45     0.11      0.45        1.89     0.33

                         Table 10: Percentage of specific issues identified by raters.


                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Issue                                InstructGPT                      ChatGPT              PaLM-2          GPT4          Falcon
                                  davinci-002          davinci-003    turbo                            text-bison                  180B-Chat
            style                       1.12              0.95         0.76                0.61            0.88        0.79             0.75
            clarity                     0.97              0.74         0.73                0.59            0.69        0.81             0.69
            correctness                 0.98              0.69         0.66                0.56            0.59        0.62             0.68
            tone                        1.16              1.26         1.21                1.30            1.36        1.22             1.23
            accuracy                    1.05              0.97         1.07                1.15            1.13        0.97             0.95
            specificity                 1.04              1.16         1.06                0.98            1.23        1.26             1.20
            completeness                1.00              1.03         1.06                0.71            1.13        1.01             1.21
            uncertainty                 0.95              0.98         0.89                0.57            1.10        0.78             1.26

Table 11: Average pairwise distance between likert ratings for each dimension. Distances between
ratings on presentational adequacy are generally lower compared to epistemological adequacy.

            Issue                                InstructGPT                      ChatGPT              PaLM-2          GPT4          Falcon
                                  davinci-002          davinci-003    turbo                            text-bison                  180B-Chat
            style                       0.45              0.53         0.74                0.70            0.60        0.48             0.72
            clarity                     0.59              0.73         0.60                0.72            0.72        0.65             0.77
            correctness                 0.57              0.74         0.80                0.85            0.82        0.71             0.78
            tone                        0.48              0.36         0.41                0.31            0.25        0.36             0.41
            accuracy                    0.56              0.57         0.52                0.46            0.46        0.59             0.62
            specificity                 0.53              0.40         0.50                0.51            0.32        0.32             0.39
            completeness                0.57              0.48         0.47                0.64            0.38        0.46             0.37
            uncertainty                 0.59              0.51         0.57                0.75            0.40        0.63             0.32

Table 12: Krippendorff’s alpha of 3 likert ratings per dimension. In general we observe a medium
agreement. For most LLMs the value is higher for the presentational dimensions, except tone.


affect the ratings significantly (please refer to Figure 7). However, we observe that Wikipedia ques-
tions tend to receive lower epistemological adequacy ratings. This could be because these questions
ask for more details and very specific info compared to GTrends and Skeptical Sciences, and thus
are harder to answer.

                                                                                                                       Policies-Mitigation-Adaptation
                 4                                                                                                     Biodiversity
Average Rating


                                                                                                                       Society-Livelihoods-Economy
                 3                                                                                                     Emissions-Pollutants
                                                                                                                       Health-Nutrition
                 2                                                                                                     Land-Ocean-Food-Water
                                                                                                                       Energy
                 1                                                                                                     Weather-Temperature
                                                                                                                       Cities-Settlements-Infra
                 0
                      Style   Clarity    Correctness     Tone    Accuracy    Specificity    Completeness Uncertainty



Figure 6: Average rating along all the dimensions per question topic. Questions in the “Policies-
Mitigation-Adaption” category receive lower ratings in most of the epistemological dimensions, and
particularly in “Tone” dimension.



J                    T IMING ANALYSIS
We analyze how long raters take for their tasks. As can be seen in Figure 8, rating the epistemolog-
ical dimensions generally takes more time than assessing the presentation quality, even though the
latter is done first in our questionnaire. We also observe that for most systems the screening part,
which includes the initial reading of question and answer, takes longer than rating the presentational


                                                                            28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Issue                                          InstructGPT                 ChatGPT   PaLM-2       GPT4     Falcon
                                  davinci-002    davinci-003        turbo             text-bison            180B-Chat

 style
 too informal                      92.40           97.77            99.55    99.78     96.42        97.10    98.21
 too long                          98.20           98.00            99.33    98.44     96.42        95.77    98.44
 too short                         84.79           87.42            99.66    99.55     95.08        99.33    97.77
 inconsistent                      90.72           98.00            99.33   100.00     97.76        99.55    99.11
 repetitive                        83.63           96.88            99.78    98.88     97.76        97.77    99.33
 other                             94.33           98.00            99.55   100.00     98.88        98.66    99.33
 clarity
 sentences too long                96.39           97.77            99.78    99.55     96.64        94.21    97.54
 too technical                     94.07           98.22            99.33    99.11     97.76        95.10    98.88
 hard math                         96.91           99.11            97.31    99.33     98.66        96.88   100.00
 other                             85.95           98.22            99.55    99.78     97.76        99.11    98.44
 correctness
 incomplete sentence               94.33          97.11          99.55      100.00    100.00       100.00   100.00
 incorrect spelling                98.45         100.00          99.78       99.78     99.55       100.00    99.78
 incorrect punctuation             95.88          99.11          98.88      100.00     99.78        99.55    98.88
 incorrect grammar                 89.43          99.33          99.33       99.78     99.78        99.78    98.66
 other                             93.81          98.22         100.00       99.78     99.33        99.78    98.66
 tone
 biased                            60.57           59.02            67.15    48.33     57.06        59.19    64.06
 persuasive                        95.62           87.08            91.03    86.38     81.05        84.98    91.96
 negative                          97.68           96.66            97.09    98.21     90.92        95.07    96.65
 other                             99.23           98.66            99.55    99.78     99.33        96.08    99.55
 accuracy
 incorrect                         69.91           89.73            91.43    95.70     84.36        92.20    93.02
 science out of context            82.70           89.35            88.76    95.22     89.17        92.46    95.56
 self contradictory                95.49           98.20            99.87    99.76     98.40        98.98    99.24
 anecdotal                         78.05           97.18            92.37    63.80     87.17        94.63    94.67
 wrong use of terms                96.22           97.69            98.26    99.52     97.46        98.98    99.49
 other                             93.46           93.84            96.12    96.42     95.45        89.13    98.48
 specificity
 irrelevant info                   75.59           90.79            92.43    89.84     84.89        84.06    93.60
 vague                             48.96           54.20            60.44    58.90     52.60        56.81    60.66
 other                             97.13           93.94            97.71    99.09     96.31        97.00    97.27
 completeness
 does not address main parts       61.33           69.27            80.68    82.77     75.12        84.07    84.95
 does not address region           93.36           94.78            98.41    98.87     97.30        96.59    97.92
 does not address time             96.09           91.61            96.14    98.64     98.59        94.54    98.73
 not enough detail                 44.66           55.56            51.48    68.59     54.23        59.39    47.57
 ignores science                   84.24           77.55            86.93    90.82     81.57        90.22    94.91
 other                             97.66           98.30            99.09    99.77     98.12        94.77    97.80
 uncertainty
 uncertainty missing               49.35           63.46            63.07    80.02     60.10        65.39    50.57
 consensus missing                 70.26           75.45            66.97    81.96     77.25        81.60    82.53
 contradicting evidence missing    92.47           88.46            94.84    95.89     91.97        92.94    95.17
 other                             98.18           97.74            99.20    99.77     99.03        96.06    99.31

Table 13: Pairwise agreement among the 3 raters per issue. In general we observe high agreement
among raters in selecting issues for all models, while some issues such as “vague”, “biased”, “not
enough detail”, and “uncertainty missing” are more disagreed upon.


                                                               29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Issue                                      InstructGPT               ChatGPT   PaLM-2       GPT4   Falcon
                                  davinci-002   davinci-003   turbo             text-bison          180B-Chat

 style
 too informal                        0.85          0.96       0.99      1.00      0.93       0.94     0.96
 too long                            0.96          0.96       0.99      0.97      0.93       0.92     0.97
 too short                           0.70          0.75       0.99      0.99      0.90       0.99     0.96
 inconsistent                        0.81          0.96       0.99      1.00      0.96       0.99     0.98
 repetitive                          0.67          0.94       1.00      0.98      0.96       0.96     0.99
 other                               0.89          0.96       0.99      1.00      0.98       0.97     0.99
 clarity
 sentences too long                  0.93          0.96       1.00      0.99      0.93       0.88     0.95
 too technical                       0.88          0.96       0.99      0.98      0.96       0.90     0.98
 hard math                           0.94          0.98       0.95      0.99      0.97       0.94     1.00
 other                               0.72          0.96       0.99      1.00      0.96       0.98     0.97
 correctness
 incomplete sentence                 0.89          0.94       0.99      1.00      1.00       1.00     1.00
 incorrect spelling                  0.97          1.00       1.00      1.00      0.99       1.00     1.00
 incorrect punctuation               0.92          0.98       0.98      1.00      1.00       0.99     0.98
 incorrect grammar                   0.79          0.99       0.99      1.00      1.00       1.00     0.97
 other                               0.88          0.96       1.00      1.00      0.99       1.00     0.97
 tone
 biased                              0.21          0.18       0.34    −0.03       0.14       0.18     0.28
 persuasive                          0.91          0.74       0.82     0.73       0.62       0.70     0.84
 negative                            0.95          0.93       0.94     0.96       0.82       0.90     0.93
 other                               0.98          0.97       0.99     1.00       0.99       0.92     0.99
 accuracy
 incorrect                           0.40          0.79       0.82      0.91      0.67       0.85     0.85
 science out of context              0.64          0.78       0.77      0.90      0.78       0.84     0.90
 self contradictory                  0.91          0.97       1.00      1.00      0.97       0.98     0.99
 anecdotal                           0.57          0.94       0.85      0.28      0.75       0.89     0.89
 wrong use of terms                  0.93          0.95       0.97      0.99      0.94       0.98     0.99
 other                               0.86          0.88       0.92      0.93      0.91       0.78     0.97
 specificity
 irrelevant info                   0.51            0.81       0.85      0.80      0.70       0.67     0.87
 vague                            −0.02            0.08       0.21      0.18      0.05       0.14     0.21
 other                             0.94            0.88       0.95      0.98      0.93       0.94     0.94
 completeness
 does not address main parts       0.23            0.38       0.61      0.65      0.51       0.68    0.70
 does not address region           0.87            0.90       0.97      0.98      0.95       0.93    0.95
 does not address time             0.92            0.83       0.92      0.97      0.97       0.89    0.97
 not enough detail                −0.11            0.11       0.03      0.38      0.09       0.19   −0.05
 ignores science                   0.68            0.55       0.73      0.82      0.63       0.80    0.90
 other                             0.95            0.96       0.98      1.00      0.96       0.90    0.95
 uncertainty
 uncertainty missing              −0.01            0.27       0.26      0.60      0.20       0.31     0.01
 consensus missing                 0.41            0.51       0.33      0.64      0.53       0.64     0.65
 contradicting evidence missing    0.85            0.77       0.90      0.92      0.84       0.86     0.91
 other                             0.96            0.96       0.98      1.00      0.98       0.92     0.99

Table 14: Krippendorff’s alpha for agreement on issue selection. The results are consistent with
patterns observed in pairwise agreement.


                                                        30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Issue                                                  InstructGPT                     ChatGPT      PaLM-2         GPT4         Falcon
                                            davinci-002    davinci-003      turbo                     text-bison                 180B-Chat

 tone
 biased                                          0.84           0.60        0.55          0.58           0.34         0.35         0.43
 accuracy
 incorrect                                       0.01           0.35        0.10          0.45           0.21         0.44         0.32
 specificity
 vague                                           0.37           0.57        0.83          0.76           0.66         0.65         0.65
 completeness
 does not address main parts                     0.16           0.31        0.49          0.59           0.42         0.64         0.51
 not enough detail                               0.30           0.62        0.77          0.87           0.63         0.72         0.71
 uncertainty
 uncertainty missing                             0.55           0.81        0.77          0.91           0.83         0.80         0.72
 consensus missing                               0.26           0.42        0.25          0.61           0.45         0.56         0.54

Table 15: Krippendorff’s alpha for agreement on issue selection, but computed only for low ratings.


                                                                                                 Skeptical Science
                           4                                                                     GTrends
                                                                                                 Wikipedia - Causal Prediction
                                                                                                 Wikipedia - All
          Average Rating


                           3


                           2


                           1


                           0
                               Style   Clarity    Correctness     Tone       Accuracy    Specificity Completeness Uncertainty



Figure 7: Average rating along all the dimensions per question source and type. In general, there is
not a significant difference among the ratings based on the question source or causality.


                                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dimensions. The exception to this rule are answers from InstructGTP (davinci-002) which are often
shorter and thus quicker to read.



                   screening
           70
                   presentational
           60      epistemological

           50
Time (s)


           40

           30

           20

           10

            0
                 InstructGPT         InstructGPT     InstructGPT   ChatGPT    PaLM-2        GPT4     Falcon
                 (davinci-002)       (davinci-003)      (turbo)              (text-bison)          (180B-Chat)



Figure 8: Average time per example for the screening, presentational, and epistemological assess-
ment.


Figure 9 shows that tone seems to be harder to assess among the presentational dimensions whereas
accuracy is quicker among the epistemological dimensions. Otherwise, each dimension takes a
similar amount of time.
Larger differences are revealed when we analyze how the rating itself affects the rating times. As
expected, Figure 10 shows that high ratings are quicker than lower ones. Keep in mind that for
disagreeing ratings (less than 3) we also require the raters to point out specific issues which may add
to the length of the interaction. Nevertheless, the trend is also clear among the better (3-5) ratings as
well as between 1 and 2. For the epistemological dimensions the raters can also select I don’t know,
which takes slightly longer than choosing the middle rating of 3.



K               Q UANTITY OF AI A SSISTANCE

We expect to find a correlation between answer quality and rating, as well as an inverse correlation
between answer quality and quantity of AI assistance in each dimension. This is supported by the
data, see Figure 11.



L               LLM R ATER

We investigate the possibility of using an LLM to perform the rating task on our evaluation frame-
work. We use GPT-4 and prompt it using the same language as presented to the human raters (Ta-
ble 16). We sample 3 responses (temperature 0.6) from GPT-4 for each question to replicate the
setup we have with human raters. We observe the following from the results in Table 17. First,
GPT-4 rater also benefits from assistance. Consistent with findings with human raters, GPT-4 rater
rates answers lower when assistance is provided. This makes sense because (1) the assistance pro-
vides an additional chain-of-thought like input and (2) the assistance is generated using additional
documents which potentially provide the model with additional information. When the issues in the
answers are more severe, GPT-4 rater agrees with human raters on all dimensions, as evident in the
ratings for InstructGPT (text-davinci-002). However, GPT-4 rater disagrees with human raters on
the relative ranking of answers from different models of similar quality. Notably, the GPT-4 rater is
more generous towards OpenAI models than humans are.


                                                                   32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Uncertainty

                                    Completeness

                                      Specificity

                                       Accuracy

                                              Tone

                                     Correctness

                                            Clarity

                                             Style

                                                            0               5                     10                 15                   20
                                                                                 Time Per Dimension
Figure 9: Distribution of rating times for presentational (style, clarity, correctness, tone) and epis-
temological (specificity, uncertainty, completeness, accuracy) dimensions. For ease of presentation,
this figure ignores a small number of timings that took longer than 60s.



                           5                                                           5

                           4
                                                                                       4

                           3
Rating


                                                                                       3
                           2

                                                                                       2
                           1


                 I don't know                                                          1


                                0       5             10             15     20             0              5            10            15                20
                                      Time Per Rating (Epistemological)                                   Time Per Rating (Presentational)

                  Figure 10: Average time per example for the epistemological and presentational assessment.


                 4.5                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                            Fraction with Critiques


                  4                                                                                                                                0.8
Average Rating


                 3.5                                                                                                                               0.6

                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                  3
                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                   0

                          Style         Clarity            Correctness    Tone         Accuracy        Specificity   Completeness    Uncertainty


Figure 11: The ratings are lower for dimensions where a higher fraction of the questions has AI
Assistance.



                                                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Function                  Prompt
 System                    You are an expert on climate communication. Given a question, and an
                           answer to it, and maybe a succinct critique of the answer.

 Rating                    To what extent do you agree with the following statement on the 5-point
                           likert scale (1=disagree completely, 2=disagree, 3=neither, 4=agree,
                           5=agree completely)?
                           Question: [question]
                           Answer: [answer]
                           Critique: [critique]
                           Statement: [statement for different dimensions (below)]

                           Answer in the format ”Rating: X Problem: Y Explanation: Z”
 Style Statement           The information is presented well (for a general audience).
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: too informal/colloquial, answer too long, answer too short, in-
                           consistent language/style/terminology, repetitive, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Clarity Statement         The answer is clear and easy to understand.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: sentences too long, language too technical, numbers/formulae
                           hard to understand, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Correctness Statement     The language in the answer does not contain mistakes.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: sentence is incomplete, spelling mistakes, punctuation mistakes,
                           grammatical errors, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Tone Statement            The tone of the answer is neutral and unbiased.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: the answer is biased, tries to convince me of an opinion/belief,
                           the tone is too negative, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.
 Accuracy Statement        The answer is accurate.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the fol-
                           lowing: incorrect, takes scientific findings out of context, self-contradictory,
                           anecdotal, wrong use of key terms/scientific terminology, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Specificity Statement     The answer addresses only what the question asks for, without adding irrel-
                           evant information.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: includes irrelevant parts, too vague/unspecific, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Completeness Statement    The answer addresses everything the question asks for.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: misses important parts of the answer, does not address the region
                           the question asks about, does not address time or time range the question
                           asks about, does not give enough detail (e.g., numbers, statistics, details),
                           ignores relevant scientific knowledge, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

 Uncertainty Statement     The answer appropriately conveys the uncertainty involved.
                           If you disagree, what is the problem with the answer? Choose one of the
                           following: degree of (un)certainty not given when it should be, agreement in
                           the scientific community not given when important, contradicting evidence
                           (if existing) not mentioned, other.
                           If you choose other, please explain your rating.

                          Table 16: Prompts used to generate ratings.

                                                 34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 System                         style clarity correctness tone accuracy specificity completeness uncertainty
 GPT4                           4.71   4.89     5.00        3.88   4.13      3.66          2.97            2.05
 ChatGPT                        4.75   4.91     4.99        3.91   4.18      3.68          2.72            2.00
 InstructGPT (davinci-003)      4.39   4.68     4.63        4.05   3.49      3.29          2.44            1.91
 InstructGPT (davinci-002)      2.88   3.25     3.54        3.11   2.32      2.27          1.89            1.74
 InstructGPT (turbo)            4.62   4.82     4.89        3.80   3.76      3.30          2.46            1.94
 PaLM-2 (text-bison)            4.40   4.72     4.75        3.42   3.38      3.03          2.31            1.92
 Falcon (180B-Chat)             4.66   4.85     4.91        3.83   4.03      3.49          2.71            2.00
 GPT4, no assistance            4.70 4.89       5.00        4.77   4.95      4.59          4.59            2.63

                                  Table 17: Results from the LLM Rater.



             Age bracket          %
             [15, 25)         43.75
             [25, 35)         34.38
                                                                              Sex              %
             [35, 45)         12.50
             [45, 55)          6.25                                           Female      56.25
             [55, 65)          3.12                                           Male        43.75
      (a) Distribution of age of our raters.                         (b) Distribution of sex of our raters.

                                                                       Country of residence            %
                                                                       United Kingdom              25.00
                                                                       South Africa                12.50
                                                                       Portugal                    12.50
                                                                       United States                9.38
                                                                       Greece                       6.25
                                                                       New Zealand                  6.25
                                                                       Netherlands                  6.25
              Ethnicity          %
                                                                       Poland                       6.25
              White          68.75                                     Canada                       3.12
              Black          12.50                                     Germany                      3.12
              Asian          12.50                                     Czech Republic               3.12
              Mixed           3.12                                     Hungary                      3.12
              Other           3.12                                     Italy                        3.12
(c) Distribution of simplified ethnicities of our              (d) Distribution of countries of residence of our
raters.                                                        raters.

                           Table 18: Demographic information of our raters.


M     R ATING F RAMEWORK D ETAILS


M.1    R ATER D EMOGRAPHICS

We are working with a group of 32 raters. The raters are all fluent in English and all have at least
an undergraduate degree in a climate-related field of study. This includes environmental disciplines
(e.g. environmental science, earth science, atmospheric physics, ecology, environmental policy,
climate economics), and also other disciplines (including the behavioral and social sciences) as
long as their academic work (coursework, project work, or otherwise) involves work on climate or
environmental studies. The remaining demographics can be seen in Table 18.


                                                       35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Presentational Dimensions           Statement and possible issues
 style                               The information is presented well (for a general audience).
    too informal                         too informal/colloquial
    too long                             answer too long
    too short                            answer too short
    inconsistent                         inconsistent language/style/terminology
    repetitive                           repetitive
    other                                other
 clarity                             The answer is clear and easy to understand.
    sentences too long                   sentences too long
    too technical                        language too technical
    hard math                            numbers/formulae hard to understand
    other                                other
 correctness                         The language in the answer does not contain mistakes.
    incomplete sentence                  sentence is incomplete
    incorrect spelling                   spelling mistakes
    punctuation mistakes                 punctuation mistakes
    incorrect grammar                    grammatical errors
    other                                other
 tone                                The tone of the answer is neutral and unbiased.
    biased                               the answer is biased
    persuasive                           tries to convince me of an opinion/belief
    negative                             the tone is too negative
    other                                other

 Epistemological Dimensions
 accuracy                            The answer is accurate.
    incorrect                            incorrect
    science out of context               takes scientific findings out of context
    self contradictory                   self-contradictory
    wrong use of terms                   wrong use of key terms/scientific terminology
    other                                other
 specificity                         The answer addresses only what the question asks for, without adding
                                     irrelevant information.
    irrelevant info                       includes irrelevant parts
    vague                                 too vague/unspecific
    other                                 other
 completeness                        The answer addresses everything the question asks for.
   does not address main parts           misses important parts of the answer
   does not address region               does not address the region the question asks about
   does not address time                 does not address time or time range the question asks about
   not enough detail                     does not give enough detail (e.g. numbers, statistics, details)
   ignores science                       ignores relevant scientific knowledge
   other                                 other
 uncertainty                         The answer appropriately conveys the uncertainty involved.
   uncertainty missing                   degree of (un)certainty not given when it should be
   consensus missing                     agreement in the scientific community not given when important
   contradicting evidence missing        contradicting evidence (if existing) not mentioned
   other                                 other


Table 19: (on the right) Statements as presented to the raters. We query each dimension separately
in the interface (Figure 15) and ask ”To what extent do you agree with the statement below?” We
also require the raters to identify particular issues for the given list if they disagree with a statement.
On the left side we list the dimensions the statements belong in and a shorthand for the issue names
used in tables throughout this work.


                                                    36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M.2    R ATING S TATEMENTS

For presentational and epistemological accuracy we evaluate 4 dimensions each. Given a question-
answer pair the raters are asked to what degree they agree with one of the statements in Table 19.17
The raters select agreement on a 5-point scale from completely disagree to completely agree. For
the two lowest choices we ask for additional details which can be selected from a list of possible
issues, including other which allows free-text input. See Appendix M.4 for screenshots of the rating
interface.

M.3    T UTORIAL AND A DMISSION T EST

We devise a special introduction session for new participants that contains a tutorial followed by an
admission test. The purpose of the session is twofold: (1) The introduction session is designed to
familiarize the raters with the interface and the task. (2) Based on the session’s outcome we select
raters into the rating pool.
Tutorial In the tutorial (see Figure 12) we present 4 examples of increasing difficulty in the rating
interface and only ask for one dimension each. Each example exhibits a particular main issue and we
expect raters to identify this issue correctly. A hint is given if the rater selects a wrong answer that
does not identify the issue and they can only proceed to the next item if an acceptable answer that
does identify the issue is given. Regarding other issues than the main issue, one might disagree on
some of these issues and we allow several possible selections. Note that to identify the main issue, a
low rating (disagree completely or disagree) must be selected. Once a valid response is selected we
show positive feedback and explain why the outcome is the desired one. We don’t collect any data
during the tutorial part.
Admission Test To test the raters’ ability and attention to detail we select three realistic exam-
ples that exhibit at least one major flaw. We use the full template and ask about all statements in
Table 19. We record the responses and assign or deduct points for every detected, undetected, and
over-detected issue. The point scheme was decided among the authors after carefully considering
possible disagreements or subjective interpretations.
Based on the performance of an early group of raters with known performance on the task we
decide on a threshold and admit raters above that score to the pool. We believe that the tutorial and
admission test were effective in ensuring that raters were both familiar with the interface as well as
the type of assessment we expect from them, which requires close reading of question and answer,
basic knowledge of climate change, and an understanding of the tasks dimensions and issues that
allows them to rate dimensions and select specific issues reliably.

M.4    T EMPLATE S CREENSHOTS

We provide screenshots of our rating implementation in Figures 13 to 15.

N     E XAMPLES
N.1    A NSWERS

In this section, we present examples showing good versus bad answers for each dimension evaluated
in Tables 20 to 27.

N.2    AI A SSISTANCE

In this section, we present examples showing AI assistance that influence human ratings in Tables
28 to 32.


   17
      Please note that when we use the shorthand correctness in our results, this only refers to correctness of
the language, i.e. presentational correctness. The corresponding epistemological dimension is accuracy, i.e.
correctness of the answer.


                                                      37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 12: Screenshot of the last of 4 tutorial questions with the correct answer selected.


                                                 38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Screenshot of the instructions to the raters, provided at the beginning of the first rating
session.


                                                 39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Screenshot of screening template which ensures the raters are able to judge the example.
If any of the questions is answered No we skip the example and proceed with the next one.


Question     In what ways can peri-urban ecosystems help reduce the urban heat island effect?
                                Model A                                            Model B
Answer       Peri-urban ecosystems can significantly help re-    Peri-urban ecosystems can help reduce the ur-
             duce the urban heat island effect in several        ban heat island effect by providing shade, evap-
             ways. Firstly, they act as natural coolants by      orative cooling, and habitat for cooling breezes.
             providing shade and releasing moisture into         Trees and other vegetation in peri-urban areas
             the atmosphere through a process known as           can help to block the sun’s rays, reducing the
             evapotranspiration, which can lower surround-       amount of heat that is absorbed by the ground.
             ing temperatures. Secondly, these ecosystems,       The evaporation of water from plants and soil
             which include forests, grasslands, and wetlands,    can also help to cool the air, and vegetation can
             can absorb and store heat, reducing the overall     create shade that helps to block the sun’s heat.
             temperature in urban areas. Lastly, they can also   In addition, vegetation can provide habitat for
             help mitigate the heat island effect by reducing    animals that help to create cooling breezes. All
             the need for energy-intensive cooling systems,      of these factors can help to reduce the urban
             as well-vegetated areas are naturally cooler than   heat island effect, making cities more livable
             concrete or asphalt surfaces.                       and sustainable.
Assistance                                                       The answer contains repetition, specifically in
                                                                 the explanation of how vegetation provides
                                                                 shade and blocks the sun’s heat.
Issues                                                           repetitive
Rating       4.6                                                 2.0

Table 20: Example for the style dimension. The Model B answer repeats the explanation on how
vegetation provides shade and blocks the sun’s heat.



                                                       40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Screenshot of the rating interface. Here we are rating the completeness dimension. Since
the rater selected a low rating, the interface asks for specific details. For ratings of 3 = neither and
above, the blue box is hidden. In this example we also show the AI Assistance which is not always
available, which is rated as not helpful.

Question    Was the name ’global warming’ changed to ’climate change’?
                               Model A                                          Model B
Answer      Yes                                              Yes, the term ”global warming” was changed to
                                                             ”climate change” in order to better reflect the
                                                             broader range of impacts associated with rising
                                                             greenhouse gas emissions. While global warm-
                                                             ing refers specifically to the increase in Earth’s
                                                             average surface temperature, climate change
                                                             encompasses a wider array of changes, includ-
                                                             ing shifts in precipitation patterns, sea level
                                                             rise, and the frequency and intensity of extreme
                                                             weather events. The term ”climate change” is
                                                             now widely used to capture the full scope of
                                                             these impacts.
Assistance The answer lacks sufficient detail to fully ad-
           dress the complexity of the question.
Issues      too short, vague
Rating      2.6                                              4.6

Table 21: Example for the clarity dimension. The Model A answer is too short. It lacks details and
context to fully address the question.


                                                   41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question     Which areas in Nigeria are at risk of rising sea levels?
                                  Model A                                            Model B
Answer       The coastal areas of Nigeria are at risk of ris-    I do not have access to the latest information
             ing sea levels due to climate change. These ar-     on the specific areas in nigeria that are at risk
             eas include Lagos, Ogun, and Delta states. Ris-     of rising sea levels. however, it is important to
             ing sea levels could cause flooding, erosion, and   note that nigeria, like many other countries, is
             salinization of freshwater sources. This could      vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, in-
             have a devastating impact on the livelihoods of     cluding sea level rise. coastal cities and com-
             the people who live in these areas.                 munities are particularly at risk, and it is crucial
                                                                 for nigeria to take action to mitigate and adapt
                                                                 to the effects of climate change.
Assistance                                                       The answer contains a grammatical error -
                                                                 ”nigeria” should be capitalized as ”Nigeria”.
Issues                                                           incorrect grammar, incorrect spelling
Rating       4.6                                                 2.3

Table 22: Example for the correctness dimension. The Model B answer contains a grammatical
error where the first letter of a location name should be capitalized.


Question     Do volcanos emit more CO2 than humans?
                                  Model A                                            Model B
Answer       No, volcanoes do not emit more CO2 than hu-         No, volcanoes do not emit more CO2 than hu-
             mans. According to the U.S. Geological Sur-         mans. While volcanic eruptions do release sig-
             vey, human activities, particularly the burning     nificant amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere,
             of fossil fuels for energy, emit more than 60       the total annual emissions from volcanoes are
             times the amount of carbon dioxide than vol-        estimated to be about 0.3 to 0.4 billion met-
             canoes each year. While volcanoes do con-           ric tons. In contrast, human activities, such as
             tribute to CO2 emissions, their contribution is     burning fossil fuels and deforestation, emit over
             relatively small compared to human activities.      35 billion metric tons of CO2 annually, which is
             It’s important to note that human-induced cli-      about 100 times more than volcanic emissions.
             mate change is primarily driven by the increase
             in greenhouse gases from human activities, not
             natural processes like volcanic eruptions.
Assistance
Issues       biased, persuasive
Rating       2.0                                                 4.3

Table 23: Example for the tone dimension. Instead of answering with only facts, the Model A
answer assigns blame on human activities as the cause of climate change which was not part of the
question.


                                                       42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question   How does burning fossil fuels mitigate climate change
                             Model A                                              Model B
Answer     Burning fossil fuels does not mitigate climate    Burning fossil fuels releases greenhouse gases
           change. In fact, it is one of the primary         into the atmosphere, which trap heat and cause
           causes of climate change. When fossil fuels are   the planet to warm. This is the leading cause of
           burned, they release carbon dioxide and other     climate change. However, burning fossil fuels
           greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, which       can also be used to mitigate climate change by
           trap heat and contribute to global warming. To    generating electricity from renewable sources,
           mitigate climate change, we need to transition    such as solar and wind power. This can help to
           to cleaner, renewable sources of energy and re-   reduce the amount of greenhouse gases emitted
           duce our overall energy consumption.              into the atmosphere and slow the rate of climate
                                                             change.
AI As-                                                       The critique is that the statement inaccurately
sistance                                                     suggests that burning fossil fuels can mitigate
                                                             climate change. As per the provided para-
                                                             graphs, ”the burning of fossil fuels is the main
                                                             source of greenhouse gas emissions causing
                                                             global warming and ocean acidification.” Fur-
                                                             thermore, ”the International Energy Agency
                                                             concluded that no new fossil fuel extraction
                                                             projects could be opened if the global economy
                                                             and society wants to avoid the worst impacts of
                                                             climate change and meet international goals for
                                                             climate change mitigation.” Therefore, burning
                                                             fossil fuels contributes to climate change rather
                                                             than mitigating it.
Issues                                                       incorrect,               science out of context,
                                                             self contradictory
Rating     4.6                                               1.3

Table 24: Example for the accuracy dimension. The Model B answer contains a factual error which
suggests that burning fossil fuels can mitigate climate change.


                                                   43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question    What happened to global temperatures by the mid-1970s?
                               Model A                                           Model B
Answer      By the mid-1970s, global temperatures began to     By the mid-1970s, global temperatures had
            rise at an accelerated rate. This period marked    risen by about 0.2 degrees Celsius (0.36 degrees
            the end of a slight cooling phase that had oc-     Fahrenheit) since the late 19th century. This
            curred from the 1940s to the 1970s, often re-      warming trend was statistically significant, and
            ferred to as the ”global cooling” period. The      it was consistent with the predictions of climate
            shift in temperature trends was largely due to     models that had been developed in the 1960s
            increased levels of greenhouse gases, particu-     and 1970s.
            larly carbon dioxide, in the Earth’s atmosphere
            from human activities such as burning fossil fu-
            els. This marked the beginning of a period of
            rapid global warming that continues today.
Assistance The statement is incorrect in asserting that        The answer could be improved by including
           there are no vague or generic statements in         the specific information that ”The 2011–2020
           the answer. The phrase ”increased levels of         decade warmed to an average 1.09 °C
           greenhouse gases, particularly carbon diox-         [0.95–1.20 °C] compared to the pre-industrial
           ide, in the Earth’s atmosphere from human           baseline (1850–1900)” and ”Surface tempera-
           activities such as burning fossil fuels” is a       tures are rising by about 0.2 °C per decade,”
           generic statement that could benefit from spe-      which provides a more precise context for the
           cific data or examples. As per Wikipedia,           warming trend observed by the mid-1970s.
           ”The 2011–2020 decade warmed to an average
           1.09 °C [0.95–1.20 °C] compared to the pre-
           industrial baseline (1850–1900). Surface tem-
           peratures are rising by about 0.2 °C per decade,
           with 2020 reaching a temperature of 1.2 °C
           above the pre-industrial era.” This specific in-
           formation could enhance the answer’s clarity
           and precision.
Issues      vague
Rating      2                                                  4

Table 25: Example for the specificity dimension. The Model A answer omits specific numbers on
how much the global temperatures have changed which is important for the answer’s clarity and
precision.


                                                     44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question     How much do cows contribute to climate change
                                Model A                                            Model B
Answer       Cows significantly contribute to climate change     Cows are a major source of methane, a power-
             due to the production of methane, a potent          ful greenhouse gas that contributes to climate
             greenhouse gas, during their digestion process.     change. According to the Environmental Pro-
             According to the United Nations’ Food and           tection Agency (EPA), cattle and other live-
             Agriculture Organization, livestock (including      stock are responsible for about 5.5 percent of
             cows) account for about 14.5% of all human-         all human-caused greenhouse gas emissions.
             caused greenhouse gas emissions, with cows
             being the largest contributor. This is equivalent
             to the exhaust emissions from all the vehicles
             on the planet. Therefore, the impact of cows
             on climate change is substantial and cannot be
             overlooked.
Assistance While the answer provides a comprehensive             While the answer provides a general overview
           overview of cows’ contribution to climate             of the contribution of cows to climate change, it
           change, it fails to mention the potential for miti-   fails to mention the potential mitigation strate-
           gation efforts, such as the adoption of best prac-    gies, such as dietary changes and adoption
           tices that can reduce emissions by up to 30%,         of best practices, which can significantly re-
           as stated by the FAO. Furthermore, it does not        duce emissions. As stated in the provided
           address the variability in environmental impacts      paragraphs, ”Mitigation options for reducing
           due to different agricultural practices around the    methane emission from livestock include a
           world.                                                change in diet, that is consuming less meat and
                                                                 dairy” and ”FAO estimates that the adoption
                                                                 of already available best practices can reduce
                                                                 emissions by up to 30%”.
Issues                                                           not enough detail,
                                                                 does not address main parts, ignores science
Rating       4.6                                                 2

Table 26: Example for the completeness dimension. The Model B answer lacks context and details
around the answer. The assistance on missing mitigation efforts is not helpful because it is not
necessary to make the answer complete. The raters are able to recognize this and give Model A
answer a correct high rating.


                                                       45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question     Did Hansen predict that the West Side highway would be underwater in 20 years?
                                 Model A                                             Model B
Answer       James Hansen, a prominent climate scientist,          No, Hansen did not predict that the West Side
             did make a statement in a 1988 interview sug-         highway would be underwater in 20 years. He
             gesting that the West Side Highway in New             did, however, predict that sea levels would rise
             York City could be underwater in 40 years.            by about 2 feet by 2100, which would put the
             However, this was not a formal prediction based       West Side highway at risk of flooding.
             on a specific scientific study, but rather a specu-
             lative comment made to illustrate potential im-
             pacts of climate change. It’s important to note
             that while sea levels are indeed rising due to cli-
             mate change, the exact rate and impact can vary
             greatly depending on a range of factors, includ-
             ing greenhouse gas emissions and ice melt rates.
Assistance The statement overlooks the importance of               The statement fails to acknowledge that the
           communicating uncertainty in climate science.           answer does not explicitly convey the inher-
           As per the answer, Hansen’s comment was                 ent uncertainty in climate predictions, such as
           speculative and not based on a specific study,          Hansen’s prediction about sea level rise. Ac-
           thus it’s crucial to mention this uncertainty to        cording to Wikipedia, ”Uncertainty is a funda-
           avoid misinterpretation of the potential impacts        mental characteristic of weather, seasonal cli-
           of climate change.                                      mate, and hydrological prediction, and no fore-
                                                                   cast is complete without a description of its un-
                                                                   certainty.”
Issues                                                             uncertainty missing
Rating       4                                                     2.3

Table 27: Example for the uncertainty dimension. The Model B answer states precise predictions
without acknowledging the uncertainty in climate science as there are many factors that can influence
a prediction.


Question                             Is IPCC consensus phoney?
Answer                               No, the consensus of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                                     (IPCC) is not phoney. The IPCC is a reputable international body that
                                     assesses the science related to climate change. It was established by the
                                     United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteoro-
                                     logical Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide policymakers with regular
                                     scientific assessments on climate change, its implications and potential fu-
                                     ture risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies.
                                     The consensus reached by the IPCC is based on rigorous scientific research
                                     and review by experts from all over the world, making it a reliable and au-
                                     thoritative source of information on climate change.
Assistance                           The tone of the answer, while factual, may be perceived as biased due to the
                                     strong defense of the IPCC’s credibility and authority.
Rating with Assistance               2.3 [biased, persuasive]
Rating without Assistance            4.6

  Table 28: Example for the tone dimension. Raters identify the biased tone only with assistance.


                                                         46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question                      How do single-family houses contribute to higher toxic chemical emissions
                              compared to multifamily buildings?
Answer                        Single-family houses contribute to higher toxic chemical emissions com-
                              pared to multifamily buildings primarily due to their larger size and indi-
                              vidualized systems. Each single-family home typically has its own heating,
                              cooling, and water systems, all of which consume energy and produce emis-
                              sions. Additionally, these houses often have larger lawns requiring mainte-
                              nance equipment like lawnmowers and leaf blowers, which also emit harm-
                              ful chemicals. Lastly, single-family homes, due to their larger size, require
                              more materials to build and maintain, leading to higher emissions from the
                              production and transportation of these materials.
Assistance                    While the answer provides a plausible explanation, it lacks empirical evi-
                              dence or scientific findings to support the claim that single-family houses
                              contribute to higher toxic chemical emissions compared to multifamily
                              buildings.
Rating with Assistance        1.6 [anecdotal, incorrect, science out of context]
Rating without Assistance     4

Table 29: Example for the accuracy dimension. Raters identify the anecdotal nature of the answer
only with assistance.


Question                      Are climate change solutions too expensive?
Answer                        While it’s true that implementing solutions to combat climate change re-
                              quires significant financial investment, it’s important to consider the cost of
                              inaction, which is likely to be much higher. The economic damage caused
                              by extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and other climate-related im-
                              pacts could be devastating. Moreover, many climate solutions, such as re-
                              newable energy technologies, are becoming increasingly cost-competitive.
                              Investing in these solutions can also stimulate economic growth and create
                              jobs, providing a return on investment. Therefore, while the upfront costs
                              may be high, the long-term benefits both economically and environmentally
                              make it a necessary investment.
Assistance                    The statement is incorrect as the answer contains a vague statement. The
                              phrase ”the cost of inaction, which is likely to be much higher” is not quan-
                              tified or supported with specific data or examples. As per the provided
                              Wikipedia paragraphs, ”a 2021 study by the reinsurance company Swiss Re
                              estimated global climate change is likely to reduce global economic output
                              by 11-14%, or as much as $23 trillion annually by 2050, compared with
                              output without climate change.” This specific information could have been
                              used to substantiate the claim.
Rating with Assistance        2 [vague, irrelevant info]
Rating without Assistance     4.6

Table 30: Example for the specificity dimension. Raters identify how specific information could
make the answer better only with assistance.


                                                 47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question                      Is the Arctic ice melt a natural cycle?
Answer                        While the Arctic ice does go through natural cycles of melting and refreez-
                              ing, the accelerated rate of ice melt that we are currently witnessing is
                              not part of a natural cycle. Scientific evidence overwhelmingly points to
                              human-induced climate change as the primary cause. Rising global temper-
                              atures, largely due to greenhouse gas emissions from human activities, are
                              causing the Arctic ice to melt at an unprecedented rate. This rapid ice loss
                              is having profound effects on Arctic ecosystems and contributing to rising
                              sea levels globally.
Assistance                    While the answer provides a comprehensive explanation of the Arctic ice
                              melt, it lacks specific details such as the decline rate of 4.7% per decade, the
                              projection of the first ice-free conditions around 2035 under a scenario of
                              continually accelerating greenhouse gas emissions, and the fact that Arctic
                              ice decline between 1979 and 2011 is estimated to have been responsible for
                              as much radiative forcing as a quarter of CO2 emissions the same period.
Rating with Assistance        2 [not enough detail]
Rating without Assistance     5

Table 31: Example for the completeness dimension. Raters identify how specific information could
make the answer better only with assistance.


Question                      will global warming cause an ice age
Answer                        While it may seem counterintuitive, some scientists have suggested that
                              global warming could potentially trigger what’s known as a ”mini ice age.”
                              This theory is based on the idea that increased melting of polar ice could
                              disrupt ocean currents, such as the Gulf Stream, that play a crucial role in
                              regulating global climate. If these currents were to be significantly altered or
                              shut down, it could potentially lead to a dramatic cooling of certain regions,
                              such as Northern Europe. However, this is just one theory and the overall
                              consensus among scientists is that global warming will lead to a general
                              trend of increasing temperatures worldwide.
Assistance                    While the answer acknowledges the theory of a potential ”mini ice age”
                              due to global warming, it fails to adequately convey the scientific consensus
                              on the matter. As stated in the provided paragraphs, ”Earth system models
                              used in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project indicate that shutdown is
                              only likely after high levels of warming are sustained well after 2100,” and
                              ”paleoceanographic research suggests that the AMOC may be even more
                              stable than what is predicted by most models.” Therefore, the answer could
                              mislead readers into thinking that a ”mini ice age” is a more immediate and
                              likely consequence of global warming than what is generally agreed upon
                              by the scientific community.
Rating with Assistance        1.6      [uncertainty missing,            consensus missing,        contradict-
                              ing evidence missing]
Rating without Assistance     4.6

Table 32: Example for the uncertainty dimension. Raters identify the unlikelihood of the theory
only with assistance.


                                                 48
