Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VANISHING G RADIENTS IN R EINFORCEMENT
F INETUNING OF L ANGUAGE M ODELS
    Noam Razin∗‡ , Hattie Zhou∗§ , Omid Saremi† , Vimal Thilak† , Arwen Bradley† ,
    Preetum Nakkiran† , Joshua Susskind† , Etai Littwin†
 †
     Apple ‡ Tel Aviv University § Mila, Université de Montréal



                                               A BSTRACT
             Pretrained language models are commonly aligned with human preferences and
             downstream tasks via reinforcement finetuning (RFT), which refers to maximizing
             a (possibly learned) reward function using policy gradient algorithms. This work
             identifies a fundamental optimization obstacle in RFT: we prove that the expected
             gradient for an input vanishes when its reward standard deviation under the model
             is small, even if the expected reward is far from optimal. Through experiments
             on an RFT benchmark and controlled environments, as well as a theoretical anal-
             ysis, we then demonstrate that vanishing gradients due to small reward standard
             deviation are prevalent and detrimental, leading to extremely slow reward maxi-
             mization. Lastly, we explore ways to overcome vanishing gradients in RFT. We
             find the common practice of an initial supervised finetuning (SFT) phase to be the
             most promising candidate, which sheds light on its importance in an RFT pipeline.
             Moreover, we show that a relatively small number of SFT optimization steps on
             as few as 1% of the input samples can suffice, indicating that the initial SFT phase
             need not be expensive in terms of compute and data labeling efforts. Overall, our
             results emphasize that being mindful for inputs whose expected gradient vanishes,
             as measured by the reward standard deviation, is crucial for successful execution
             of RFT.1


1         I NTRODUCTION

The dominant machine learning paradigm for textual data relies on pretraining a language model
on vast corpora, and subsequently aligning it with human preferences and downstream tasks via
finetuning (see, e.g., Yang et al. (2019); Raffel et al. (2020); Wei et al. (2022); Thoppilan et al.
(2022); OpenAI (2023); Touvron et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2023)). Supervised finetuning (SFT)
provides a straightforward procedure for adapting the model, in which the cross entropy loss is
minimized over pairs of textual inputs and desirable outputs. Despite the simplicity of SFT, the
cost of obtaining high-quality labeled data, as well as the difficulty in expressing human preferences
through ground truth labels, has led to wide adoption of a reinforcement learning-based approach,
herein referred to as reinforcement finetuning (RFT) (Wu and Hu, 2018; Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).
In RFT, instead of minimizing a loss over labeled inputs, policy gradient algorithms are used for
maximizing a reward function. The reward function can be learned from human preferences, in
which case RFT is known as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), or tailored to a
downstream task. Specifically, denote by V (x; θ) the expected reward that a model parameterized
by θ achieves, given as input a sequence of tokens x. For a distribution over inputs, RFT maximizes
Ex [V (x; θ)] with respect to θ by following estimates of its gradient. Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) — a policy gradient algorithm widely used for RFT — adheres to
this scheme, up to replacing the expected reward with a surrogate objective.
In this work, we highlight a fundamental optimization obstacle in RFT: we prove that the expected
gradient for an input x, i.e. ∇θ V (x; θ), vanishes when the reward standard deviation of x under
     ∗
         Work done while interning at Apple.
      1
         Code for reproducing our experiments is available at https://github.com/apple/ml-rlgrad.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the model is small, even if the expected reward V (x; θ) is far from optimal (Section 3). The same
holds for PPO, and stems from a combination of the reward maximization objective and the softmax
operator used for producing distributions over tokens. In contrast, under SFT the expected gradient
does not necessarily vanish in analogous circumstances.
Vanishing gradients in RFT can arise when attempting to reverse an existing behavior of the model
or when the text distribution of the downstream task differs from that of the pretraining corpora.
In both of these common use cases, over some inputs, the pretrained model is likely to give non-
negligible probability only to outputs of roughly the same suboptimal reward. The reward standard
deviation for such inputs is small, implying that their expected gradients are near-zero. Thus, RFT
is anticipated to be ineffective for achieving a higher reward over them.
Using the GRUE benchmark (Ramamurthy et al., 2023) for RFT of language models, we empirically
affirm the prevalence of inputs with small reward standard deviation, for which the expected gradient
vanishes, and showcase its harmful effects (Section 4.1). Specifically, we find that three of seven
GRUE datasets contain a considerable amount of inputs with near-zero reward standard deviation
under pretrained models, while their expected reward is suboptimal. As anticipated, RFT has limited
impact on the rewards of such inputs. Moreover, our experiments show that, in datasets where inputs
with small reward standard deviation are more common, the reward that RFT achieves compared to
SFT is worse. This indicates that vanishing gradients in RFT hinder the ability to maximize the
reward function. Controlled experiments that remove possible confounding factors (Section 4.2),
such as insufficient exploration, and a theoretical analysis for a simplified setting (Section 4.3),
corroborate that vanishing gradients in RFT can lead to extremely slow optimization.
Lastly, we explore ways to overcome vanishing gradients in RFT of language models (Section 5).
Conventional heuristics, including increasing the learning rate, using a temperature hyperparameter,
and entropy regularization, are shown to be inadequate (Section 5.1). On the other hand, in agree-
ment with prior evidence from Ramamurthy et al. (2023), we find the common practice of an initial
SFT phase (e.g., used in Ziegler et al. (2019); Stiennon et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022); Dubois
et al. (2023); Touvron et al. (2023)) to be beneficial, both in terms of the resulting reward and in sig-
nificantly reducing the number of input samples with small reward standard deviation. This sheds
light on the importance of SFT in an RFT pipeline — it can help alleviate vanishing gradients.
If the benefits of an initial SFT phase stem, at least partially, from alleviating vanishing gradients for
the subsequent RFT phase, as our results suggest, one would expect that a relatively few SFT steps
on a small number of labeled inputs can suffice. Meaning, we need only perform SFT to decrease
the number of input samples with near-zero reward standard deviation, after which the potency of
RFT will substantially improve. We show that this is indeed the case (Section 5.2). Remarkably,
for some datasets, SFT over as few as 1% of the input samples allows RFT to reach 96% of the
reward achieved when SFT is performed over all input samples. This demonstrates that the initial
SFT phase need not be expensive in terms of compute and data labeling efforts, highlighting its
effectiveness in addressing vanishing gradients in RFT.
Overall, we identify a fundamental optimization challenge in RFT, demonstrate its prevalence and
detrimental effects, and explore possible solutions. Our results emphasize that being mindful for
inputs whose expected gradient vanishes, as can be measured by the reward standard deviation, is
crucial for successful execution of RFT. We believe further investigating ways to overcome vanish-
ing gradients in RFT, e.g., by modifying the objective (as recently done in Lu et al. (2022); Rafailov
et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2023); Dong et al. (2023); Gulcehre et al. (2023)), is a valuable direction for
future research.

Related work: We discuss related work throughout and defer a concentrated account with additional
references to Appendix A.

2    P RELIMINARIES : S UPERVISED AND R EINFORCEMENT F INETUNING

Contemporary language models, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023),
are trained on large corpora to produce a probability distribution over sequences of tokens. The
distribution is modeled in an autoregressive manner, often conditioned on an input sequence, where
the output of the model is converted into a distribution over tokens through the softmax operator —
                            PK
softmax(z)k := exp(zk )/ k0 =1 exp(zk0 ) for z ∈ RK and k ∈ {1, . . . , K}.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Formally, let X be a finite vocabulary of tokens. We consider a model f parameterized by θ ∈ RP
that, conditioned on an input x = (x1 , . . . , xLin ) ∈ X Lin of length Lin , defines a distribution over
outputs y = (y1 , . . . , yLout ) ∈ X Lout of length Lout as follows:
                            YLout                        YLout
             pθ (y|x) =             pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) =        softmax(f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ))yl ,
                            l=1                          l=1

where y≤l−1 := (y1 , . . . , yl−1 ) and f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ) ∈ R|X | . In particular, f can stand for a neural
network that intakes a sequence of tokens and produces logits for the distribution of the next token.
Supervised finetuning (SFT): SFT is a straightforward approach for adapting a pretrained language
model to comply with human intent and downstream tasks. Given pairs of textual inputs and ouputs,
e.g. instructions and desirable completions (Wei et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Longpre et al., 2023), minimize the cross entropy loss through gradient-based methods. The SFT
objective LSFT (θ) is defined by:

           LSFT (θ) := Ex∼D [LSFT (x; θ)] , LSFT (x; θ) := Ey∼D(·|x) − ln pθ (y|x) ,              (1)
where D is a distribution over inputs, D(·|x) is a ground truth conditional distribution over outputs,
and LSFT (x; θ) is the loss over a single input x. Although the simplicity of SFT is appealing, it
comes with a few drawbacks. Namely: (i) human preferences can be difficult to express through
ground truth labels, e.g., reducing the toxicity and bias of the model’s outputs; and (ii) obtaining
high-quality labeled data can be expensive.
Reinforcement finetuning (RFT): Given a reward function r : X Lin × X Lout → [−1, 1], instead
of minimizing a loss over labeled inputs, the goal of RFT is to maximize the expected reward V (θ)
with respect to the model:

                   V (θ) := Ex∼D [V (x; θ)] , V (x; θ) := Ey∼pθ (·|x) r(x, y) .                (2)
In reinforcement learning terminology, RFT forms a horizon-one (bandit) environment, where each
input is a state, each output is an action that the model (i.e. policy) can take, and D is a distribution
over initial states. The reward function r can be learned from human preferences, e.g., based on
rankings of the model’s outputs, which are often easier to obtain than ground truth labels (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Alternatively, it may be a task specific
metric, such as ROUGE (Lin, 2004), METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), or a learned sentiment
classifier (Ramamurthy et al., 2023). Policy gradient algorithms are used to maximize V (θ), by
updating the parameters θ according to sample-based estimates of ∇θ V (θ). PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017) — a policy gradient algorithm widely used for RFT — adheres to this scheme, up to replacing
V (x; θ) with a surrogate (clipped) objective.

3   S MALL R EWARD S TANDARD D EVIATION I MPLIES VANISHING G RADIENTS
IN R EINFORCEMENT F INETUNING

We begin by introducing a, yet unnoticed, cause for vanishing gradients in RFT: the expected gradi-
ent for an input is near-zero if its reward standard deviation is small.
Theorem 1. For parameters θ ∈ RP and input x       p∈ X
                                                          Lin
                                                              , denote the reward standard deviation of
x under the model by STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)] := Ey∼pθ (·|x) [(r(x, y) − V (x; θ))2 ], where V (x; θ)
is the expected reward defined in Equation (2). Then, it holds that:
                                                                               2/3
                     k∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ 6Lout γ(x; θ) · STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]         ,
where γ(x; θ) := maxl∈{1,...,Lout },y≤l−1 ∈X l−1 kJf (x,y≤l−1 ;θ) k2 with Jf (x,y≤l−1 ;θ) standing for the
Jacobian of f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ) with respect to θ, and k·k and k·k2 denote the Euclidean and operator
norms, respectively.

The gradient ∇θ V (x; θ) vanishes, when the reward standard deviation of x is small, due to a combi-
nation of the reward maximization objective and the use of softmax for producing distributions over
output tokens (see proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix D.1). Notably, this occurs regardless of what
the expected reward V (x; θ) is and, in particular, whether it is nearly optimal or not.
Vanishing gradients in RFT can be problematic when attempting to reverse an existing behavior of
the model or when the text distribution of the downstream task differs from that of the pretraining


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


corpora. In both of these common use cases, over some inputs, the pretrained model is likely to give
non-negligible probability only to outputs of roughly the same suboptimal reward. The reward stan-
dard deviation for such inputs is small, implying that their expected gradients are near-zero. Thus,
RFT is anticipated to be ineffective for achieving higher reward over them. We empirically affirm
this expectation in Section 4 through experiments on an RFT benchmark and controlled environ-
ments.
We make two important distinctions. First, Theorem 1 considers the expected gradient for an indi-
vidual input x, as opposed to the gradient across a batch or the population of inputs. Thus, although
adaptive optimizers such as Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) — the standard optimizer choice for
RFT — normalize the batch gradient, the contribution of inputs whose reward standard deviation
is small is still negligible compared to the contribution of other inputs. Indeed, the experiments
of Section 4 verify that adaptive (batch) gradient normalization does not solve the harmful effects of
vanishing gradients in RFT, since they are carried out using the Adam optimizer. Second, in contrast
to RFT, under SFT the expected gradient ∇θ LSFT (x; θ) need not vanish unless LSFT (x; θ) is nearly
minimal (and usually does not, e.g., as demonstrated by the experiments of Section 4.2).
Vanishing gradients in PPO due to small reward standard deviation: A common practice for
maximizing the reward in RFT is to use PPO, which replaces the expected reward with a surrogate
objective. In Appendix B we establish that, if the reward standard deviation for an input is small,
then its expected gradient under PPO vanishes, just as its expected reward gradient vanishes.
Known causes of vanishing gradients: Focusing mostly on tabular Markov Decision Processes,
prior works identified other conditions that lead to vanishing gradients in policy gradient algorithms.
Agarwal et al. (2021) showed that the gradient norm can decay exponentially with the horizon when
the rewards are sparse. In RFT, however, the horizon is equal to one and the rewards are not sparse.
More relevant is the fact that the expected gradient for a softmax parameterized model vanishes if it
outputs near-deterministic distributions (Ahmed et al., 2019; Hennes et al., 2019; Schaul et al., 2019;
Mei et al., 2020a;b; Agarwal et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022) — a special case of the reward standard
deviation being small, i.e. of Theorem 1. Though, this is unlikely to be an issue for RFT of language
models since, barring extreme cases, the output distributions produced by language models are not
near-deterministic.

4   P REVALENCE AND D ETRIMENTAL E FFECTS OF VANISHING G RADIENTS
IN R EINFORCEMENT F INETUNING

In this section, we first show that the vanishing gradients phenomenon from Section 3 is prevalent
in the GRUE benchmark, using the GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and T5-base (Raffel et al., 2020)
pretrained language models considered in Ramamurthy et al. (2023) (Section 4.1). Specifically,
among its seven datasets, three contain a substantial amount of inputs with small reward standard
deviation under the corresponding pretrained model, i.e. their expected gradient vanishes, although
their expected reward is suboptimal. As anticipated, RFT has limited impact on the rewards of these
inputs compared to its impact on the rewards of other inputs. Moreover, in datasets where inputs with
small reward standard deviation are more common, the reward that RFT achieves relative to SFT is
worse, indicating that vanishing gradients in RFT hinder the ability to maximize the reward function.
Controlled experiments that remove possible confounding factors (Section 4.2), such as insufficient
exploration, and a theoretical analysis for a simplified setting with linear models (Section 4.3),
further establish that vanishing gradients in RFT can lead to extremely slow reward maximization.
For brevity, we often refer to the reward standard deviation of an input under a pretrained model as
the input’s “pretrain reward standard deviation.”

4.1   VANISHING G RADIENTS IN THE GRUE B ENCHMARK

We followed the experimental setup of Ramamurthy et al. (2023), up to slight adjustments (spec-
ified in Appendix F.2.1) for a fairer comparison between RFT and SFT. In particular, we adopted
their default hyperparameters and considered the following text generation datasets from GRUE:
NarrativeQA (Kočiskỳ et al., 2018), ToTTo (Parikh et al., 2020), CommonGen (Lin et al., 2020),
IWSLT 2017 (Cettolo et al., 2017), CNN/Daily Mail (Hermann et al., 2015), DailyDialog (Li et al.,
2017), and IMDB (Maas et al., 2011) — see Table 1 in Ramamurthy et al. (2023) for a complete de-


                                                  4
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                       Pretrained Model              RFT Model                        SFT Model


Dataset: NarrativeQA
Dataset: ToTTo
Dataset: IMDB


   Figure 1: Inputs with small reward standard deviation under the pretrained model, i.e. with vanishing
   expected gradient, are prevalent in the GRUE benchmark. For randomly chosen subsets of 5000 train
   samples from the NarrativeQA, ToTTo, and IMDB datasets, presented are the reward means and standard
   deviations (estimated based on ten generations per input) under the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models. The
   samples are ordered according to their pretrain reward standard deviation, with each marker representing the
   reward mean and standard deviation (depicted by color) of an individual sample. Notice that a significant
   number of samples from NarrativeQA and ToTTo have small pretrain reward standard deviation, while their
   reward mean is low. Accordingly, RFT struggles to improve the reward of these inputs, especially compared to
   SFT. In contrast, IMDB does not suffer from this issue, and the effect of RFT and SFT over it is more similar.
   See Figure 8 in Appendix F.1 for identical experiments with the remaining GRUE datasets.



   scription of the datasets. We ran PPO using the Adam optimizer for RFT, with the reward function
   in each dataset being either a task specific metric or a learned reward model (as specified in Ap-
   pendix F.2.1). In contrast, SFT was performed based on ground truth completions (i.e. labels), also
   using Adam. Similarly to Ramamurthy et al. (2023), we used GPT-2 as the pretrained language
   model for DailyDialog and IMDB, and T5-base for the remaining datasets.
   Our findings are detailed below. For conciseness, we defer some experiments, e.g., using NLPO (Ra-
   mamurthy et al., 2023) instead of PPO for RFT, and implementation details to Appendix F.
   Inputs with small reward standard deviation are prevalent: As evident from Figure 1, Narra-
   tiveQA and ToTTo contain a considerable amount of input samples whose pretrain reward standard
   deviation is near-zero, i.e. their expected gradient vanishes, while their reward mean is low. On the
   other hand, in IMDB the vast majority of samples have a relatively large pretrain reward standard de-
   viation or a high reward mean. Figure 8 in Appendix F.1 further shows that the remaining datasets lie
   on a spectrum between these two extremes, with CommonGen also exhibiting a noticeable amount
   of input samples with small pretrain reward standard deviation.
   As was expected (in Section 3), inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation are more com-
   mon in datasets whose text distribution differs markedly from the pretraining corpora. Specifically,
   NarrativeQA consists of questions concatenated to text segments and the task is to output free-
   form answers based on the texts, while in ToTTo each input is a table and the task is to produce
   a one-sentence description of it. By manual inspection, unsurprisingly, the pretrained model often
   generates continuations for the input text instead of obliging to the task at hand. When the desired
   output does not overlap with a “natural” (according to the pretraining corpora) continuation of an
   input, the model assigns non-negligible probability only to outputs of roughly the same low reward,
   leading to a small reward standard deviation and vanishing expected gradient. We provide repre-
   sentative examples of inputs with small and inputs with large pretrain reward standard deviation,
   including outputs produced by the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models, in Appendix E.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        0.0


                                                       RFT SFT Reward
             NarrativeQA     ToTTo    IMDB
                                                                        0.1
      RFT        0.48         0.46     0.72                             0.2                    Train               IWSLT 2017
      SFT        0.05         0.16     0.72                                                    Test                CNN/Daily Mail
                                                                        0.3                    NarrativeQA         DailyDialog
                                                                                               ToTTo               IMDB
Table 1: RFT affects inputs with small reward                           0.4                    CommonGen
standard deviation under the pretrained model                                 0.00     0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08    0.10   0.12
less than it affects other inputs. Per dataset,                                      10'th Pretrain Reward STD Percentile
reported is the Pearson correlation between the
pretrain reward standard deviation and the abso-      Figure 2: RFT performance (relative to SFT) is worse
lute reward mean change due to finetuning, across     when inputs with small reward standard deviation
the train samples. The correlations are computed      are prevalent. Per dataset, the difference between the
based on the subsets of train samples from Fig-       mean reward achieved by RFT and SFT is plotted against
ure 1. As anticipated, the correlation is consid-     the 10’th percentile of the reward standard deviation un-
erably higher for RFT compared to SFT on Nar-         der the pretrained model. Means are taken over five runs
rativeQA and ToTTo, which contain a substan-          and error bars (indiscernible) mark standard deviations.
tial amount of samples with small pretrain reward     We exclude inputs with near-optimal reward mean under
standard deviation. In contrast, on IMDB the cor-     the pretrained model (higher than 0.9) when computing
relation is roughly the same since most samples       the percentiles, since small reward standard deviation is
with a small pretrain reward standard deviation al-   only problematic if the reward mean is not high to begin
ready have a high reward mean, thus, their reward     with. Observe that, the lower the pretrain reward stan-
mean does not change much under both RFT and          dard deviation percentile is, i.e. the more train samples
SFT. See Table 3 in Appendix F.1 for the correla-     have small pretrain reward standard deviation, the worse
tions on the remaining GRUE datasets.                 the reward that RFT achieves relative to SFT.


RFT affects inputs with small reward standard deviation less than other inputs: Figure 1 qual-
itatively demonstrates that the rewards of train samples with small reward standard deviation change
less due to RFT than the rewards of other train samples, whereas under SFT the change is more uni-
form across the samples. To quantify this observation, for each dataset, Table 1 reports the Pearson
correlation between the pretrain reward standard deviation and the absolute reward mean change due
to finetuning, across the train samples. Indeed, the correlations for RFT are positive and significantly
higher than those for SFT.
RFT performance is worse when inputs with small reward standard deviation are prevalent:
Lastly, we examine whether there is a connection between the prevalence of inputs with small pre-
train reward standard deviation, i.e. with vanishing expected gradient, and the reward that RFT
achieves. A simple way to measure the prevalence of such inputs in a dataset is to examine some
percentile of the pretrain reward standard deviation, over the train samples. Remarkably, Figure 2
shows that the lower the 10’th percentile of the pretrain reward standard deviation is, the worse the
reward that RFT achieves relative to SFT. This observation is not sensitive to the choice of per-
centile, as long as it is not too large — Figure 9 in Appendix F.1 demonstrates a similar trend for
varying percentile choices.2
Our investigation reveals that the extent of vanishing expected gradients in a dataset, as measured by
the reward standard deviation, is indicative of how well RFT performs. Yet one cannot infer a causal
relation due to possible confounding factors. Mainly, the large output space in language generation
introduces the well-known challenge of exploration (Ranzato et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017;
Choshen et al., 2020), which in the context of RFT translates to the challenge of obtaining accurate
estimates for expected gradients (Greensmith et al., 2004; Schulman et al., 2015; Tucker et al., 2018).
A natural question is whether the difficulty of RFT to maximize the rewards of inputs with small
reward standard deviation indeed stems from their expected gradients vanishing, or rather solely
from insufficient exploration. We address this question via controlled experiments (Section 4.2) and
a theoretical analysis (Section 4.3). They show how vanishing gradients in RFT, due to small reward
standard deviation, can lead to extremely slow reward maximization even under perfect exploration,
i.e. even when we have access to expected gradients.

4.2   C ONTROLLED E XPERIMENTS

To account for the possible confounding effect of insufficient exploration, i.e. of inaccurate gradient
estimates, we consider environments where exploration is not an obstacle. Namely, environments
    2
      For completeness, the train and test rewards that the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models obtain over all
datasets are provided in Table 4 of Appendix F.1.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                Model: MLP Dataset: MNIST         Model: ResNet18 Dataset: CIFAR10     Model: BERT-mini Dataset: STS-B


Reward


Figure 3: RFT struggles to maximize the reward over inputs with small reward standard deviation under the
pretrained model, i.e. inputs with vanishing expected gradient, even with perfect exploration. On the contrary,
SFT easily leads to maximal reward. For the controlled environments described in Section 4.2, in which RFT
has access to expected gradients, displayed is the train reward that RFT and SFT attain throughout optimization,
separately for train samples with small and train samples with large pretrain reward standard deviation. In
Appendix F.1, Figure 12 provides plots showing the reward standard deviation and gradient norm throughout
optimization, and Figure 13 presents identical experiments with stochastic gradient descent instead of Adam.



with a relatively small number of outputs in which one can compute the expected gradient for an
input instead of estimating it. We observe that RFT is still unable to achieve high reward over
inputs whose pretrain reward standard deviation is small, in stark contrast to SFT which easily does
so. This demonstrates that, in the presence of inputs with vanishing expected gradient, RFT can
suffer from extremely slow optimization despite perfect exploration. For conciseness, we defer
some experiments and implementation details to Appendix F.
We seek to create finetuning environments in which: (i) it is possible to compute the expected
reward gradient ∇θ V (x; θ) for an input x; and (ii) there are inputs whose pretrain reward standard
deviation is small. To that end, we take a classification dataset with a modest number of labels,
e.g. STS-B (Cer et al., 2017).3 This ensures (i): we can compute the expected gradient given an
input by simply querying the reward for all labels.
For pretraining, we assign to each train sample multiple ground truth labels by randomly choosing
additional labels, and minimize the cross entropy loss starting from a randomly initialized model,
e.g. a BERT model (Devlin et al., 2018). At the end of this process, given a train sample, the model
roughly outputs a uniform distribution over the sample’s pretraining labels. During finetuning, every
train sample is assigned a (possibly different) single ground truth label, whose reward for RFT is
set to 1, whereas the reward of an incorrect label is set to −1 . For a subset of the samples, we
set their finetuning label such that it was not included in their pretraining labels. This guarantees
(ii): the pretrain reward standard deviation of these train samples is small since the model (roughly)
produces a uniform distribution over labels with the same suboptimal reward. On the other hand, the
reward standard deviation is large for the remaining train samples, whose finetuning label existed in
their pretraining labels.
We followed the blueprint above for three different model and dataset configurations: a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) on MNIST (LeCun, 1998), ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009), and BERT-mini (Turc et al., 2019) on STS-B (Cer et al., 2017). RFT was performed
by maximizing the expected reward (Equation (2)) via the Adam optimizer, and SFT was performed
by minimizing the cross entropy loss, also via the Adam optimizer. Figure 3 tracks the train reward
that RFT and SFT attain throughout optimization, separately for train samples with small and train
samples with large pretrain reward standard deviation. The results confirm that, despite having
access to expected gradients and the small output space, RFT is unable to achieve high reward in
a reasonable time over inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation. On the other hand, it
does not encounter difficulty for inputs with large pretrain reward standard deviation. The behavior
of SFT strikingly differs — it quickly reaches the maximal reward for both types of inputs.
Insignificance of the pretrain expected reward: The pretrain expected reward (i.e. expected re-
ward under the pretrained model) of inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation is often
close to minimal, as shown on the GRUE benchmark in Section 4.1. This is also the case in the
controlled experiments of Figure 3. However, we highlight that the vanishing gradient phenomenon
established in Section 3 is independent of the expected reward — the expected gradient for an input
vanishes if its reward standard deviation is small, regardless of what the expected reward is. We
empirically demonstrate this independence through experiments analogous to those of Figure 3, in

         3
             We quantize the continuous labels of STS-B, which reside in [0, 5], to six values via rounding.


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which, although the initial expected reward of inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation
is relatively high, RFT is still unable to maximize their reward — see Figure 14 in Appendix F.1.

4.3   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS : S LOW O PTIMIZATION D UE TO VANISHING G RADIENTS

Through an analysis for a simplified setting, we theoretically demonstrate that vanishing gradients
in RFT, due to small reward reward standard deviation, can lead to impractically slow optimization.
Specifically, we prove an exponential optimization time separation between RFT and SFT, with re-
spect to the pretrain reward standard deviation of an input x: the time it takes RFT to assign maximal
                                                                           2
probability for the correct label of x is Ω(1/ STDy∼pθ(0) (·|x) [r(x, y)] ), where θ(0) is the pretrained
model parameters, while the time it takes SFT to do so is only O(ln(1/ STDy∼pθ(0) (·|x) [r(x, y)])).
Our analysis considers linear models trained over orthonormal inputs using a small learning rate.
Although the setting is rather simplistic, it gives insight into the detrimental effects of vanishing gra-
dients due to small reward standard deviation. The details of our analysis are given in Appendix C;
we regard extending it to more complex settings as an interesting avenue for future work.

5     OVERCOMING VANISHING G RADIENTS IN R EINFORCEMENT F INETUNING

Section 3 established that small reward standard deviation leads to vanishing gradients in RFT, which
Section 4 demonstrated to be detrimental in a real-world benchmark and controlled environments.
In this section, we explore ways to overcome vanishing gradients in RFT. We show that the con-
ventional heuristics of increasing the learning rate, applying temperature to the logits, and entropy
regularization are inadequate (Section 5.1). On the other hand, the common practice of an initial
SFT phase (e.g., used in Ziegler et al. (2019); Stiennon et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022); Dubois
et al. (2023); Touvron et al. (2023)) is shown to be highly effective, both in terms of the resulting
reward and in reducing the number of inputs with small reward standard deviation. This sheds light
on the importance of SFT in an RFT pipeline — it can help alleviate vanishing gradients. Moreover,
our experiments reveal that a relatively small number of SFT optimization steps on as few as 1% of
the input samples can suffice, indicating that the initial SFT phase need not be expensive in terms of
compute and data labeling efforts (Section 5.2).
We focus on three datasets from the GRUE benchmark, which were found in Section 4.1 to suffer the
most from vanishing gradients: NarrativeQA, ToTTo, and CommonGen. For conciseness, we defer
to Appendix F the results for ToTTo and CommonGen, as well as some implementation details.

5.1   I NADEQUACY OF C ONVENTIONAL H EURISTICS

We validate the resilience of vanishing gradients in RFT to common heuristics. Three sensible meth-
ods that may seem suitable for addressing the problem are: increasing the learning rate, applying
temperature to the logits, and entropy regularization (which is known theoretically to improve con-
vergence rates in simple settings (Mei et al., 2020b)). However, we do not expect modifying the
learning rate to help since it increases the effective gradient norm over a batch of inputs. Thus,
the contribution of inputs whose reward standard deviation is small will continue to be negligible
compared to the contribution of other inputs. Furthermore, while applying temperature to the logits
or entropy regularization may yield non-zero expected gradients, the gradients will likely not be in
a direction that aids maximizing the reward due to the large output space of language models.
Based on the default hyperparameters from Ramamurthy et al. (2023), we carried out RFT runs
with: (i) several values of larger learning rates, temperature, and entropy regularization coefficient;
and, for comparison, (ii) an initial SFT phase, whereby the pretrained model is first finetuned in
a supervised manner before applying RFT. Confirming our expectation, none of the RFT config-
urations led to a higher train reward compared to the default one. By contrast, in line with prior
evidence (Ramamurthy et al., 2023), an initial SFT phase greatly increases the reward that RFT at-
tains — see Table 6 in Appendix F.1. Furthermore, to gauge the effect of the considered heuristics
on inputs with small reward standard deviation, Figure 15 in Appendix F.1 presents the reward mean
and standard deviation of individual train samples after applying RFT with each of the heuristics.
In comparison to the effect of the default RFT configuration and SFT (shown in Figure 1), it is evi-
dent that the considered heuristics do not reduce the number of samples with small reward standard
deviation nor substantially improve their rewards, whereas SFT is highly effective in doing so.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: On datasets in which RFT suffers from vanishing gradients, a few initial SFT optimization steps on a
small number of labeled inputs substantially boost the efficacy of RFT. For the NarrativeQA dataset, reported
metrics are based on the mean train reward achieved when performing RFT after an initial SFT phase with
various percentages of optimization steps and labeled inputs (over three random seeds). A “full” SFT phase
refers to 100% of the steps and labeled inputs used by Ramamurthy et al. (2023). Observe that the number
of optimization steps and labeled inputs can be greatly reduced without causing a significant degradation in
reward (left). Furthermore, RFT becomes roughly 5 to 18 times more potent after the initial SFT phase (right).
We refer to Appendix F.1 for analogous plots reporting metrics based on the mean test reward (Figure 16), as
well as identical experiments on the ToTTo and CommonGen datasets (Figures 18 and 19, respectively).


5.2   A F EW S UPERVISED F INETUNING S TEPS ON A S MALL N UMBER OF I NPUTS S UFFICE

Although an initial SFT phase often yields improved performance, it comes with a major drawback:
it requires additional compute and, more importantly, relies on labeled data, which can be especially
expensive to obtain for language generation. The results of Section 5.1 suggest that the benefits of an
initial SFT phase stem, at least partially, from mitigating vanishing gradients for the subsequent RFT
phase. This gives rise to the possibility that a relatively few SFT steps on a small number of labeled
inputs suffice. Meaning, we need only perform SFT to decrease the number of input samples with
near-zero reward standard deviation, after which the potency of RFT will substantially improve.
We investigate this prospect by decreasing the percentage of optimization steps and labeled inputs
used for the initial SFT phase, with 100% corresponding to the default setup from Ramamurthy et al.
(2023). As Figure 4 shows, the number of SFT optimization steps and labeled inputs can be greatly
reduced without significantly harming the reward achieved by RFT. In particular, using 40% of the
optimization steps and as few as 1% of the input samples allows RFT to reach 96% of the reward
achieved when performing a “full” initial SFT phase. Moreover, the efficacy of RFT, as quantified
by the difference between the reward after and before RFT, exhibits a substantial increase as a result
of the initial SFT phase. To understand the cause for this increase, we examine the impact of a
partial SFT phase on individual train samples (see Figure 17 in Appendix F.1). We observe that the
number of samples with small reward standard deviation, i.e. with vanishing expected gradient, is
considerably reduced. This supports the perspective that the initial SFT phase is beneficial due to
mitigating vanishing gradients for the following RFT phase, and showcases that the SFT phase need
not be expensive in terms of compute and data labeling efforts.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we identified a fundamental optimization challenge in RFT: the expected gradient for an
input vanishes when its reward standard deviation is small. We then demonstrated the prevalence and
detrimental effects of this phenomenon, as well as explored possible solutions. Overall, our results
emphasize that being mindful for inputs whose expected gradient vanishes, as can be measured by
the reward standard deviation, is crucial for successful execution of RFT.
Limitations and future work: To facilitate efficient experimentation, we considered language mod-
els of small to moderate size and did not incorporate reward functions learned from human feedback.
An exciting next step is to study the extent to which our empirical findings carry over to more
complex finetuning pipelines, including larger models and iterative human feedback (cf. Bai et al.
(2022); OpenAI (2023); Touvron et al. (2023)). Additionally, Section 5 demonstrated that three
common heuristics, which may seem suitable for overcoming vanishing gradients in RFT, are in-
adequate, whereas performing a few initial SFT steps over a small number of labeled samples is a
promising solution. Our investigation of possible solutions is not exhaustive. We believe further ex-
ploring ways to overcome vanishing gradients in RFT, e.g., by modifying the objective (as recently
done in Lu et al. (2022); Rafailov et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2023); Dong et al. (2023); Gulcehre et al.
(2023)), is a valuable direction for future research.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Eshbal Hezroni for aid in preparing illustrative figures. NR is supported by the Apple
Scholars in AI/ML PhD fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy gradient methods:
  Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):4431–
  4506, 2021.

Zafarali Ahmed, Nicolas Le Roux, Mohammad Norouzi, and Dale Schuurmans. Understanding the impact of
  entropy on policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 151–160. PMLR,
  2019.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu, Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron Courville,
  and Yoshua Bengio. An actor-critic algorithm for sequence prediction. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav
  Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement
  learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation
  with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures
  for machine translation and/or summarization, pages 65–72, 2005.

Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Iñigo Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. SemEval-2017 task 1: Semantic
  textual similarity multilingual and crosslingual focused evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th International
  Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.

Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Federico, Luisa Bentivogli, Niehues Jan, Stüker Sebastian, Sudoh Katsuitho, Yoshino
  Koichiro, and Federmann Christian. Overview of the iwslt 2017 evaluation campaign. In Proceedings of the
  14th International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation, pages 2–14, 2017.

Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend. On the weaknesses of reinforcement learning
  for neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi Wang,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
   transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong
  Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.

Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes over-
  parameterized neural networks. 2019.

Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that learn from human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14387, 2023.

Omer Elkabetz and Nadav Cohen. Continuous vs. discrete optimization of deep neural networks. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4947–4960, 2021.

Spencer Frei, Gal Vardi, Peter Bartlett, and Nathan Srebro. Benign overfitting in linear classifiers and leaky relu
  networks from kkt conditions for margin maximization. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning
  Theory, pages 3173–3228. PMLR, 2023.

Shivam Garg, Samuele Tosatto, Yangchen Pan, Martha White, and Rupam Mahmood. An alternate policy
  gradient estimator for softmax policies. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pages 6630–6689, 2022.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evan Greensmith, Peter L Bartlett, and Jonathan Baxter. Variance reduction techniques for gradient estimates
  in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5(9), 2004.

Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek Sharma,
  Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, et al. Reinforced self-training (rest) for language
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998, 2023.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

Daniel Hennes, Dustin Morrill, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Remi Munos, Julien Perolat, Marc Lanctot, Audrunas
  Gruslys, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Paavo Parmas, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, et al. Neural replicator dynamics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00190, 2019.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman,
  and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 28, 2015.

Jian Hu, Li Tao, June Yang, and Chandler Zhou. Aligning language models with offline reinforcement learning
   from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12050, 2023.

Natasha Jaques, Asma Ghandeharioun, Judy Hanwen Shen, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah Jones,
  Shixiang Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Way off-policy batch deep reinforcement learning of implicit human
  preferences in dialog. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00456, 2019.

Samuel Kiegeland and Julia Kreutzer. Revisiting the weaknesses of reinforcement learning for neural machine
  translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2015.

Tomáš Kočiskỳ, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis, and Ed-
  ward Grefenstette. The narrativeqa reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 6:317–328, 2018.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.

Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, Yuantao Gu, and Yuxin Chen. Softmax policy gradient methods can take
  exponential time to converge. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 3107–3110. PMLR, 2021.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. Deep reinforcement
   learning for dialogue generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01541, 2016.

Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. DailyDialog: A manually la-
  belled multi-turn dialogue dataset. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 986–995. Asian Federation of Natural Language
  Processing, 2017. URL https://aclanthology.org/I17-1099.

Bill Yuchen Lin, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ming Shen, Pei Zhou, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xi-
   ang Ren. CommonGen: A constrained text generation challenge for generative commonsense reason-
   ing. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1823–1840.
   Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.165. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.165.

Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out,
  pages 74–81, 2004.

Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V Le, Barret
  Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688, 2023.

Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, and
  Yejin Choi. Quark: Controllable text generation with reinforced unlearning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 35:27591–27609, 2022.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaifeng Lyu and Jian Li. Gradient descent maximizes the margin of homogeneous neural networks. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts. Learn-
  ing word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 142–150. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2011. URL https://aclanthology.org/P11-1015.

Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, Csaba Szepesvári, and Dale Schuurmans. Escaping the
   gravitational pull of softmax. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21130–21140, 2020a.

Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Csaba Szepesvari, and Dale Schuurmans. On the global convergence rates of
   softmax policy gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 6820–6829.
   PMLR, 2020b.

Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural machine
  translation with simulated human feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with
  human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.

Ankur Parikh, Xuezhi Wang, Sebastian Gehrmann, Manaal Faruqui, Bhuwan Dhingra, Diyi Yang, and Dipan-
  jan Das. ToTTo: A controlled table-to-text generation dataset. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1173–1186. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.89. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2020.emnlp-main.89.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming Lin,
  Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In NIPS-W, 2017.

Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive summarization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304, 2017.

Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771, 2018.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models
  are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
  Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Christian Bauck-
  hage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural language processing?:
  Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy optimization. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence level training with
  recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Noam Razin and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in deep learning may not be explainable by norms.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:21174–21187, 2020.

Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of
  learning in deep linear neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.

Tom Schaul, Diana Borsa, Joseph Modayil, and Razvan Pascanu. Ray interference: a source of plateaus in deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11455, 2019.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional contin-
  uous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.


                                                       12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario
  Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng,
  Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bash-
  lykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned
  chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
George Tucker, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shixiang Gu, Richard Turner, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Sergey Levine. The
  mirage of action-dependent baselines in reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine
  learning, pages 5015–5024. PMLR, 2018.
Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Well-read students learn better: On the
   importance of pre-training compact models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962, 2019.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, Anjana Arunk-
  umar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al. Super-naturalinstructions:
  Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ nlp tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07705, 2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M
   Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2022.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cis-
  tac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Yuxiang Wu and Baotian Hu. Learning to extract coherent summary via deep reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. Xlnet: Gen-
  eralized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang,
  Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
Li Zhou, Kevin Small, Oleg Rokhlenko, and Charles Elkan. End-to-end offline goal-oriented dialog policy
   learning via policy gradient. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.02838, 2017.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-
  tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    R ELATED W ORK

Reinforcement learning for language generation: Our work highlights an optimization challenge
in policy gradient-based RFT, motivated by its widespread use for adapting pretrained language
models (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Dubois
et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Reinforcement learning has been applied more
broadly in task specific settings, for example: translation (Ranzato et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al.,
2017; Nguyen et al., 2017; Kiegeland and Kreutzer, 2021), summarization (Ranzato et al., 2016;
Paulus et al., 2017; Wu and Hu, 2018), and dialog (Li et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017; Jaques et al.,
2019). Policy gradient algorithms are most commonly the method of choice. Though, value-based
methods have also been used (as in Jaques et al. (2019)), which notably do not suffer from the
vanishing gradients phenomenon identified in this work.
Optimization challenges in policy gradient: The objective landscape of policy gradient is non-
convex even in simple settings (e.g. with linear models). Thus, deriving conditions under which
efficient optimization occurs has proven difficult (Mei et al., 2020a;b; Agarwal et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2021). In environments with a large output (i.e. action) space, for which language generation is a
prominent example, another well-known challenge is that of exploration (see, e.g., Ranzato et al.
(2016); Nguyen et al. (2017); Choshen et al. (2020)), which in the context of RFT boils down to
obtaining accurate expected gradient estimates (Greensmith et al., 2004; Schulman et al., 2015;
Tucker et al., 2018). Interestingly, our results highlight that, for inputs with small reward standard
deviation, obtaining more accurate estimates is unlikely to be useful since their expected gradient
vanishes.
As discussed in Section 3, the expected gradient for a softmax parameterized model is known to
vanish when the model outputs near-deterministic distributions (Mei et al., 2020a;b; Agarwal et al.,
2021) — a special case of the reward standard deviation being small, i.e. of Theorem 1. Under this
special case, it was empirically demonstrated that policy gradient algorithms struggle to maximize
the reward, even with perfect exploration, i.e. even with access to expected gradients (Ahmed et al.,
2019; Hennes et al., 2019; Schaul et al., 2019; Mei et al., 2020a;b; Garg et al., 2022). However, the
relevance of near-deterministic output distributions to RFT is limited since language models rarely
produce such distributions. In contrast, Section 3 establishes a more general condition leading to
vanishing gradients, relevant to RFT, that is demonstrated in Section 4 to result in optimization
difficulties.
Overcoming optimization challenges in policy gradient: To address the poor optimization land-
scape of softmax parameterized policy gradient, prior work proposed to replace softmax with an
alternative transformation (Mei et al., 2020a) and modify the gradient update step (Hennes et al.,
2019; Garg et al., 2022). Examining the utility of these methods for RFT may be an interesting topic
for future work.


B    S MALL R EWARD S TANDARD D EVIATION I MPLIES VANISHING
     G RADIENTS IN PPO

Theorem 1 (in Section 3) established that the expected reward gradient ∇θ V (x; θ), for an input x,
vanishes if the reward standard deviation of x is small. In this appendix, we prove that the expected
gradient under PPO — a policy gradient algorithm widely used for RFT — vanishes as well in that
case.
PPO most often replaces the expected reward V (x; θ) with a surrogate (clipped) objective (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). That is, it maximizes
VPPO (θ) := Ex∼D [VPPO (x; θ)] with (cf. Schulman et al. (2017)):

                                     pθ (y|x)                  p (y|x)
                                                                θ

  VPPO (x; θ) := Ey∼pθ̄ (·|x) min              A (x, y), clip            , 1 − δ, 1 + δ Aθ̄ (x, y) ,
                                     pθ̄ (y|x) θ̄              pθ̄ (y|x)
                                                                                                     (3)
where θ̄ ∈ RP stands for fixed reference parameters, which are updated to the current parameter
values at the start of each PPO iteration, Aθ̄ (x, y) := r(x, y) − V (x; θ̄) is the advantage function
with respect to θ̄, and clip(z, 1 − δ, 1 + δ) projects z ∈ R onto the interval [1 − δ, 1 + δ] for


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


δ ∈ (0, 1).4 Another, less common, variant of PPO includes the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
between pθ (·|x) and pθ̄ (·|x) as a regularization term instead of clipping (cf. Schulman et al. (2017)):

                                             pθ (y|x)
         VPPO−KL (x; θ) := Ey∼pθ̄ (·|x)               A (x, y) − λ · DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x)) ,      (4)
                                             pθ̄ (y|x) θ̄
for λ ≥ 0.
Propositions 1 and 2 below establish that, if the reward standard deviation for an input is small, then
its expected gradient under both PPO variants vanishes, just as its expected reward gradient vanishes.
Specifically, we show that the distance between ∇θ V (x; θ) and ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) depends on the total
variation distance between pθ (·|x) and pθ̄ (·|x), where θ̄ denotes the PPO reference parameters. The
same is true for the distance between ∇θ V (x; θ) and ∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ). At the beginning of each
PPO iteration θ̄ is updated to the current parameter values. Hence, the distance between pθ (·|x)
and pθ̄ (·|x) typically remains small throughout optimization, and is exactly zero at the beginning
of each PPO iteration. The proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 are deferred to Appendices D.2 and D.3,
respectively.
Proposition 1. Under the notation of Theorem 1, let θ̄ ∈ RP be the reference parameters at some
iteration of PPO (Equation (3)). For an input x ∈ X Lin , P     we denote the total variation distance
between pθ (·|x) and pθ̄ (·|x) by TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) := 21 y∈X Lout |pθ (y|x) − pθ̄ (y|x)|. Then,
it holds that:
                                                  12Lout γ(x; θ)
             k∇θ VPPO (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤                    · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                                                       δ
where δ ∈ (0, 1) is the PPO clipping hyperparameter. Consequently, by Theorem 1:

                                                           2/3   2
   k∇θ VPPO (x; θ)k ≤ 6Lout γ(x; θ) STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)] + · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                                                                 δ
where at the beginning of each PPO iteration θ = θ̄, meaning TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) = 0.
Proposition 2. Under the notation of Theorem 1, let θ̄ ∈ RP be the reference parameters at
some iteration of the KL regularized PPO variant (Equation (4)). For an input x ∈ X Lin ,
wePdenote the total variation distance between pθ (·|x) and pθ̄ (·|x) by TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) :=
1
2   y∈X Lout |pθ (y|x) − pθ̄ (y|x)|. Then, it holds that:

           k∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ)λ · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
where λ ≥ 0 is the KL regularization coefficient. Consequently, by Theorem 1:

                                                               2/3   2λ
k∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ)k ≤ 6Lout γ(x; θ) STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)] +           · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                                                                      3
where at the beginning of each PPO-KL iteration θ = θ̄, meaning TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) = 0.

C D ETAILS OF T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS : S LOW O PTIMIZATION D UE TO
VANISHING G RADIENTS

In this appendix, we deliver our formal analysis of slow optimization due to vanishing gradients in
RFT, referred to in Section 4.3.
Consider a linear multiclass classification problem with D-dimensional inputs and K ≥ 2 labels,
where the model f : RD × RK×D → RK is parameterized by a matrix θ ∈ RK×D . Conditioned
on an input x ∈ RD , the model produces a distribution over labels y ∈ {1, . . . , K} through the
softmax operator as follows:
                          pθ (y|x) = softmax(f (x; θ))y = softmax(θx)y .

Suppose that we are given parameters θ(0) ∈ RK×D obtained through some pretraining process, and
a finetuning training set (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN ) ∈ RD × {1, . . . , K} consisting of N orthonormal
    4
      We consider a horizon-one formulation of PPO. One can also treat the environment as having a horizon
of Lout , with all intermediate rewards being zero and a discount factor of one.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


inputs (meaning, N ≤ D) and corresponding ground truth labels. A natural way to define a reward
function in this case is, given a train sample xn , set the reward of the ground truth label to 1,
i.e. r(xn , yn ) = 1, and the reward of all other labels to −1, i.e. r(xn , y) = −1 for all y 6= yn .
We analyze the optimization dynamics of RFT when carried out via gradient descent with the re-
wards specified above over the training set, i.e. of gradient descent over −V (θ) (Equation (2)) with
D being the uniform distribution over x1 , . . . , xN . The dynamics of gradient descent are commonly
studied via the infinitesimal limit of a small learning rate, known as gradient flow (cf. Saxe et al.
(2014); Du et al. (2019); Lyu and Li (2020); Razin and Cohen (2020); Elkabetz and Cohen (2021);
Frei et al. (2023)), which in the context of RFT boils down to assuming the parameters are governed
by the following differential equation:
                                            d
                     θRFT (0) = θ(0) ,        θRFT (t) := ∇θ V (θRFT (t)) , t ≥ 0 ,
                                           dt
where θRFT (t) denotes the parameters at time t ≥ 0 of optimization. Analogously, in SFT, gradient
flow for minimizing the cross entropy loss LSFT (θ) (Equation (1)) over the training set amounts to:
                                         d
                  θSFT (0) = θ(0) ,        θSFT (t) := −∇θ LSFT (θSFT (t)) , t ≥ 0 ,
                                        dt
with the distribution D in the definition of LSFT (θ) being uniform over the training set, and θSFT (t)
denoting the parameters at time t ≥ 0.
Theorem 2 establishes an exponential optimization time separation between RFT and SFT with
respect to the reward standard deviation of an input under θ(0) . Resonating with the controlled
experiments of Section 4.2, we assume that there exists a train sample misclassified by θ(0) , for
which θ(0) assigns the same probability to all incorrect labels.
Theorem 2. Consider the setting described above (in Appendix C), and let xn be a train sample
                                              / argmaxy∈{1,...,K} pθ(0) (y|xn ), for which θ(0) assigns
that θ(0) misclassifies, i.e. pθ(0) (yn |xn ) ∈
the same probability to all incorrect labels, i.e. pθ(0) (y|xn ) = pθ(0) (y0 |xn ) for all y, y0 6= yn .
Denote by tRFT , tSFT ≥ 0 the initial times at which RFT and SFT classify xn correctly, respectively.
Formally:
                         n                                                                 o
          tRFT := min t ≥ 0 : pθRFT (t) (yn |xn ) ∈ argmaxy∈{1,...,K} pθRFT (t) (y|xn ) ,
                     n                                                                 o
          tSFT := min t ≥ 0 : pθSFT (t) (yn |xn ) ∈ argmaxy∈{1,...,K} pθSFT (t) (y|xn ) .
Then, it holds that:

                             1                                              1
  tRFT = Ω                                    2   , tSFT = O ln                                   .
                STDy∼pθ(0) (·|xn ) [r(xn , y)]                  STDy∼pθ(0) (·|xn ) [r(xn , y)]
That is, there exist constants c1 , c01 ∈ R>0 and c2 , c02 ∈ R (i.e. c1 , c01 , c2 , c02 do not depend on
                                                                                          2
the initial parameters θ(0) ) such that tRFT ≥ c1 · (1/ STDy∼pθ(0) (·|x) [r(x, y)] ) + c2 , whereas
tSFT ≤ c01 · ln(1/ STDy∼pθ(0) (·|x) [r(x, y)]) + c02 .

Proof sketch (full proof in Appendix D.4). Since x1 , . . . , xN are orthogonal, the logits that the
model produces for xn , i.e. f (xn ; θRFT (t)) in RFT and f (xn ; θSFT (t)) in SFT, evolve indepen-
dently of the remaining train samples. Furthermore, the assumption that θ(0) assigns equal proba-
bilities to all incorrect labels of xn implies that they remain equal throughout optimization, and so
do the respective logits. Let µ(t) be the difference between the logit of yn and of some y 6= yn
at time t, given xn , and note that the initial time at which xn is classified correctly is the initial
time at which µ(t) = 0. The above facilitate deriving the exact dependence of tRFT and tSFT on
f (xn ; θ(0) ), i.e. on the initial logits produced by the model given xn , from the differential equation
governing µ(t). The proof concludes by relating f (xn ; θ(0) ) to the reward standard deviation of xn
under θ(0) .

We note that our lower bound on tRFT is similar in spirit to Theorem 1 of Mei et al. (2020a). For a
multi-armed bandit problem, Mei et al. (2020a) lower bounds the time until reaching near-optimal
reward, in terms of the initial optimal action probability. The main difference between the results,
besides the exact technical conditions, is that we derive the dependence of optimization time on the
initial reward standard deviation and contrast it with the optimization time under SFT.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D      D EFERRED P ROOFS

D.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Differentiating V (x; θ) with respect to θ using the log-derivative trick we get:
                                h                      i
      ∇θ V (x; θ) = Ey∼pθ (·|x) r(x, y)∇θ ln pθ (y|x)
                                h        XLout                             i
                  = Ey∼pθ (·|x) r(x, y)           ∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 )
                                             l=1
                                h        XLout                                         i
                  = Ey∼pθ (·|x) r(x, y)           ∇θ ln softmax(f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ))yl
                                             l=1
                    X                             XLout
                  =          L
                                  pθ (y|x)r(x, y)          Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) ,
                             y∈X     out                         l=1
                    |X |
where eyl ∈ R         denotes the yl ’th standard basis vector, i.e. the yl ’th entry of eyl is one and its
other entries are zero, and pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) stands for the vector holding the next-token probabilities,
i.e. pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) = softmax(f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ)) ∈ R|X | .
For c > 0 to be determined later, denote by Yc the set of outputs whose rewards deviate by more
than c from the expected reward, i.e.:
                          Yc := y ∈ X Lout : |r(x, y) − V (x; θ)| > c .


Defining a modified reward function r̃ : X Lin × X Lout → [−1, 1] by:

                                              r(x, y) , y ∈/ Yc
                               r̃(x, y) :=                       ,
                                              V (x; θ) , y ∈ Yc
we may write ∇θ V (x; θ) as follows:
      ∇θ V (x; θ)
            X                            XLout
         =         L
                        pθ (y|x)r̃(x, y)       Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ))
                y∈X out                   l=1
            |                                 {z                                      }
                                                      (I)
                X                                           XLout
            +               pθ (y|x)[r(x, y) − r̃(x, y)]                Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) .
                     y∈Yc                                         l=1
                |                                                {z                                            }
                                                                 (II)

We upper bound the Euclidean norms of (I) and (II) separately. Starting with (II), by Chebyshev’s
inequality we know that:
                                                                      2
                                            STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]
                               pθ (Yc |x) ≤                             .
                                                       c2
Notice that keyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k ≤ keyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1 ≤ 2 for all y≤l ∈ X l , where k·k1
denotes the `1 norm. Thus, for any y ∈ Yc and l ∈ {1, . . . , Lout }:
         Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) ≤ Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) 2 · k(eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ))k
                                                      ≤ 2γ(x; θ) .
Since rewards lie in [−1, 1], by the triangle inequality this implies that:
                                                                                                        2
                                                                  STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]
            k(II)k ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ) · pθ (Yc |x) ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ) ·                         .                          (5)
                                                                           c2
As for (I), denoting for y≤l−1 ∈ X l−1 :
                  X
     a(y≤l−1 ) :=           L  −l+1
                                    pθ (y≥l |x, y≤l−1 )r̃(x, y)(eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) ∈ R|X | ,
                            y≥l ∈X   out


where y≥l := (yl , . . . , yLout ), we have that:
                           XLout X
               (I) =                            l−1
                                                    pθ (y≤l−1 |x)Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) a(y≤l−1 ) .
                                 l=1       y≤l−1 ∈X


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The y’th entry of a(y≤l−1 ) is given by:
     (y    )
                X
    ay ≤l−1 =                        pθ (y≥l+1 |x, y≤l−1 , y)pθ (y|x, y≤l−1 )r̃(x, y≤l−1 , y, y≥l+1 )
                    y≥l+1 ∈X Lout −l
                   X
                −                       pθ (y≥l |x, y≤l−1 )pθ (y|x, y≤l−1 )r̃(x, y)
                      y≥l ∈X Lout −l+1

             = pθ (y|x, y≤l−1 ) Ey≥l+1 ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ,y) [r̃(x, y≤l−1 , y, y≥l+1 )]

                − Ey≥l ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ) [r̃(x, y)] .

Since by the definition of r̃ it holds that |r̃(x, y) − V (x; θ)| ≤ c for all y ∈ X Lout , we can bound
the difference of expectations in the equation above through adding and subtracting V (x; θ) and the
triangle inequality:
            Ey≥l+1 ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ,y) [r̃(x, y≤l−1 , y, y≥l+1 )] − Ey≥l ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ) [r̃(x, y)]
            ≤ Ey≥l+1 ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ,y) [r̃(x, y≤l−1 , y, y≥l+1 )] − V (x; θ)
              + V (x; θ) − Ey≥l ∼pθ (·|x,y≤l−1 ) [r̃(x, y)]
            ≤ 2c .
Thus:                                                    X
                     a(y≤l−1 ) ≤ a(y≤l−1 ) 1 ≤                       pθ (y|x, y≤l−1 ) · 2c = 2c .
                                                               y∈X
Recalling that:
                          XLout X
                  (I) =                                  pθ (y≤l−1 |x)Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) a(y≤l−1 ) ,
                              l=1         y≤l−1 ∈X l−1

taking the norm of both sides and applying the triangle inequality yields:
                          XLout X
                 k(I)k ≤                       l−1
                                                   pθ (y≤l−1 |x)γ(x; θ) a(y≤l−1 )
                                    l=1      y≤l−1 ∈X
                              XLout                      X                                              (6)
                          ≤               2γ(x; θ) · c                     pθ (y≤l−1 |x)
                                    l=1                     y≤l−1 ∈X l−1
                          = 2Lout γ(x; θ) · c .
Combining the bounds on the norms of (I) and (II) (Equations (5) and (6)) then leads to:
                                                                                2
                                                   STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]
            k∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ) ·                                + 2Lout γ(x; θ) · c .
                                                            c2
                                                   2/3
Lastly, choosing c = STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]             concludes the proof:
                                                                                         2/3
                      k∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ 6Lout γ(x; θ) · STDy∼pθ (·|x) [r(x, y)]                  .



D.2     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Define:

                                         pθ (y|x)
                      R+
                       δ :=  y∈X       :   Lout
                                                    > 1 + δ , Aθ̄ (x, y) > 0 ,
                                         pθ̄ (y|x)

                       −          Lout   pθ (y|x)
                      Rδ := y ∈ X      :            < 1 − δ , Aθ̄ (x, y) < 0 ,
                                         pθ̄ (y|x)

                                          pθ (y|x)
                      Rδ := y ∈ X Lout :            −1 >δ ,
                                          pθ̄ (y|x)
i.e. R+
      δ is the set of outputs for which PPO will clip the objective when the probability ratio is strictly
greater than 1 + δ, R−  δ is the set of outputs for which clipping occurs when the probability ratio is


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


strictly less than 1 − δ, and Rδ is the set of outputs for which the probability ratio is either strictly
                                                                  −
greater than 1 + δ or strictly less than 1 − δ. Note that R+
                                                           δ ∪ Rδ ⊆ Rδ .

We can decompose VPPO (x; θ) according to R+       +
                                           δ , Rδ , and the remaining outputs as follows:
                                  X
                   VPPO (x; θ) =                        −
                                                            pθ (y|x)Aθ̄ (x, y)
                                     y∈X Lout \(R+  δ ∪Rδ )
                                    X
                                  +           pθ̄ (y|x)(1 + δ)Aθ̄ (x, y)
                                        y∈R+
                                           δ
                                    X
                                  +        −
                                               pθ̄ (y|x)(1 − δ)Aθ̄ (x, y) .
                                                y∈Rδ

Since the second and third sums in the equation above do not depend on θ we have that:
                                     X
                  ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) =                      −
                                                            Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) .
                                        y∈X Lout \(R+
                                                    δ ∪Rδ )
                        P
Adding and subtracting y∈R+ ∪R− Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) yields:
                               δ   δ
                     X                                   X
   ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) =          L
                                 Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) −           +   −
                                                                         Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) .            (7)
                          y∈X   out                                y∈Rδ ∪Rδ

Recall that Aθ̄ (x, y) = r(x, y) − V (x; θ̄). Because V (x; θ̄) does not depend on y we get that:
X                                   X                                           X
        L
            Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) =           L
                                                 r(x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) − V (x; θ̄)           ∇θ pθ (y|x)
   y∈X out                              y∈X out                                    y∈X Lout
                                                                X
                                  = ∇θ V (x; θ) − V (x; θ̄)∇θ           L
                                                                            pθ (y|x)
                                                                        y∈X    out

                                  = ∇θ V (x; θ) − V (x; θ̄) ∇θ 1
                                                            |{z}
                                                                 =0
                                  = ∇θ V (x; θ) .
Plugging this into Equation (7), rearranging the equality, and taking the Euclidean norm of both
sides, it follows that:
                                                X
                ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ) ≤          +    −
                                                               Aθ̄ (x, y)∇θ pθ (y|x) .
                                                          y∈Rδ ∪Rδ

Rewards lie in the interval [−1, 1], hence, |Aθ̄ (x, y)| ≤ 2. So, applying the triangle inequality we
obtain:
                                        X
   ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ) ≤ 2                   −
                                                        k∇θ pθ (y|x)k
                                           y∈R+  δ ∪Rδ
                                        X
                                   =2            +    −
                                                        kpθ (y|x)∇θ ln pθ (y|x)k
                                               y∈Rδ ∪Rδ
                                           X                            XLout
                                      =2                 −
                                                           pθ (y|x) ·            ∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) ,
                                               y∈R+
                                                  δ ∪Rδ                   l=1

where the first equality is by the log-derivative trick. Since
                            pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) = softmax(f (x, yl−1 ; θ))yl ,
for any l ∈ {1, . . . , Lout } and y ∈ X Lout we have:
                   ∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) = Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) ,
where eyl ∈ R|X | denotes the yl ’th standard basis vector, i.e. the yl ’th entry of eyl is one and
its other entries are zero, and pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) := softmax(f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ)) ∈ R|X | . Noticing that
keyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k ≤ keyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1 ≤ 2, where k·k1 denotes the `1 norm, we have:
                                k∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 )k ≤ 2γ(x; θ) .
By the triangle inequality this implies that:
                                        X                             XLout
  ∇θ VPPO (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ) ≤ 2                  −
                                                         pθ (y|x) ·            k∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 )k
                                             y∈R+
                                                δ ∪Rδ                    l=1
                                                        X
                                      ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ)             −
                                                                    pθ (y|x)                                (8)
                                                           y∈R+
                                                              δ ∪Rδ
                                                                   −
                                      = 4Lout γ(x; θ) · pθ R+

                                                            δ ∪ Rδ |x
                                                                           −
                                      = 4Lout γ(x; θ) · pθ R+

                                                             δ |x + pθ Rδ |x    ,

                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 −
where the last transition is due to R+δ and Rδ being disjoint. The proof concludes by showing that
both pθ (R+
          δ |x) ≤ 2δ
                       −1
                          · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) and pθ (R−
                                                             δ |x) ≤ δ
                                                                       −1
                                                                          · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)).
Focusing on pθ (R+
                 δ |x), by the definition of the total variation distance:

                        pθ R+                +

                              δ |x − pθ̄ Rδ |x      ≤ TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
from which it follows that:
                                           pθ̄ R+

                                                δ |x
                       pθ R+

                           δ |x       · 1−             ≤ TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                                           pθ R+δ |x

where note that pθ (R+δ |x) 6= 0 due to the softmax parameterization, under which the probability of
any output cannot be equal to zero. For each y ∈ R+     δ we know that pθ (y|x)/pθ̄ (y|x) > 1 + δ.
            +           +                        +
Thus, pθ (Rδ |x)/pθ̄ (Rδ |x) > 1 + δ and pθ̄ (Rδ |x)/pθ (R+               δ
                                                             δ |x) < 1 − 1+δ . Plugging this into the
inequality above, we have that:

                                                    pθ̄ R+

                +         δ             +                 δ |x

           pθ Rδ |x ·          < pθ Rδ |x · 1 −                  ≤ TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                                                    pθ R+

                         1+δ                              δ |x

and so:
                        1+δ                            2
              pθ R+
                  δ |x ≤    · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ≤ · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .                     (9)
                         δ                             δ
Turning our attention to pθ (R−δ |x), by an analogous derivation we get:

                                          pθ̄ R−

                             −                 δ |x

                      pθ Rδ |x · 1 −                  ≤ TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .
                                          pθ R−δ |x

For each y ∈ R−                                                               −           −
                δ we know that pθ (y|x)/pθ̄ (y|x) < 1 − δ, implying that pθ (Rδ |x)/pθ̄ (Rδ |x) <
                −           −           δ
1 − δ and pθ̄ (Rδ |x)/pθ (Rδ |x) > 1 + 1−δ . Consequently:

                                                  pθ̄ R−

                 −        δ           −                δ |x

          pθ Rδ |x ·          < pθ Rδ |x · 1 −                ≤ TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
                       1−δ                        pθ R−δ |x

from which it follows that:
                         1−δ                             1
            pθ R−  δ |x ≤     · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ≤ · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .                  (10)
                            δ                            δ

Finally, combining Equations (8), (9), and (10) establishes the sought-after result:
                                                                                     −
           k∇θ VPPO (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ) · pθ R+

                                                                     δ |x + pθ Rδ |x
                                                    12Lout γ(x; θ)
                                                ≤                  · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .
                                                         δ


D.3    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

We may write the PPO-KL objective (Equation (4)) as:

                                        pθ (y|x)
        VPPO−KL (x; θ) = Ey∼pθ̄ (·|x)             Aθ̄ (x, y) − λ · DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))
                                        pθ̄ (y|x)
                       = Ey∼pθ (·|x) [Aθ̄ (x, y)] − λ · DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x)) .
Since Aθ̄ (x, y) = r(x, y) − V (x; θ̄), it holds that Ey∼pθ (·|x) [Aθ̄ (x, y)] = V (x; θ) − V (x; θ̄), where
note that V (x; θ̄) does not depend on θ. Differentiating with respect to θ thus yields:
                 ∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ) = ∇θ V (x; θ) − λ · ∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x)) ,


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and so:
                k∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ)k = λ · k∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))k .
We therefore need only show that k∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))k is upper bounded by 4Lout γ(x; θ) ·
TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)). Writing the KL divergence term explicitly:
                                                X                               pθ̄ (y|x)
          ∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x)) = ∇θ                      pθ̄ (y|x) ln
                                                     y∈X Lout                   pθ (y|x)
                                                    X
                                         = −∇θ                     pθ̄ (y|x) ln pθ (y|x)
                                                        y∈X Lout
                                                    X
                                            + ∇θ                    pθ̄ (y|x) ln pθ̄ (y|x)
                                                        y∈X Lout
                                              |                     {z                   }
                                                                    =0
                                              X                             XLout
                                         =−                     pθ̄ (y|x)             ∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) .
                                                    y∈X Lout                    l=1

For any l ∈ {1, . . . , Lout } and y ∈ X Lout we have that:

                      ∇θ ln pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) = Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (eyl − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) ,

where eyl ∈ R|X | denotes the yl ’th standard basis vector, i.e. the yl ’th entry of eyl is one and its other
entries are zero, and pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) := softmax(f (x, y≤l−1 ; θ)) ∈ R|X | . Thus, a straightforward
computation shows:
 ∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))
         XLout X
    =−                                   pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) · Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (pθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )) .
                l=1       y≤l−1 ∈X l−1

Then, by the triangle inequality and the fact that:

                       Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ) (pθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ))

                          ≤ Jf>(x,y≤l−1 ;θ)         · k(pθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ))k
                                                2
                          ≤ γ(x; θ) · k(pθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 ))k1 ,
where k·k1 denotes the `1 norm, we obtain:
   k∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))k
                  XLout X                                                                                          (11)
     ≤ γ(x; θ)                                  pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) · kpθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1 .
                       l=1       y≤l−1 ∈X l−1

Notice that for any l ∈ {1, . . . , Lout } and y≤l−1 ∈ X l−1 :
  pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) · kpθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1
                           X
       = pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x)              |pθ̄ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 )|
                               yl ∈X
         X
       =            |pθ̄ (y≤l |x) − pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x)pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 )|
              yl ∈X
         X          h                                                                                  i
       ≤              pθ̄ (y≤l |x) − pθ (y≤l |x) + pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) · pθ (y≤l−1 |x) − pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x)
              yl ∈X
                                                    X
       = pθ (y≤l−1 |x) − pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) +                    pθ̄ (y≤l |x) − pθ (y≤l |x) ,
                                                        yl ∈X

where the penultimate transition is by adding and subtracting pθ (y≤l−1 |x)pθ (yl |x, y≤l−1 ) in each
summand and the triangle inequality. Summing over y≤l−1 ∈ X l−1 we thus get:
   X
                    pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) · kpθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1
       y≤l−1 ∈X l−1
         X                                                      X
      ≤                l−1
                           pθ (y≤l−1 |x) − pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) +               l
                                                                            pθ̄ (y≤l |x) − pθ (y≤l |x) .
               y≤l−1 ∈X                                                      y≤l ∈X


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Both sums in right hand side of the inequality above are equal to twice the total variation distance
between marginal distributions of pθ (·|x) and pθ̄ (·|x). Hence, each one of them is upper bounded
by 2TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)), i.e.:
   X
              l−1
                  pθ̄ (y≤l−1 |x) · kpθ̄ (·|x, y≤l−1 ) − pθ (·|x, y≤l−1 )k1 ≤ 4TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .
        y≤l−1 ∈X

Going back to Equation (11):
                   k∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))k ≤ 4Lout γ(x; θ) · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) ,
from which it readily follows that
            k∇θ VPPO−KL (x; θ) − ∇θ V (x; θ)k ≤ λ · k∇θ DKL (pθ̄ (·|x)||pθ (·|x))k
                                              ≤ 4λLout γ(x; θ) · TV(pθ (·|x)||pθ̄ (·|x)) .



D.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

The proof is sectioned into two parts. We first derive the lower bound on the time until correct
classification of xn for RFT, after which we prove the upper bound for SFT. For simplicity, we
assume without loss of generality that x1 = e1 , . . . , xN = eN , with e1 , . . . , eN being the first N
standard basis vectors of RD . The analysis for arbitrary orthonormal inputs x1 , . . . , xN follows from
analogous arguments, by tracking the evolution of inner products between rows of θ and x1 , . . . , xN
instead of individual entries of θ.

D.4.1     O PTIMIZATION T IME L OWER B OUND FOR RFT
Denote by wy,d (t) ∈ R the (y, d)’th entry of θRFT (t), for y ∈ {1, . . . , K}, d ∈ {1, . . . , D}.
Under this notation, since xn0 = en0 we have that f (xn0 ; θRFT (t)) = θRFT (t)xn0 =
                              >
(w1,n0 (t), . . . , wK,n0 (t)) for n0 ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Now, recalling that r(xn0 , yn0 ) = 1 and
r(xn0 , y) = −1 for all y 6= yn0 , the expected reward at time t ≥ 0 can be written as:
                             1 XN XK
        V (θRFT (t)) =                          pθRFT (t) (y|xn0 )r(xn0 , y)
                            N    n0 =1     y=1
                             1 XN
                        =               pθRFT (t) (yn0 |xn0 ) − 1 − pθRFT (t) (yn0 |xn0 )
                            N    n0 =1
                                       "                                                       !#
                             1 XN          exp(wyn0 ,n0 (t))                 exp(wyn0 ,n0 (t))
                        =                PK                      − 1 − PK
                            N    n0 =1
                                           y=1 exp(wy,n (t))
                                                            0
                                                                             y=1 exp(wy,n (t))
                                                                                            0
                                       "                             #
                             1 XN         2 exp(wyn0 ,n0 (t))
                        =                  K
                                                                 −1 .
                            N     0
                                 n =1
                                         P
                                           y=1 exp(wy,n0 (t))
                                             PK
By introducing the shorthand zn0 (t) :=         y=1 exp(wy,n (t)), we have that:
                                                               0


                                          1 XN     2 exp(wyn0 ,n0 (t))
                           V (θRFT (t)) =                              −1 .
                                          N  n0 =1      zn0 (t)
Focusing on xn = en , under gradient flow the parameters w1,n (t), . . . , wK,n (t), which determine
the output distribution given xn , obey the following differential equations:
                                         h                                         i
                                           2 exp(wyn ,n (t))       exp(wyn ,n (t))
                                                              1 −                    , y = yn
   d                                      N      zn (t)               zn (t)
      wy,n (t) = ∇wy,n V (θRFT (t)) =                                                          , (12)
   dt                                   − 2 · exp(wyn ,n (t)) exp(wy,n (t))              6
                                        
                                             N             zn (t)2                    , y = yn

for all y ∈ {1, . . . , K}. As can be seen from Equation (12), the evolution of w1,n (t), . . . , wK,n (t)
is independent of the remaining parameters (this is a result of the orthogonality assumption on
x1 , . . . , xN ). Furthermore, the differential equation governing each parameter wy,n (t) correspond-
ing to an incorrect label y 6= yn is the same. Since, by assumption, the softmax probabilities of
the incorrect labels for xn are equal under θRFT (0), we know that wy,n (0) = wy0 ,n (0) for all


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


y, y0 6= yn . Hence, the uniqueness of the solution to Equation (12) for an initial condition implies
that wy,n (t) = wy0 ,n (t) for all t ≥ 0 and y, y0 6= yn . Meaning, the parameters corresponding to
incorrect labels of xn are equal throughout optimization.
Given this observation, we may denote v(t) := wy,n (t) for any y 6= yn . The dynamics for the n’th
column of θRFT (t) thus boil down to:
                     d                 2(K − 1) exp(wyn ,n (t) + v(t))
                       wy ,n (t) =                                        2 ,
                     dt n          N [exp(wyn ,n (t)) + (K − 1) exp(v(t))]
                                                                                                     (13)
                          d                   2 exp(wyn ,n (t) + v(t))
                             v(t) = −                                        2 ,
                          dt          N [exp(wyn ,n (t)) + (K − 1) exp(v(t))]
where we used the fact that z(t) = exp(wyn ,n (t)) + (K − 1) exp(v(t)).
Let µ(t) := wyn ,n (t) − v(t). Dividing the nominator and denominator of the terms on the right
hand side in Equation (13) by exp(2v(t)), we may describe the dynamics of µ(t) through a single
differential equation:
                    d        d            d            2K exp(µ(t))
                       µ(t) = wyn ,n (t) − v(t) =                      2 .
                    dt       dt           dt      N [exp(µ(t)) + K − 1]
Equivalently, this can be written as:
                    d                                    2K
                      µ(t) =                                                          .               (14)
                   dt         N [exp(µ(t)) + 2(K − 1) + (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(t))]
It can be verified by differentiation that the solution to the above differential equation satisfies:
                     2K
                         t + exp(µ(0)) + 2(K − 1)µ(0) − (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(0))
                      N
                        = exp(µ(t)) + 2(K − 1)µ(t) − (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(t)) .
                                        d
Notice that by Equation (14) we have dt   µ(t) > 0, and so µ(t) is monotonically increasing. Since
 (0)
θ misclassifies xn , i.e. µ(0) < 0, this implies that tRFT — the initial time at which RFT classifies
                                                                                    d
xn correctly — is the unique time at which µ(t) = 0. Such a time must exist since dt  µ(t) is bounded
away from zero when µ(t) ∈ [µ(0), 0]. It therefore follows that:
          N (K − 1)2                  N (K − 1)2      N                   N (K − 1)
 tRFT =                exp(−µ(0)) −               +     (1 − exp(µ(0))) −           µ(0)
              2K                          2K         2K                      K           (15)
          N (K − 1)2
       ≥               · (exp(−µ(0)) − 1) ,
              2K
where the inequality is due to µ(0) < 0 and 1 − exp(µ(0)) > 0.
Now, recalling that exp(wyn ,n (t))/zn (t) is the probability for outputing the correct class, which
receives a reward of 1, while incorrect labels receive a reward of −1, the standard deviation of the
reward for xn at time t is given by:
                                           s                                                 2
                                                   exp(wyn ,n (t))         exp(wyn ,n (t))
      STDy∼pθRFT (t) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)] = 1 −                     − 1−
                                                       zn (t)                   zn (t)
                                           s
                                             4(K − 1) exp(wyn ,n (t) + v(t))
                                         =
                                                          zn (t)2
                                           s
                                                                 4(K − 1)
                                         =                                                    ,
                                             exp(µ(t)) + 2(K − 1) + (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(t))
where the first transition is due to fact pthat the standard deviation of a random variable that is 1
with probability q and −1 otherwise is 1 − (q − (1 − q))2 , and the last transition is by dividing
the nominator and denominator of the fraction by exp(wyn ,n (t) + v(t)) and plugging in µ(t) =
wyn ,n (t) − v(t). Specifically, at time t = 0:
                                        s
                    1                      exp(µ(0)) + 2(K − 1) + (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(0))
                                      =                                                    .     (16)
     STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]                           4(K − 1)

                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying exp(µ(0)) < 1 < 2(K − 1) and squaring both sides of the inequality leads to:
                                    1                         (K − 1)
                                                    2 <1+        4
                                                                      exp(−µ(0)) ,
                     STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]

which implies:
                                                                                      !
                                  4                            1
                   exp(−µ(0)) >      ·                                         2 −1       .
                                K −1            STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]

Combining the inequality above with Equation (15), we may conclude:
                                                                                              !
                      2N (K − 1)                      1                  K −1
               tRFT ≥            ·                                 2 −1−
                          K          STDy∼pθ(0) (·|xn ) [r(xn , y)]        4

                                      1
                    =Ω                                 2   .
                         STDy∼pθ(0) (·|xn ) [r(xn , y)]

D.4.2    O PTIMIZATION T IME U PPER B OUND FOR SFT
Similarly to the analysis for RFT, we denote by wy,d (t) ∈ R the (y, d)’th entry of θSFT (t), for
                                                             PK                         0
y ∈ {1, . . . , K}, d ∈ {1, . . . , D}, and let zn0 (t) =      y=1 exp(wy,n (t)) for n ∈ {1, . . . , N }
                                                                               0

Under this notation, the SFT loss is:
                                               1 XN
                       LSFT (θSFT (t)) = −                  ln pθSFT (t) (yn |xn0 )
                                              N       n0 =1

                                               1 XN             exp(wyn0 ,n0 (t)
                                         =−                 ln                        .
                                              N       n0 =1          zn0 (t)
Focusing on xn = en , the parameters w1,n (t), . . . , wK,n (t), which determine the output distribution
given xn , obey the following differential equations:
                                                       
                                                         1        exp(wyn ,n (t))
                                                            1−                     , y = yn
           d                                            N             zn (t)
              wy,n (t) = −∇wy,n LSFT (θSFT (t)) =                                             ,     (17)
           dt                                          − 1 · exp(wy,n (t))             6
                                                       
                                                           N       zn (t)           , y = y n

for all y ∈ {1, . . . , K}. As in RFT, the evolution of w1,n (t), . . . , wK,n (t) is independent of the re-
maining parameters due to the orthogonality assumption on x1 , . . . , xN . Furthermore, every wy,n (t)
corresponding to an incorrect label y 6= yn is governed by the same differential equation, and, by
assumption, initially wy,n (0) = wy0 ,n (0) for all y, y0 6= yn . As a result, the uniqueness of the
solution to Equation (17) for an initial condition implies that wy,n (t) = wy0 ,n (t) for all t ≥ 0 and
y, y0 6= yn .
Denoting v(t) := wy,n (t) for some y 6= yn , the dynamics for the n’th column of θSFT (t) are
therefore given by:
                      d                   (K − 1) exp(v(t) − wyn ,n (t))
                         wyn ,n (t) =                                        ,
                      dt              N [1 + (K − 1) exp(v(t) − wyn ,n (t))]
                                                                                                       (18)
                           d                   exp(v(t) − wyn ,n (t))
                              v(t) = −                                         ,
                          dt           N [1 + (K − 1) exp(v(t) − wyn ,n (t))]
Let µ(t) := wyn ,n (t) − v(t). We can express the dynamics of µ(t) through:
                    d        d            d                 K
                       µ(t) = wyn ,n (t) − v(t) =                         ,
                    dt       dt           dt      N [exp(µ(t)) + (K − 1)]
for which it can be verified by differentiation that the unique solution satisfies:
                   K
                     t + (K − 1)µ(0) + exp(µ(0)) = (K − 1)µ(t) + exp(µ(t)) .                           (19)
                   N

                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We are now in a position to extract from Equation (19) an upper bound on tSFT — the initial time at
                                                d
which SFT classifies xn correctly. Notice that dt µ(t) > 0, and so µ(t) is monotonically increasing.
       (0)
Since θ misclassifies xn , i.e. µ(0) < 0, this implies that tSFT is the unique time at which µ(t) = 0.
                                         d
Note that such a time must exist since dt  µ(t) is bounded away from zero when µ(t) ∈ [µ(0), 0].
Thus, from Equation (19) it follows that:
                                    N [1 − (K − 1)µ(0) − exp(µ(0))]
                            tSFT =
                                                  K                                              (20)
                                    N     N (K − 1)
                                  <    −            µ(0) .
                                    K        K
where the inequality is due to 1 − exp(µ(0)) < 1. Recall from Equation (16) that:
                                        s
                      1                   exp(µ(0)) + 2(K − 1) + (K − 1)2 exp(−µ(0))
                                      =
       STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]                        4(K − 1)
                                        r
                                          (K − 1) exp(−µ(0))
                                      ≥                        .
                                                   4
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides and rearranging the inequality yields:
                                                                            !
                                                       4
                      −µ(0) ≤ ln                                          2   .
                                    (K − 1) STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]
Hence, combined with Equation (20), we arrive at the desired result:
                                                                                      !
                     N    N (K − 1)                            4
              tSFT <   +            · ln                                         2
                     K       K             (K − 1) STDy∼pθ(0) (y|xn ) [r(xn , y)]
                                        1
                   = O ln                                    .
                           STDy∼pθ(0) (·|xn ) [r(xn , y)]



E     E XAMPLES OF I NPUTS WITH S MALL AND I NPUTS WITH L ARGE R EWARD
      S TANDARD D EVIATION U NDER THE P RETRAINED L ANGUAGE M ODEL

Figures 5, 6, and 7 give examples from the NarrativeQA, ToTTo, and CommonGen datasets, re-
spectively, of inputs with small and inputs with large pretrain reward standard deviation. We also
include outputs produced by the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models along with their rewards. The
examples showcase how: (i) the pretrained model often generates continuations for the input text
instead of obliging to the task at hand; and (ii) RFT struggles to maximize the reward of inputs with
a small pretrain reward standard deviation compared to those with a large pretrain reward standard
deviation.

F     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

F.1    F URTHER E XPERIMENTS

Listed below are additional experiments, omitted from Sections 4 and 5.
Vanishing gradients in the GRUE benchmark (Section 4.1):
    • Figure 8 supplements Figure 1, by plotting the reward mean and standard deviation of train
      samples, under the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models, for the remaining GRUE datasets: Com-
      monGen, IWSLT 2017, CNN/Daily Mail, and DailyDialog.
    • Table 3 supplements Table 1 by reporting, for the remaining GRUE datasets (see above), the
      Pearson correlation between the reward standard deviation under the pretrained model and the
      absolute reward mean change due to finetuning, across the train samples.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Representative example of an input with small (top) and an input with large (bottom) reward standard
deviation under the pretrained model from the NarrativeQA dataset.


   • Figure 9 supplements Figure 2, by showing that the correlation between the pretrain reward
     standard deviation percentile and the reward difference between RFT and SFT is not sensitive
     to the choice of percentile.
   • Table 4 reports the train and test rewards that the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models obtain over
     each of the considered GRUE datasets.
   • Figure 10, Table 5, and Figure 11 extend Figure 1, Table 1, and Figure 2, respectively, by
     considering RFT runs carried out using NLPO (Ramamurthy et al., 2023), an adaptation of
     PPO for language generation tasks, instead of PPO.

Controlled experiments (Section 4.2):
   • Figure 12 supplements Figure 3 by reporting the reward standard deviation and gradient norm
     throughout optimization, in addition to the reward.
   • Figure 13 presents experiments identical to Figure 12, except that RFT and SFT were optimized
     using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) as opposed to Adam.
   • Figure 14 is identical to Figure 12, except that the pretrain expected reward of inputs with small
     pretrain reward standard deviation is 0.5 instead of −1, i.e. it is relatively high at the start of
     finetuning.

Overcoming vanishing gradients in RFT (Section 5):
   • Table 6 compares the train and test rewards obtained by RFT with an increased learning rate,
     temperature, and entropy regularization coefficient, to the rewards obtained by the default RFT
     configuration and RFT after an initial SFT phase, on the NarrativeQA dataset.
   • Figure 15 presents reward means and standard deviations of individual train samples from
     NarrativeQA (analogously to Figure 1) after applying RFT with an increased learning rate,
     temperature, or entropy regularization coefficient.
   • Table 7 supplements Table 6 by including results for identical experiments on the ToTTo and
     CommonGen datasets.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Representative example of an input with small (top) and an input with large (bottom) reward standard
deviation under the pretrained model from the ToTTo dataset.


   • Figure 16 supplements Figure 4 by reporting the same metrics based on the mean test reward,
     in addition to the metrics based on the mean train reward, for the partial SFT experiments on
     NarrativeQA.
   • Figure 17 compares the reward means and standard deviations of individual train samples (anal-
     ogously to Figure 1), for the NarrativeQA dataset, after performing a full SFT phase and after
     a partial SFT phase with 40% of the optimization steps and 1% of the labeled samples.
   • Figures 18 and 19 supplement Figure 4 by including results for identical experiments on the
     ToTTo and CommonGen datasets, respectively.

F.2   F URTHER I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We provide implementation details omitted from our experimental reports (Sections 4 and 5 and Ap-
pendix F.1). Code for reproducing our results, based on the PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017), Hug-
gingFace (Wolf et al., 2019), and RL4LMs (Ramamurthy et al., 2023) libraries, can be found at
https://github.com/apple/ml-rlgrad. Each finetuning experiment was run on four
Nvidia A100 80GB GPUs, and each experiment from Section 4.2 was run on a single Nvidia V100
32GB GPU, except for those with MLPs for which we used a standard laptop.
We note that, since the test sets of ToTTo and CommonGen are not publicly available, we report
results over their validation sets instead. This does not pose an issue as our interest lies in opti-
mization, i.e. the ability to achieve a higher reward over the train set, and we do not conduct any
hyperparameter tuning beyond taking the default values from Ramamurthy et al. (2023).


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Representative example of an input with small (top) and an input with a relatively large (bottom)
reward standard deviation under the pretrained model from the CommonGen dataset.

        Table 2: The reward functions used in our experiments for datasets from the GRUE benchmark.

                 Dataset            Reward
                 NarrativeQA        ROUGE-L-Max (Lin, 2004)
                 ToTTo              SacreBLEU (Post, 2018)
                 CommonGen          METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005)
                 IWSLT 2017         SacreBLEU
                 CNN/Daily Mail     METEOR
                 DailyDialog        METEOR
                 IMDB               Learned sentiment classifier (Ramamurthy et al., 2023)


F.2.1    E XPERIMENTS ON THE GRUE B ENCHMARK (S ECTIONS 4.1 AND 5)

Modifications to the default setup from Ramamurthy et al. (2023): In our experiments with
the GRUE benchmark we followed the experimental setup of Ramamurthy et al. (2023), including
default hyperparameters for RFT and SFT, up to the following adjustments.

   • For the NarrativeQA dataset, Ramamurthy et al. (2023) use an SFT model that was finetuned
     on multiple question answering datasets. In contrast, we finetune it only on NarrativeQA for a
     fairer comparison with RFT, which does not have access to the additional datasets.
   • For the IMDB dataset, Ramamurthy et al. (2023) perform SFT using positively labeled train
     samples only, whereas RFT is performed over the whole training set. For a fairer comparison,
     we use for RFT the same train samples used for SFT.
   • For the CommonGen dataset, we do not apply a repeat penalty to the reward function.

Reward functions: The GRUE benchmark suggests a few reward functions for each dataset, from
which we used those specified in Table 2.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Inputs with small reward standard deviation under the pretrained model, i.e. with vanishing expected
gradient, are prevalent in the GRUE benchmark. This figure supplements Figure 1, by including identical plots
for the remaining GRUE datasets. For further details see caption of Figure 1.


F.2.2   C ONTROLLED E XPERIMENTS (S ECTION 4.2)
Models: We used the default ResNet18 and BERT-mini implementations from the PyTorch and
HuggingFace libraries, respectively. The MLP had two hidden layers, of sizes 250 and 100, with
ReLU non-linearity.
Data: To facilitate more efficient experimentation, we subsampled the MNIST and CIFAR10 train-
ing sets, choosing uniformly at random 1000 samples from MNIST and 10,000 from CIFAR10.
For pretraining, we assigned 4 additional labels for each sample in MNIST and CIFAR10, i.e. each
sample had a total of 5 pretraining labels, while each sample in STS-B was assigned 2 additional
labels, i.e. a total of 3 pretraining labels. During finetuning, every train sample was assigned a sin-
gle, randomly chosen, ground truth label. For 10% of the samples the label was chosen such that it
was not included in their pretraining labels. As a result, their pretrain reward standard deviation was
small. The rest of the samples were assigned a label such that it was one of their pretraining labels.
Meaning, their pretrain reward standard deviation was relatively large.
Optimization: In the experiments of Figures 3, 12, and 14, the cross-entropy loss was minimized
via the Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.0001, default β1 , β2 coefficients, and a batch size of 512.
Pretraining and finetuning were carried out for 1000 and 5000 epochs, respectively. For Figure 13
we used an identical setup, except that Adam was replaced by SGD with learning rate 0.01 for
the MLP and ResNet18 models. To improve optimization stability, for BERT-mini we reduced the
learning rate to 0.001. Varying the learning rate (for both experiments with Adam and SGD) did not
yield a noticeable improvement in the ability of RFT to maximize the reward of train samples with
small pretrain reward standard deviation.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: RFT affects inputs with small reward standard deviation under the pretrained model less than it affects
other inputs. This table supplements Table 1 by reporting, for the remaining GRUE datasets, the Pearson corre-
lation between the pretrain reward standard deviation and the absolute reward mean change due to finetuning,
across the train samples. As anticipated, the correlation is considerably higher for RFT compared to SFT. For
further details see caption of Table 1.

                                     CommonGen         IWSLT 2017       CNN/Daily Mail          DailyDialog
                        RFT            0.18               0.51               0.33                  0.33
                        SFT            0.07               0.37               0.23                  0.21


           'st


Figure 9: RFT performance (relative to SFT) is worse when inputs with small reward standard deviation are
prevalent. This figure supplements Figure 2, by including identical plots with different choices for the mea-
sured pretrain reward standard deviation percentile: 1%, 5%, and 15% (instead of 10%). As can be seen, the
correlation between the pretrain reward standard deviation percentile and the reward difference between RFT
and SFT is not sensitive to reasonable choices of the percentile. For further details see caption of Figure 2.



Table 4: Mean reward attained by the pretrained, RFT, and SFT models over each of the considered GRUE
datasets. Means and standard deviations are taken over five different random seeds per model and dataset.
Since the test sets of ToTTo and CommonGen are not publicly available, reported are the rewards over their
validation sets instead. This does not pose an issue as our interest lies in optimization, i.e. the ability to achieve
a higher reward over the train set, and we do not conduct any hyperparameter tuning beyond taking the default
values from Ramamurthy et al. (2023).

                                        Train Reward                                                 Test Reward

                  Pretrained Model       RFT Model          SFT Model        Pretrained Model        RFT Model       SFT Model

 NarrativeQA      0.110 ± 0.000        0.102 ± 0.012      0.493 ± 0.003     0.117 ± 0.000         0.116 ± 0.002    0.537 ± 0.001
 ToTTo            0.024 ± 0.000        0.098 ± 0.014      0.305 ± 0.005     0.036 ± 0.000         0.144 ± 0.019    0.443 ± 0.003
 CommonGen        0.130 ± 0.000        0.163 ± 0.007      0.224 ± 0.000     0.179 ± 0.000         0.206 ± 0.005    0.308 ± 0.001
 IWSLT 2017       0.175 ± 0.000        0.239 ± 0.005      0.226 ± 0.000     0.307 ± 0.000         0.299 ± 0.002    0.337 ± 0.000
 CNN/Daily Mail   0.227 ± 0.000        0.260 ± 0.011      0.279 ± 0.000     0.255 ± 0.000         0.284 ± 0.010    0.308 ± 0.000
 DailyDialog      0.191 ± 0.000        0.224 ± 0.003      0.189 ± 0.005     0.190 ± 0.001         0.222 ± 0.004    0.180 ± 0.005
 IMDB             0.831 ± 0.001        0.890 ± 0.005      0.880 ± 0.001     0.498 ± 0.002         0.565 ± 0.009    0.547 ± 0.002


Table 5: RFT (using NLPO) affects inputs with small reward standard deviation under the pretrained model less
than it affects other inputs. This table supplements Tables 1 and 3, by including the Pearson correlations for RFT
performed via NLPO (Ramamurthy et al., 2023) instead of PPO. Similarly to RFT with PPO, the correlation
between the pretrain reward standard deviation of a train sample and its absolute reward mean change for RFT
with NLPO is considerably higher than for SFT. For further details see caption of Table 1.

                  NarrativeQA         ToTTo     IMDB       CommonGen         IWSLT 2017          CNN/Daily Mail    DailyDialog

  RFT (NLPO)          0.42             0.48      0.71            0.19            0.51                  0.34            0.29
  RFT                 0.48             0.46      0.72            0.18            0.51                  0.33            0.33
  SFT                 0.05             0.16      0.72            0.07            0.37                  0.23            0.21


                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Inputs with small reward standard deviation under the pretrained model, i.e. with vanishing ex-
pected gradient, are prevalent in the GRUE benchmark. This figure is identical to Figures 1 and 8, except
that NLPO (Ramamurthy et al., 2023) is used instead of PPO for RFT. The pretrained model (left) and SFT
model (right) columns are repeated here for ease of comparison. Notice that, the effect of RFT with NLPO on
the rewards of train samples is qualitatively similar to that of RFT with PPO. For further details see caption
of Figure 1.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   RFT (NLPO) SFT Reward
                                                           0.0
                                                           0.1
                                                           0.2                    Train                IWSLT 2017
                                                                                  Test                 CNN/Daily Mail
                                                           0.3                    NarrativeQA          DailyDialog
                                                                                  ToTTo                IMDB
                                                           0.4                    CommonGen
                                                                 0.00     0.02   0.04    0.06   0.08    0.10   0.12
                                                                        10'th Pretrain Reward STD Percentile
Figure 11: RFT (using NLPO) performance (relative to SFT) is worse when inputs with small reward standard
deviation are prevalent. This figure is identical to Figure 2, except that NLPO (Ramamurthy et al., 2023) is
used instead of PPO for RFT. For further details see caption of Figure 2.


                Model: MLP Dataset: MNIST                               Model: ResNet18 Dataset: CIFAR10                Model: BERT-mini Dataset: STS-B
Reward
Reward STD
Gradient Norm


Figure 12: RFT struggles to maximize the reward over inputs with small reward standard deviation under the
pretrained model, i.e. inputs with vanishing expected gradient, even with perfect exploration. On the contrary,
SFT easily leads to maximal reward. This figure supplements Figure 3 by reporting the reward standard devi-
ation and gradient norm, in addition to the reward (separately for train samples with small and train samples
with large pretrain reward standard deviation). The top row is identical to Figure 3, and is repeated here for
convenience. Notice that, in accordance with Theorem 1, the gradient norm under RFT vanishes when the
reward standard deviation is small, whereas under SFT the gradient norm vanishes only when the reward is
near-maximal. For further details see caption of Figure 3.


                                                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: RFT struggles to maximize the reward over inputs with small reward standard deviation under the
pretrained model, i.e. inputs with vanishing expected gradient, even with perfect exploration (using stochatic
gradient descent). On the contrary, SFT easily leads to maximal reward. This figure is identical to Figure 12,
except that RFT and SFT were optimized using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) as opposed to Adam (note
that in RFT we use SGD to minimize the negative expected reward). As can be seen, the inability of RFT to
maximize the rewards of inputs with small reward standard deviation is even more severe when using SGD
instead of Adam. For further details see caption of Figure 12.


Table 6: Conventional heuristics are inadequate for overcoming vanishing gradients in RFT. For the Narra-
tiveQA dataset, which was shown in Section 4.1 to suffer from vanishing gradients, reported are means and
standard deviations of train and test rewards, taken over three random seeds, with best result in bold. While
the common heuristics of increasing the learning rate, temperature, and entropy regularization coefficient are
unable to improve upon the default RFT configuration, an initial SFT phase is highly effective. See Table 7
in Appendix F.1 for analogous experiments on the ToTTo and CommonGen datasets.

            Dataset: NarrativeQA

                                                        Train Reward                 Test Reward
            RFT*                                      0.101 ± 0.009                0.116 ± 0.000
            SFT + RFT                                0.537 ± 0.005                0.544 ± 0.003
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−5           0.012 ± 0.010                0.020 ± 0.017
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−4           0.053 ± 0.010                0.048 ± 0.016
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−3           0.039 ± 0.018                0.012 ± 0.020
            RFT with temperature 1.5                  0.077 ± 0.021                0.118 ± 0.002
            RFT with temperature 2                    0.060 ± 0.018                0.104 ± 0.009
            RFT with temperature 2.5                  0.044 ± 0.004                0.088 ± 0.009
            RFT with entropy regularization 0.01      0.080 ± 0.006                0.113 ± 0.002
            RFT with entropy regularization 0.1       0.024 ± 0.005                0.019 ± 0.007
            RFT with entropy regularization 1         0.011 ± 0.000                0.013 ± 0.010
            * With default hyperparameters: learning rate 2 · 10−6 , temperature 1, entropy regularization 0


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: RFT struggles to maximize the reward over inputs with small reward standard deviation under the
pretrained model, i.e. inputs with vanishing expected gradient, even with perfect exploration and when their
expected reward under the pretrained model is relatively high. On the contrary, SFT easily leads to maximal
reward. This figure is identical to Figure 12, except that for inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation
(i.e. inputs for which the finetuning label was not included in their pretraining labels), the reward of an incorrect
label is set to 0.5 as opposed to −1. Consequently, the expected reward of such inputs at the beginning of
finetuning is 0.5, while it is −1 in the experiments of Figure 12. Nonetheless, RFT struggles to increase their
reward, with the reward dynamics mimicking those from Figure 12. For further details see caption of Figure 12.


         Pretrained Model      RFT With Increased Learning Rate        RFT With Temperature   RFT With Entropy Regularization


Figure 15: Conventional heuristics are inadequate for overcoming vanishing gradients in RFT. For the same
randomly chosen NarrativeQA train samples from Figure 1, presented are the reward means and standard devia-
tions (estimated based on ten generations per input) under the pretrained model and RFT models optimized with
an increased learning rate, temperature, or entropy regularization coefficient. The learning rate, temperature,
and entropy regularization values with which the plots were created are those achieving the highest train reward
(excluding the default values), as reported in Table 6. Notice that the effect of these RFT runs is qualitatively
similar to that of the default RFT configuration (shown in Figure 1). Meaning, the heuristics do not alleviate
the difficulty of RFT to improve the reward of inputs with small pretrain reward standard deviation.


                                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Conventional heuristics are inadequate for overcoming vanishing gradients in RFT. This table supple-
ments Table 6 by including results for the ToTTo and CommonGen datasets. Reported are means and standard
deviations of train and test rewards, taken over three different random seeds, with best result in bold. While
the common heuristics of increasing the learning rate, temperature, and entropy regularization coefficient are
unable to improve upon the default RFT configuration, an initial SFT phase is highly effective.

            Dataset: ToTTo

                                                        Train Reward              Validation Reward
            RFT*                                       0.095 ± 0.026                0.137 ± 0.037
            SFT + RFT                                 0.342 ± 0.001                0.439 ± 0.001
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−5            0.065 ± 0.005                0.131 ± 0.003
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−4            0.000 ± 0.000                0.000 ± 0.000
            RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−3            0.000 ± 0.000                0.000 ± 0.000
            RFT with temperature 1.5                   0.059 ± 0.007                0.096 ± 0.022
            RFT with temperature 2                     0.043 ± 0.004                0.073 ± 0.005
            RFT with temperature 2.5                   0.019 ± 0.001                0.038 ± 0.002
            RFT with entropy regularization 0.01       0.061 ± 0.013                0.139 ± 0.014
            RFT with entropy regularization 0.1        0.000 ± 0.000                0.018 ± 0.015
            RFT with entropy regularization 1          0.000 ± 0.000                0.000 ± 0.000
            * With default hyperparameters: learning rate 2 · 10−6 , temperature 1, entropy regularization 0



           Dataset: CommonGen

                                                     Train Reward                 Validation Reward
           RFT*                                     0.164 ± 0.004                  0.209 ± 0.005
           SFT + RFT                               0.265 ± 0.001                  0.319 ± 0.008
           RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−5          0.098 ± 0.019                  0.134 ± 0.015
           RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−4          0.112 ± 0.094                  0.157 ± 0.072
           RFT with learning rate 2 · 10−3          0.055 ± 0.029                  0.106 ± 0.048
           RFT with temperature 1.5                 0.139 ± 0.004                  0.190 ± 0.017
           RFT with temperature 2                   0.147 ± 0.004                  0.189 ± 0.000
           RFT with temperature 2.5                 0.140 ± 0.007                  0.182 ± 0.006
           RFT with entropy regularization 0.1      0.009 ± 0.000                  0.083 ± 0.020
           RFT with entropy regularization 1        0.002 ± 0.000                  0.004 ± 0.003
           RFT with entropy regularization 10       0.001 ± 0.000                  0.000 ± 0.000
           * With default hyperparameters: learning rate 2 · 10−6 , temperature 1, entropy regularization 0.01


                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Train
Test


Figure 16: On datasets in which RFT suffers from vanishing gradients, a few initial SFT optimization steps
on a small number of labeled inputs substantially boost the efficacy of RFT. This figure supplements Figure 4
by reporting metrics based on the mean test reward, in addition to on the mean train reward. The top row is
identical to Figure 4, repeated here for ease of comparison.


            Pretrained Model          SFT Model: 1% Samples, 40% Steps   SFT Model: 100% Samples, 100% Steps


Figure 17: A few initial SFT optimization steps on a small number of labeled inputs effectively mitigate vanish-
ing gradients in RFT. For the same randomly chosen NarrativeQA train samples from Figure 1, presented are
the reward means and standard deviations (estimated based on ten generations per input) under the pretrained,
a partial SFT, and the full (default) SFT models. The pretrained model (left) and SFT model (right) plots are
identical to the respective plots in Figure 1, and are repeated here for ease of comparison. Observe that the
number of samples with small reward standard deviation, i.e. with vanishing expected gradient, is considerably
reduced after the partial SFT. We highlight that, despite the reward mean obtained by the partial SFT model
being noticeably lower than that obtained by the full SFT model, after performing RFT the gap is closed almost
completely. That is, as shown in Figure 4, RFT over the partial SFT model reaches roughly the same reward
as RFT over the full SFT model. This highlights the effectiveness of a partial initial SFT phase for addressing
vanishing gradients in RFT.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Train
Validation


Figure 18: On datasets in which RFT suffers from vanishing gradients, a few initial SFT optimization steps on
a small number of labeled inputs substantially boost the efficacy of RFT. This figure is identical to Figure 16,
except that the experiments were carried out over the ToTTo dataset (as opposed to NarrativeQA).
Train
Validation


Figure 19: On datasets in which RFT suffers from vanishing gradients, a few initial SFT optimization steps on
a small number of labeled inputs substantially boost the efficacy of RFT. This figure is identical to Figure 16,
except that the experiments were carried out over the CommonGen dataset (as opposed to NarrativeQA).


                                                      37
