Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E UREKA : H UMAN - LEVEL R EWARD D ESIGN VIA
C ODING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Yecheng Jason Ma1 2 , William Liang2 , Guanzhi Wang1 3 , De-An Huang1 , Osbert Bastani2 ,
 Dinesh Jayaraman2 , Yuke Zhu1 4 , Linxi “Jim” Fan1 † , Anima Anandkumar1 3 †
               1
                 NVIDIA, 2 UPenn, 3 Caltech, 4 UT Austin; † Equal advising
                    https://eureka-research.github.io



                                               A BSTRACT
         Large Language Models (LLMs) have excelled as high-level semantic planners for
         sequential decision-making tasks. However, harnessing them to learn complex low-
         level manipulation tasks, such as dexterous pen spinning, remains an open problem.
         We bridge this fundamental gap and present E UREKA, a human-level reward
         design algorithm powered by LLMs. E UREKA exploits the remarkable zero-shot
         generation, code-writing, and in-context improvement capabilities of state-of-the-
         art LLMs, such as GPT-4, to perform evolutionary optimization over reward code.
         The resulting rewards can then be used to acquire complex skills via reinforcement
         learning. Without any task-specific prompting or pre-defined reward templates,
         E UREKA generates reward functions that outperform expert human-engineered
         rewards. In a diverse suite of 29 open-source RL environments that include 10
         distinct robot morphologies, E UREKA outperforms human experts on 83% of the
         tasks, leading to an average normalized improvement of 52%. The generality
         of E UREKA also enables a new gradient-free in-context learning approach to
         reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), readily incorporating human
         inputs to improve the quality and the safety of the generated rewards without model
         updating. Finally, using E UREKA rewards in a curriculum learning setting, we
         demonstrate for the first time, a simulated Shadow Hand capable of performing
         pen spinning tricks, adeptly manipulating a pen in circles at rapid speed.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have excelled as high-level semantic planners for robotics tasks (Ahn
et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2023), but whether they can be used to learn complex low-level manipulation
     Corresponding authors: jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu, dr.jimfan.ai@gmail.com


Figure 1: E UREKA generates human-level reward functions across diverse robots and tasks. Combined with
curriculum learning, E UREKA for the first time, unlocks rapid pen-spinning capabilities on an anthropomorphic
five-finger hand.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: E UREKA takes unmodified environment source code and language task description as context to
zero-shot generate executable reward functions from a coding LLM. Then, it iterates between reward sampling,
GPU-accelerated reward evaluation, and reward reflection to progressively improve its reward outputs.



tasks, such as dexterous pen spinning, remains an open problem. Existing attempts require substantial
domain expertise to construct task prompts or learn only simple skills, leaving a substantial gap in
achieving human-level dexterity (Yu et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023).
On the other hand, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results in dexter-
ity (Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Handa et al., 2023) as well as many other domains-if the human
designers can carefully construct reward functions that accurately codify and provide learning signals
for the desired behavior; likewise, many real-world RL tasks admit sparse rewards that are difficult
for learning, necessitating reward shaping that provides incremental learning signals. Despite their
fundamental importance, reward functions are known to be notoriously difficult to design in prac-
tice (Russell & Norvig, 1995; Sutton & Barto, 2018); a recent survey conducted finds 92% of polled
reinforcement learning researchers and practitioners report manual trial-and-error reward design and
89% indicate that their designed rewards are sub-optimal (Booth et al., 2023) and lead to unintended
behavior (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017).
Given the paramount importance of reward design, we ask whether it is possible to develop a universal
reward programming algorithm using state-of-the-art coding LLMs, such as GPT-4. Their remarkable
abilities in code writing, zero-shot generation, and in-context learning have previously enabled
effective programmatic agents (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a). Ideally, this reward design
algorithm should achieve human-level reward generation capabilities that scale to a broad spectrum of
tasks, including dexterity, automate the tedious trial-and-error procedure without human supervision,
and yet be compatible with human oversight to assure safety and alignment.
We introduce Evolution-driven Universal REward Kit for Agent (E UREKA), a novel reward design
algorithm powered by coding LLMs with the following contributions:

1. Achieves human-level performance on reward design across a diverse suite of 29 open-sourced
   RL environments that include 10 distinct robot morphologies, including quadruped, quadcopter,
   biped, manipulator, as well as several dexterous hands; see Fig. 1. Without any task-specific
   prompting or reward templates, E UREKA autonomously generates rewards that outperform expert
   human rewards on 83% of the tasks and realizes an average normalized improvement of 52%.

2. Solves dexterous manipulation tasks that were previously not feasible by manual reward
   engineering. We consider pen spinning, in which a five-finger hand needs to rapidly rotate a
   pen in pre-defined spinning configurations for as many cycles as possible. Combining E UREKA
   with curriculum learning, we demonstrate for the first time rapid pen spinning maneuvers on a
   simulated anthropomorphic Shadow Hand (see Figure 1 bottom).


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3. Enables a new gradient-free in-context learning approach to reinforcement learning from
   human feedback (RLHF) that can generate more performant and human-aligned reward functions
   based on various forms of human inputs without model updating. We demonstrate that E UREKA
   can readily benefit from and improve upon existing human reward functions. Likewise, we
   showcase E UREKA’s capability in using purely textual feedback to generate progressively more
   human-aligned reward functions.

Unlike prior work L2R on using LLMs to aid reward design (Yu et al., 2023), E UREKA is completely
free of task-specific prompts, reward templates, as well as few-shot examples. In our experiments,
E UREKA significantly outperforms L2R due to its ability to generate free-form, expressive reward
programs. E UREKA’s generality is made possible through three key algorithmic design choices:
environment as context, evolutionary search, and reward reflection. First, by taking the environment
source code as context, E UREKA can zero-shot generate executable reward functions from the
backbone coding LLM (GPT-4). Then, E UREKA substantially improves the quality of its rewards
by performing evolutionary search, iteratively proposing batches of reward candidates and refining
the most promising ones within the LLM context window. This in-context improvement is made
effective via reward reflection, a textual summary of the reward quality based on policy training
statistics that enables automated and targeted reward editing; see Fig. 3 for an example of E UREKA
zero-shot reward as well as various improvements accumulated during its optimization. To ensure
that E UREKA can scale up its reward search to maximum potential, E UREKA evaluates intermediate
rewards using GPU-accelerated distributed reinforcement learning on IsaacGym (Makoviychuk et al.,
2021), which offers up to three orders of magnitude in policy learning speed, making E UREKA an
extensive algorithm that scales naturally with more compute. See Fig. 2 for an overview. We are
committed to open-sourcing all prompts, environments, and generated reward functions to promote
further research on LLM-based reward design.

2     P ROBLEM S ETTING AND D EFINITIONS

The goal of reward design is to return a shaped reward function for a ground-truth reward function
that may be difficult to optimize directly (e.g., sparse rewards); this ground-truth reward function
may only be accessed via queries by the designer. We first introduce the formal definition from Singh
et al. (2010), which we then adapt to the program synthesis setting, which we call reward generation.
Definition 2.1. (Reward Design Problem (Singh et al., 2010)) A reward design problem (RDP) is
a tuple P = ⟨M, R, πM , F ⟩, where M = (S, A, T ) is the world model with state space S, action
space A, and transition function T . R is the space of reward functions; AM (·) : R → Π is a learning
algorithm that outputs a policy π : S → ∆(A) that optimizes reward R ∈ R in the resulting Markov
Decision Process (MDP), (M, R); F : Π → R is the fitness function that produces a scalar evaluation
of any policy, which may only be accessed via policy queries (i.e., evaluate the policy using the
ground truth reward function). In an RDP, the goal is to output a reward function R ∈ R such that
the policy π := AM (R) that optimizes R achieves the highest fitness score F (π).

Reward Generation Problem. In our problem setting, every component within a RDP is specified
via code. Then, given a string l that specifies the task, the objective of the reward generation problem
is to output a reward function code R such that F (AM (R)) is maximized.

3     M ETHOD

E UREKA consists of three algorithmic components: 1) environment as context that enables zero-shot
generation of executable rewards, 2) evolutionary search that iteratively proposes and refines reward
candidates, and 3) reward reflection that enables fine-grained reward improvement. See Alg. 1 for
pseudocode; all prompts are included in App. A.

3.1   E NVIRONMENT AS C ONTEXT

Reward design requires the environment specification to be provided to the LLM. We propose directly
feeding the raw environment source code (without the reward code, if exists) as context. Given
that any reward function is a function over the environment’s state and action variables, the only


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: E UREKA can zero-shot generate executable rewards and then flexibly improve them with many distinct
types of free-form modification, such as (1) changing the hyperparameter of existing reward components, (2)
changing the functional form of existing reward components, and (3) introducing new reward components.



requirement in the source code is that it exposes these environment variables, which is easy to satisfy.
In cases where the source code is not available, relevant state information can also be supplied via
an API, for example. In practice, to ensure that the environment code fits within the LLM’s context
window and does not leak simulation internals (so that we can expect the same prompt to generalize
to new simulators), we have an automatic script to extract just the environment code snippets that
expose and fully specify the environment state and action variables. see App. D for details.
Given environment as context,
E UREKA instructs the coding LLM
to directly return executable Python
                                        Algorithm 1 E UREKA
code with only generic reward design
and formatting tips, such as exposing     1: Require: Task description l, environment code M ,
individual components in the reward          coding LLM LLM, fitness function F , initial prompt prompt
as a dictionary output (for reasons 2: Hyperparameters: search iteration N , iteration batch size K
that will be apparent in Sec. 3.3); 3: for N iterations do
                                          4:    // Sample K reward code from LLM
see Prompt 1 and 3 in App. A. 5:                R1 , ..., Rk ∼ LLM(l, M, prompt)
Remarkably, with only these minimal       6:    // Evaluate reward candidates
instructions, E UREKA can already 7:            s1 = F (R1 ), ..., sK = F (RK )
zero-shot generate plausibly-looking 8:         // Reward reflection
                                                                                                    n
rewards in diverse environments in its 9:       prompt := prompt : Reflection(Rbest                     , snbest ),
first attempts. An example E UREKA              where    best  =  arg max  k 1s ,  ..., sK
output is shown in Fig. 3. As seen, 10:         // Update Eureka reward
                                                                       n
E UREKA adeptly composes over 11:               REureka , sEureka = (Rbest , sn
                                                                              best ),     if sn
                                                                                              best > sEureka

existing observation variables (e.g.,   12:  Output:     R Eureka

fingertip pos) in the provided
environment code and produces a competent reward code – all without any environment-specific
prompt engineering or reward templating. On the first try, however, the generated reward may not
always be executable, and even if it is, it can be quite sub-optimal with respect to the task fitness
metric F . While we can improve the prompt with task-specific formatting and reward design hints,
doing so does not scale to new tasks and hinders the overall generality of our system. How can we
effectively overcome the sub-optimality of single-sample reward generation?


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   E VOLUTIONARY S EARCH

In this section, we will demonstrate how evolutionary search presents a natural solution that addresses
the aforementioned execution error and sub-optimality challenges. In each iteration, E UREKA
samples several independent outputs from the LLM (Line 5 in Alg. 1). Since the generations are i.i.d,
the probability that all reward functions from an iteration are buggy exponentially decreases as the
number of samples increases. We find that for all environments we consider, sampling just a modest
number of samples (16) contains at least one executable reward code in the first iteration.
Given executable reward functions from an earlier iteration, E UREKA performs in-context reward
mutation, proposing new improved reward functions from the best one in the previous iteration.
Concretely, a new E UREKA iteration will take the best-performing reward from the previous iteration,
its reward reflection (Sec. 3.3), and the mutation prompt (Prompt 2 in App. A) as context and generate
K more i.i.d reward outputs from the LLM; several illustrative reward modifications are visualized in
Fig. 3. This iterative optimization continues until a specified number of iterations has been reached.
Finally, we perform multiple random restarts to find better maxima; this is a standard strategy in
global optimization. In all our experiments, E UREKA conducts 5 independent runs per environment,
and for each run, searches for 5 iterations with K = 16 samples per iteration.

3.3   R EWARD R EFLECTION

In order to ground the in-context reward mutation, we must be able to put into words the quality of
the generated rewards. We propose reward reflection, an automated feedback that summarizes the
policy training dynamics in texts. Specifically, given that E UREKA reward functions are asked to
expose their individual components in the reward program (e.g., reward components in Fig. 3),
reward reflection tracks the scalar values of all reward components and the task fitness function at
intermediate policy checkpoints throughout training. For instance, consider the illustrative example
in Fig. 2, where the snapshot values of av penalty are provided as a list in the reward feedback.
See App. G.1 for full examples.
This reward reflection procedure, though simple to construct, is important due to two reasons: (1) the
lack of fine-grained reward improvement signal in the task fitness function, and (2) the algorithm-
dependent nature of reward optimization (Booth et al., 2023). First, as we can query the task fitness
function F on the resulting policies, a simple strategy is to just provide this numerical score as
the reward evaluation. While serving as the holistic ground-truth metric, the task fitness function
itself lacks in credit assignment, providing no useful information on why a reward function works
or not. Second, whether a reward function is effective is influenced by the particular choice of RL
algorithm, and the same reward may perform very differently even under the same optimizer given
hyperparameter differences (Henderson et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021). By providing detailed
accounts on how well the RL algorithm optimizes individual reward components, reward reflection
enables E UREKA to produce more intricate and targeted reward editing.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We thoroughly evaluate E UREKA on a diverse suite of robot embodiments and tasks, testing its ability
to generate reward functions, solve new tasks, and incorporate various forms of human input. We
use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), in particular the gpt-4-0314 variant, as the backbone LLM for all
LLM-based reward-design algorithms unless specified otherwise.
Environments. Our environments consist of 10 distinct robots and 29 tasks implemented using the
IsaacGym simulator (Makoviychuk et al., 2021). First, we include 9 original environments from
IsaacGym (Isaac), covering a diverse set of robot morphologies from quadruped, bipedal, quadrotor,
cobot arm, to dexterous hands. In addition to coverage over robot form factors, we ensure depth in our
evaluation by including all 20 tasks from the Bidexterous Manipulation (Dexterity) benchmark (Chen
et al., 2022). Dexterity contains 20 complex bi-manual tasks that require a pair of Shadow Hands to
solve a wide range of complex manipulation skills, ranging from object handover to rotating a cup by
180 degrees. For the task description input to E UREKA, we use the official description provided in
the environment repository when possible. See App. B for details on all environments. It is worth
noting that both benchmarks are publicly released concurrently, or after the GPT-4 knowledge cut-off
date (September 2021), so GPT-4 is unlikely to have accumulated extensive internet knowledge


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: E UREKA outperforms Human and L2R across all tasks. In particular, E UREKA realizes much greater
gains on high-dimensional dexterity environments.


about these tasks, making them ideal testbeds for assessing E UREKA’s reward generation capability
compared to measurable human-engineered reward functions.

4.1   BASELINES

L2R (Yu et al., 2023) proposes a two-stage LLM-prompting solution to generate templated rewards.
For an environment and task specified in natural language, a first LLM is asked to fill in a natural
language template describing the agent’s motion; then, a second LLM is asked to convert this “motion
description” into code that calls a manually defined set of reward API primitives to write a reward
program that sets their parameters. To make L2R competitive for our tasks, we define the motion
description template to mimic the original L2R templates, and we construct the API reward primitives
using the individual components of the original human rewards when possible. Note that this gives
L2R an advantage as it has access to the original reward functions. Consistent with E UREKA, we
conduct 5 independent L2R runs per environment, and for each run, we generate 16 reward samples.
See App. C for more details.
Human. These are the original shaped reward functions provided in our benchmark tasks. As these
reward functions are written by active reinforcement learning researchers who designed the tasks,
these reward functions represent the outcomes of expert-level human reward engineering.
Sparse. These are identical to the fitness functions F that we use to evaluate the quality of the
generated rewards. Like Human, these are also provided by the benchmark. On the dexterity tasks,
they are uniformly binary indicator functions that measure task success; on Isaac tasks, they vary in
functional forms depending on the nature of the task. See App. B for a description of the ground-truth
scoring metric for all tasks.

4.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

Policy Learning. For each task, all final reward functions are optimized using the same RL algorithm
with the same set of hyperparameters. Isaac and Dexterity share a well-tuned PPO implementa-
tion (Schulman et al., 2017; Makoviichuk & Makoviychuk, 2021), and we use this implementation
and the task-specific PPO hyperparameters without any modification. Note that these task hyperpa-
rameters are tuned to make the official human-engineered rewards work well. For each final reward
function obtained from each method, we run 5 independent PPO training runs and report the average
of the maximum task metric values achieved from 10 policy checkpoints sampled at fixed intervals.
In particular, the maximum is taken over the same number of checkpoints for each approach.
Reward Evaluation Metrics. For Isaac tasks, since the task metric F for each task varies in semantic
                                                                                      Method−Sparse
meaning and scale, we report the human normalized score for E UREKA and L2R, |Human−Sparse|         .
This metric provides a holistic measure of how E UREKA rewards fare against human-expert rewards
with respect to the ground-truth task metric. For Dexterity, since all tasks are evaluated using the
binary success function, we directly report success rates.

4.3   R ESULTS

E UREKA outperforms human rewards. In Figure 4, we report the aggregate results on Dexterity
and Isaac. Notably, E UREKA exceeds or performs on par to human level on all Isaac tasks and 15 out
of 20 tasks on Dexterity (see App. F for a per-task breakdown). In contrast, L2R, while comparable


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on low-dimensional tasks (e.g., CartPole, BallBalance), lags significantly behind on high-dimensional
tasks. Despite being provided access to some of the same reward components as Human, L2R still
underperforms E UREKA after its initial iteration, when both methods have had the same number of
reward queries. As expected, L2R’s lack of expressivity severely limits its performance. In contrast,
E UREKA generates free-form rewards from scratch without any domain-specific knowledge and
performs substantially better. In App. F, we present results on additional evaluation metrics such as
interquantile mean (IQM), probability of improvement (Agarwal et al., 2021), and the aggregate RL
training curves; on all evaluations, we observe the consistent trend that E UREKA generates the most
capable reward functions. Furthermore, we ablate GPT-4 with GPT-3.5 and find E UREKA degrades in
performance but still matches or exceeds human-level on most Isaac tasks, indicating that its general
principles can be readily applied to coding LLMs of varying qualities.
E UREKA consistently improves
over time. In Fig. 5, we visualize the
average performance of the cumula-
tive best E UREKA rewards after each
evolution iteration. Moreover, we
study an ablation, E UREKA w.o. Evo-
lution (32 Samples), which performs
only the initial reward generation
step, sampling the same number of
reward functions as two iterations in
the original E UREKA. This ablation
helps study, given a fixed number of Figure 5: E UREKA progressively produces better rewards via in-
reward function budget, whether it context evolutionary reward search.
is more advantageous to perform the
E UREKA evolution or simply sample more first-attempt rewards without iterative improvement. As
seen, on both benchmarks, E UREKA rewards steadily improve and eventually surpass human rewards
in performance despite sub-par initial performances. This consistent improvement also cannot be
replaced by just sampling more in the first iteration as the ablation’s performances are lower than
E UREKA after 2 iterations on both benchmarks. Together, these results demonstrate that E UREKA’s
novel evolutionary optimization is indispensable for its final performance.
E UREKA generates novel rewards. We assess the nov-
elty of E UREKA rewards by computing the correlations
between E UREKA and human rewards on all the Isaac
tasks; see App. B for details on this procedure. Then, we
plot the correlations against the human normalized scores
on a scatter-plot in Figure 6, where each point represents
a single E UREKA reward on a single task. As shown,
E UREKA mostly generates weakly correlated reward func-
tions that outperform the human ones. In addition, by
examining the average correlation by task (App. F), we
observe that the harder the task is, the less correlated the
E UREKA rewards. We hypothesize that human rewards
are less likely to be near optimal for difficult tasks, leaving
more room for E UREKA rewards to be different and bet- Figure 6: Eureka generates novel rewards.
ter. In a few cases, E UREKA rewards are even negatively
correlated with human rewards but perform significantly better, demonstrating that E UREKA can
discover novel reward design principles that may run counter to human intuition; we illustrate these
E UREKA rewards in App. G.2.
Reward reflection enables targeted improvement. To assess the importance of constructing reward
reflection in the reward feedback, we evaluate an ablation, E UREKA (No Reward Reflection), which
reduces the reward feedback prompt to include only snapshot values of the task metric F . Averaged
over all Isaac tasks, E UREKA without reward reflection reduces the average normalized score by
28.6%; in App. F, we provide detailed per-task breakdown and observe much greater performance
deterioration on higher dimensional tasks. To provide qualitative analysis, in App. G.1, we include
several examples in which E UREKA utilizes the reward reflection to perform targeted reward editing.



                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E UREKA with curriculum learning enables dexterous pen spinning. Finally, we investigate
whether E UREKA can be used to solve a truly novel and challenging dexterous task. To this end,
we propose pen spinning as a test bed. This task is highly dynamic and requires a Shadow Hand
to continuously rotate a pen to achieve some pre-defined spinning patterns for as many cycles as
possible; we implement this task on top of the original Shadow Hand environment in Isaac Gym
without changes to any physics parameter, ensuring physical realism. We consider a curriculum
learning (Bengio et al., 2009) approach to break down the task into manageable components that can
be independently solved by E UREKA. Specifically, we first use E UREKA to generate a reward for the
task of re-orienting the pen to random target configurations and train a policy using the final E UREKA
reward. Then, using this pre-trained policy (Pre-Trained), we fine-tune it using the same E UREKA
reward to reach the sequence of pen-spinning configurations (Fine-Tuned). To demonstrate the
importance of curriculum learning, we also directly train a policy from scratch on the target task using
E UREKA reward without the first-stage pre-training (Scratch). The RL training curves are shown in
Figure 7. Eureka fine-tuning quickly adapts the policy to successfully spin the pen for many cycles
in a row; see project website for videos. In contrast, neither pre-trained or learning-from-scratch
policies can complete even a single cycle of pen spinning. In addition, using this E UREKA fine-tuning
approach, we have also trained pen spinning policies for a variety of different spinning configurations;
all pen spinning videos can be viewed on our project website, and experimental details are in App. D.1.
These results demonstrate E UREKA’s applicability to advanced policy learning approaches, which
are often necessary for learning very complex skills

4.4   E UREKA F ROM H UMAN F EEDBACK

In addition to automated reward design, E UREKA enables
a new gradient-free in-context learning approach to RL
from Human Feedback (RLHF) that can readily incor-
porate various types of human inputs to generate more
performant and human-aligned reward functions.
E UREKA can improve and benefit from human reward
functions. We study whether starting with a human reward
function initialization, a common scenario in real-world
RL applications, is advantageous for E UREKA. Impor-
tantly, incorporating human initialization requires no mod-
ification to E UREKA – we can simply substitute the raw Figure 7: E UREKA can be flexibly combined
human reward function as the output of the first E UREKA with curriculum learning to acquire complex
iteration. To investigate this, we select several tasks from dexterous skills.
Dexterity that differ in the relative performances between
the original E UREKA and human rewards. The full results are shown in Figure 8.
As shown, regardless of the quality of the human
rewards, E UREKA improves and benefits from
human rewards as E UREKA (Human Init.) is
uniformly better than both E UREKA and Hu-
man on all tasks. This suggests that E UREKA’s
in-context reward improvement capability is
largely independent of the quality of the base
reward. Furthermore, the fact that E UREKA can
significantly improve over human rewards even
when they are highly sub-optimal hints towards
an interesting hypothesis: human designers are
generally knowledgeable about relevant state
variables but are less proficient at designing re- Figure 8: E UREKA effectively improves and benefits
wards using them. This makes intuitive sense as from human reward initialization.
identifying relevant state variables that should
be included in the reward function involves mostly common sense reasoning, but reward design
requires specialized knowledge and experience in RL. Together, these results demonstrate E UREKA’s
reward assistant capability, perfectly complementing human designers’ knowledge about useful state
variables and making up for their less proficiency on how to design rewards using them. In App. G.3,
we provide several examples of E UREKA (Human Init.) steps.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reward reflection via human feedback induces aligned behavior. So far, all E UREKA rewards
are optimized against a fixed, black-box task fitness function F . This task metric, however, may
not fully align with human intent. Moreover, in many open-ended tasks, F may not be available in
the first place (Fan et al., 2022). In these challenging scenarios, we propose to augment E UREKA
by having humans step in and put into words the reward reflection in terms of the desired behavior
and correction. We investigate this capability in E UREKA by teaching a Humanoid agent how to run
purely from textual reward reflection; in App. G.4, we show the exact sequence of human feedback
and E UREKA rewards. Then, we conduct a user study asking 20 unfamiliar users to indicate their
preferences between two policy rollout videos shown in random order, one trained with human reward
reflection (E UREKA-HF) and the other one trained with the original best E UREKA reward; the details
are in App. D.3. As shown in Fig. 9, despite running a bit slower, the E UREKA-HF agent is preferred
by a large majority of our users. Qualitative, we indeed see that the E UREKA-HF agent acquires safer
and more stable gait, as instructed by the human. See the project website for a comparison.

5    R ELATED W ORK
Reward Design. Reward engineering is a
long-standing challenge in reinforcement learn-
ing (Singh et al., 2010; Sutton & Barto, 2018).
The most common reward design method is man-
ual trial-and-error (Knox et al., 2023; Booth
et al., 2023). Inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) infers reward functions from demonstra-
                                                        Method        Forward Velocity Human Preference
tions (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008;
Ho & Ermon, 2016), but it requires expensive ex-        E UREKA            7.53                5/20
pert data collection, which may not be available,       E UREKA-HF         5.58               15/20
and outputs non-interpretable black-box reward
functions. Several prior works have studied au- Figure 9: E UREKA can incorporate human reward re-
                                                     flection to modify rewards that induce safer and more
tomated reward search through evolutionary al- human-aligned behavior.
gorithms (Niekum et al., 2010; Chiang et al.,
2019; Faust et al., 2019). These early attempts
are limited to task-specific implementations of evolutionary algorithms that search over only parame-
ters within provided reward templates. Recent works have also proposed using pretrained foundation
models that can produce reward functions for new tasks (Ma et al., 2022; 2023; Fan et al., 2022; Du
et al., 2023a; Karamcheti et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023b; Kwon et al., 2023). Most of these approaches
output scalar rewards that lack interpretability and do not naturally admit the capability to improve or
adapt rewards on-the-fly. In contrast, E UREKA adeptly generates free-form, white-box reward code
and effectively in-context improves.
Code Large Language Models for Decision Making. Recent works have considered using coding
LLMs (Austin et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Rozière et al., 2023) to generate grounded and structured
programmatic output for decision making and robotics problems (Liang et al., 2023; Singh et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023a; Silver et al.,
2023; Ding et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023). However, most of these works rely on
known motion primitives to carry out robot actions and do not apply to robot tasks that require
low-level skill learning, such as dexterous manipulation. The closest to our work is a recent work (Yu
et al., 2023) that also explores using LLMs to aid reward design. Their approach, however, requires
domain-specific task descriptions and reward templates.

6    C ONCLUSION
We have presented E UREKA, a universal reward design algorithm powered by coding large language
models and in-context evolutionary search. Without any task-specific prompt engineering or human
intervention, E UREKA achieves human-level reward generation on a wide range of robots and tasks.
E UREKA’s particular strength in learning dexterity solves dexterous pen spinning for the first time with
a curriculum learning approach. Finally, E UREKA enables a gradient-free approach to reinforcement
learning from human feedback that readily incorporates human reward initialization and textual
feedback to better steer its reward generation. The versatility and substantial performance gains of
E UREKA suggest that the simple principle of combining large language models with evolutionary
algorithms are a general and scalable approach to reward design, an insight that may be generally
applicable to difficult, open-ended search problems.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are grateful to colleagues and friends at NVIDIA and UPenn for their helpful feedback and
insightful discussions. We thank Viktor Makoviychuk, Yashraj Narang, Iretiayo Akinola, Erwin
Coumans for their assistance on Isaac Gym experiment and rendering. This work is done during
Yecheng Jason Ma’s internship at NVIDIA. We acknowledge funding support from NSF CAREER
Award 2239301, ONR award N00014-22-1-2677, NSF Award CCF-1917852, and ARO Award
W911NF-20-1-0080.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.

Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.

Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.

OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
 Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
  dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
  2020.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48, 2009.

Serena Booth, W Bradley Knox, Julie Shah, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro Allievi. The
  perils of trial-and-error reward design: misdesign through overfitting and invalid task specifications.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 5920–5929, 2023.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
  Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuan Jiang, Zongqing Lu, Stephen
  McAleer, Hao Dong, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards human-level bimanual
  dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:5150–5163, 2022.

Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Aleksandra Faust, Marek Fiser, and Anthony Francis. Learning navigation
  behaviors end-to-end with autorl. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(2):2007–2014, 2019.

Yan Ding, Xiaohan Zhang, Chris Paxton, and Shiqi Zhang. Task and motion planning with large
  language models for object rearrangement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06247, 2023.

Yuqing Du, Ksenia Konyushkova, Misha Denil, Akhil Raju, Jessica Landon, Felix Hill, Nando
  de Freitas, and Serkan Cabi. Vision-language models as success detectors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.07280, 2023a.

Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06692, 2023b.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  18343–18362, 2022.
Aleksandra Faust, Anthony Francis, and Dar Mehta. Evolving rewards to automate reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07628, 2019.
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
  robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In 2017 IEEE international conference
  on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 3389–3396. IEEE, 2017.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Smitha Milli, Pieter Abbeel, Stuart J Russell, and Anca Dragan. Inverse
  reward design. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ankur Handa, Arthur Allshire, Viktor Makoviychuk, Aleksei Petrenko, Ritvik Singh, Jingzhou Liu,
  Denys Makoviichuk, Karl Van Wyk, Alexander Zhurkevich, Balakumar Sundaralingam, et al.
  Dextreme: Transfer of agile in-hand manipulation from simulation to reality. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5977–5984. IEEE, 2023.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Taylor Howell, Nimrod Gileadi, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Kevin Zakka, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa.
  Predictive sampling: Real-time behaviour synthesis with mujoco. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00541,
  2022.
Siyuan Huang, Zhengkai Jiang, Hao Dong, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. Instruct2act:
  Mapping multi-modality instructions to robotic actions with large language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11176, 2023.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh,
  and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12766, 2023.
W Bradley Knox, Alessandro Allievi, Holger Banzhaf, Felix Schmitt, and Peter Stone. Reward (mis)
 design for autonomous driving. Artificial Intelligence, 316:103829, 2023.
Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for
  legged robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04034, 2021.
Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023.
Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion:
  From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023b.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy
  Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Vaidehi Som, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bastani, and
  Dinesh Jayaraman. Liv: Language-image representations and rewards for robotic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.00958, 2023.
Denys Makoviichuk and Viktor Makoviychuk. rl-games: A high-performance framework for rein-
  forcement learning. https://github.com/Denys88/rl_games, May 2021.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Gabriel B Margolis, Ge Yang, Kartik Paigwar, Tao Chen, and Pulkit Agrawal. Rapid locomotion via
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02824, 2022.
Scott Niekum, Andrew G Barto, and Lee Spector. Genetic programming for reward function search.
  IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):83–90, 2010.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Prentice Hall,
  Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1st edition, 1995.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
 Yao. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Tom Silver, Soham Dan, Kavitha Srinivas, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Michael
  Katz. Generalized planning in pddl domains with pretrained large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11014, 2023.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
Satinder Singh, Richard L. Lewis, , and Andrew G. Barto. Where do rewards come from? In
  Proceedings of the International Symposium on AI Inspired Biology - A Symposium at the AISB
  2010 Convention, pp. 111–116, 2010. ISBN 1902956923.
Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. A walk in the park: Learning to walk in 20 minutes
  with model-free reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07860, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, USA, 2nd edition, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Huaxiaoyue Wang, Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega, Yash Sharma, and Sanjiban Choudhury.
  Demo2code: From summarizing demonstrations to synthesizing code via extended chain-of-
  thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16744, 2023b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control
  using covariance variable importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
Yaqi Xie, Chen Yu, Tongyao Zhu, Jinbin Bai, Ze Gong, and Harold Soh. Translating natural language
  to planning goals with large-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05128, 2023.
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Jianfeng Wang, Chung-Ching Lin, Zicheng Liu, and Li-
  juan Wang. The dawn of lmms: Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v (ision). arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.17421, 9, 2023.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to rewards
 for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    F ULL P ROMPTS

In this section, we provide all E UREKA prompts.

                                  Prompt 1: Initial system prompt
You are a reward engineer trying to write reward functions to solve reinforcement learning
     tasks as effective as possible.
Your goal is to write a reward function for the environment that will help the agent learn the
       task described in text.
Your reward function should use useful variables from the environment as inputs. As an example
     ,
the reward function signature can be:
@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(object_pos: torch.Tensor, goal_pos: torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor,
     Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:
    ...
    return reward, {}
Since the reward function will be decorated with @torch.jit.script,
please make sure that the code is compatible with TorchScript (e.g., use torch tensor instead
     of numpy array).
Make sure any new tensor or variable you introduce is on the same device as the input tensors.



                              Prompt 2: Reward reflection and feedback
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of the
     individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
     success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
     minimum values encountered:
<REWARD REFLECTION HERE>

Please carefully analyze the policy feedback and provide a new, improved reward function that
     can better solve the task. Some helpful tips for analyzing the policy feedback:
    (1) If the success rates are always near zero, then you must rewrite the entire reward
     function
    (2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this
     means RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written. You may consider
        (a) Changing its scale or the value of its temperature parameter
        (b) Re-writing the reward component
        (c) Discarding the reward component
    (3) If some reward components’ magnitude is significantly larger, then you must re-scale
     its value to a proper range
Please analyze each existing reward component in the suggested manner above first, and then
     write the reward function code.



                                   Prompt 3: Code formatting tip
The output of the reward function should consist of two items:
    (1) the total reward,
    (2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "‘‘‘python ... ‘‘‘".

Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
    (1) You may find it helpful to normalize the reward to a fixed range by applying
     transformations like torch.exp to the overall reward or its components
    (2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
     temperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named
     variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed
     reward component should have its own temperature variable
    (3) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input
     variable should not be specified as torch.Tensor
    (4) Most importantly, the reward code’s input variables must contain only attributes of
     the provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.).
     Under no circumstance can you introduce new input variables.


B    E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

In this section, we provide environment details. For each environment, we list its observation and
action dimensions, the verbatim task description, and the task fitness function F . F is evaluated
per-environment, and our policy feedback uses the mean across environment instances.
For the functions below, || denotes the L2 norm, and 1[] denotes the indicator function.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      IsaacGym Environments
          Environment (obs dim, action dim)
          Task description
          Task fitness function F
          Cartpole (4, 1)
          To balance a pole on a cart so that the pole stays upright
          duration
          Quadcopter (21, 12)
          To make the quadcopter reach and hover near a fixed position
          -cur_dist
          FrankaCabinet (23, 9)
          To open the cabinet door
          1[cabinet_pos > 0.39]
          Anymal (48, 12)
          To make the quadruped follow randomly chosen x, y, and yaw target velocities
          -(linvel_error + angvel_error)
          BallBalance (48, 12)
          To keep the ball on the table top without falling
          duration
          Ant (60, 8)
          To make the ant run forward as fast as possible
          cur_dist - prev_dist
          AllegroHand (88, 16)
          To make the hand spin the object to a target orientation
          number of consecutive successes where
          current success is 1[rot_dist < 0.1]
          Humanoid (108, 21)
          To make the humanoid run as fast as possible
          cur_dist - prev_dist
          ShadowHand (211, 20)
          To make the shadow hand spin the object to a target orientation
          number of consecutive successes where
          current success is 1[rot_dist < 0.1]



                                         Dexterity Environments
 Environment (obs dim, action dim)
 Task description
 Task fitness function F
 Over (398, 40)
 This class corresponds to the HandOver task. This environment consists of two shadow hands
 with palms facing up, opposite each other, and an object that needs to be passed. In the beginning,
 the object will fall randomly in the area of the shadow hand on the right side. Then the hand holds
 the object and passes the object to the other hand. Note that the base of the hand is fixed. More
 importantly, the hand which holds the object initially can not directly touch the target, nor can it
 directly roll the object to the other hand, so the object must be thrown up and stays in the air in the
 process
 1[dist < 0.03]


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 DoorCloseInward (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the DoorCloseInward task. This environment require a closed door to
 be opened and the door can only be pushed outward or initially open inward. Both these two
 environments only need to do the push behavior, so it is relatively simple
 1[door_handle_dist < 0.5]
 DoorCloseOutward (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the DoorCloseOutward task. This environment also require a closed
 door to be opened and the door can only be pushed inward or initially open outward, but because
 they can’t complete the task by simply pushing, which need to catch the handle by hand and then
 open or close it, so it is relatively difficult
 1[door_handle_dist < 0.5]
 DoorOpenInward (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the DoorOpenInward task. This environment also require a opened door
 to be closed and the door can only be pushed inward or initially open outward, but because they
 can’t complete the task by simply pushing, which need to catch the handle by hand and then open
 or close it, so it is relatively difficult
 1[door_handle_dist > 0.5]
 DoorOpenOutward (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the DoorOpenOutward task. This environment require a opened door
 to be closed and the door can only be pushed outward or initially open inward. Both these two
 environments only need to do the push behavior, so it is relatively simple
 1[door_handle_dist < 0.5]
 Scissors (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Scissors task. This environment involves two hands and scissors, we
 need to use two hands to open the scissors
 1[dof_pos > -0.3]
 SwingCup (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the SwingCup task. This environment involves two hands and a dual
 handle cup, we need to use two hands to hold and swing the cup together
 1[rot_dist < 0.785]
 Switch (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Switch task. This environment involves dual hands and a bottle, we
 need to use dual hand fingers to press the desired button
 1[1.4 - (left_switch_z + right_switch_z) > 0.05]
 Kettle (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the PourWater task. This environment involves two hands, a kettle, and
 a bucket, we need to hold the kettle with one hand and the bucket with the other hand, and pour
 the water from the kettle into the bucket. In the practice task in Isaac Gym, we use many small
 balls to simulate the water
 1[|bucket - kettle_spout| < 0.05]
 LiftUnderarm (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the LiftUnderarm task. This environment requires grasping the pot
 handle with two hands and lifting the pot to the designated position. This environment is designed
 to simulate the scene of lift in daily life and is a practical skill
 1[dist < 0.05]
 Pen (417, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Open Pen Cap task. This environment involves two hands and a pen,
 we need to use two hands to open the pen cap
 1[5 * |pen_cap - pen_body| > 1.5]
 BottleCap (420, 52)



                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 This class corresponds to the Bottle Cap task. This environment involves two hands and a bottle,
 we need to hold the bottle with one hand and open the bottle cap with the other hand. This skill
 requires the cooperation of two hands to ensure that the cap does not fall
 1[dist > 0.03]
 CatchAbreast (422, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Catch Abreast task. This environment consists of two shadow hands
 placed side by side in the same direction and an object that needs to be passed. Compared with the
 previous environment which is more like passing objects between the hands of two people, this
 environment is designed to simulate the two hands of the same person passing objects, so different
 catch techniques are also required and require more hand translation and rotation techniques
 1[dist] < 0.03
 CatchOver2Underarm (422, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Over2Underarm task. This environment is similar to Catch Underarm,
 but with an object in each hand and the corresponding goal on the other hand. Therefore, the
 environment requires two objects to be thrown into the other hand at the same time, which requires
 a higher manipulation technique than the environment of a single object
 1[dist < 0.03]
 CatchUnderarm (422, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Catch Underarm task. In this task, two shadow hands with palms
 facing upwards are controlled to pass an object from one palm to the other. What makes it more
 difficult than the Hand over task is that the hands’ translation and rotation degrees of freedom are
 no longer frozen but are added into the action space
 1[dist < 0.03]
 ReOrientation (422, 40)
 This class corresponds to the ReOrientation task. This environment involves two hands and two
 objects. Each hand holds an object and we need to reorient the object to the target orientation
 1[rot_dist < 0.1]
 GraspAndPlace (425, 52)
 This class corresponds to the GraspAndPlace task. This environment consists of dual-hands, an
 object and a bucket that requires us to pick up the object and put it into the bucket
 1[|block - bucket| < 0.2]
 BlockStack (428, 52)
 This class corresponds to the Block Stack task. This environment involves dual hands and two
 blocks, and we need to stack the block as a tower
 1[goal_dist_1 < 0.07 and goal_dist_2 < 0.07 and
 50 * (0.05 - z_dist_1) > 1]
 PushBlock (428, 52)
 This class corresponds to the PushBlock task. This environment involves two hands and two
 blocks, we need to use both hands to reach and push the block to the desired goal separately. This
 is a relatively simple task
 1[left_dist <= 0.1 and right_dist <= 0.1] +
 0.5 * 1[left_dist <= 0.1 and right_dist > 0.1]
 TwoCatchUnderarm (446, 52)
 This class corresponds to the TwoCatchUnderarm task. This environment is similar to Catch
 Underarm, but with an object in each hand and the corresponding goal on the other hand. Therefore,
 the environment requires two objects to be thrown into the other hand at the same time, which
 requires a higher manipulation technique than the environment of a single object
 1[goal_dist_1 + goal_dist_2 < 0.06]


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    BASELINE D ETAILS
Language-to-Rewards (L2R) uses an LLM to generate a motion description from a natural language
instruction and a set of reward API calls from the motion description. The reward is computed as
the sum of outputs from the reward API calls. While the LLM automates the process of breaking
down the task into basic low-level instructions, manual effort is still required to specify the motion
description template, low-level reward API, and the API’s function implementations.
All three parts require significant design considerations and can drastically affect L2R’s performance
and capabilities. Unfortunately, this makes comparison difficult since L2R requires manual engineer-
ing whereas Eureka is fully automatic—ambiguity thus arises from how much human-tuning should
be done with L2R’s components. Nonetheless, we seek to provide a fair comparison and base our
implementation off two factors:

• To create our motion description template, we reference L2R’s quadruped and dexterous manipula-
  tor templates. Specifically, our templates consist of statements that set parameters to quantitative
  values and statements that relate two parameters. We also aim to mimic the style of L2R’s template
  statements in general.
• The reward API is designed so that each template statement can be faithfully written in terms
  of an API function. The functions are implemented to resemble their respective human reward
  terms from their environment; thus, L2R is given an advantage in that its components resemble the
  manually-tuned human reward. In a few exceptions where the human reward differs significantly
  from the L2R template style, we base our API implementation on the formulas provided in the L2R
  appendix.

L2R was designed to allow for an agent in a single environment to perform multiple tasks. Thus,
each environment has its own motion description template and reward API. Since our experiments
range over many agents and environments, we have one template and API for each Isaac task, and we
generalize all Dexterity tasks into one environment with all necessary objects.
For illustration, our descriptor and coder prompts for the Dexterity experiments are below.
                                 Prompt 1: Dexterity descriptor prompt
We have two dexterous manipulators (shadow hands) and we want you to help plan how it should
     move to perform tasks using the following template:

[start of description]
object1={CHOICE: <INSERT OBJECTS HERE>} should be {CHOICE: close to, far from} object2={CHOICE
     : <INSERT OBJECTS HERE>, nothing}.
[optional] object3={CHOICE: <INSERT OBJECTS HERE>} should be {CHOICE: close to, far from}
     object4={CHOICE: <INSERT OBJECTS HERE>, nothing}.
[optional] object1 needs to have a rotation orientation similar to object2.
[optional] object3 needs to have a rotation orientation similar to object4.
<INSERT OPTIONAL HAND DESCRIPTIONS HERE>
[optional] doors needs to be {CHOICE: open, closed} {CHOICE: inward, outward}.
[optional] scissor needs to be opened to [NUM: 0.0] radians.
[optional] block2 needs to be stacked on top of block1.
[end of description]

Rules:
1. If you see phrases like [NUM: default_value], replace the entire phrase with a numerical
     value.
2. If you see phrases like {CHOICE: choice1, choice2, ...}, it means you should replace the
     entire
phrase with one of the choices listed.
3. If you see [optional], it means you only add that line if necessary for the task, otherwise
      remove that line.
4. The environment contains <INSERT OBJECTS HERE>. Do not invent new objects not listed here.
5. I will tell you a behavior/skill/task that I want the manipulator to perform and you will
     provide the full plan, even if you may only need to change a few lines. Always start the
     description with [start of plan] and end it with [end of plan].
6. You can assume that the hands are capable of doing anything, even for the most challenging
     task.
7. Your plan should be as close to the provided template as possible. Do not include
     additional details.



                                   Prompt 2: Dexterity coder prompt



                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We have a plan of a robot arm with palm to manipulate objects and we want you to turn that
     into the corresponding program with following functions:

‘‘‘
def set_min_l2_distance_reward(name_obj_A, name_obj_B)
‘‘‘
This term sets a reward for minimizing l2 distance between name_obj_A and name_obj_B so they
     get closer to each other.
name_obj_A and name_obj_B are selected from [<INSERT FIELDS HERE>].

‘‘‘
def set_max_l2_distance_reward(name_obj_A, name_obj_B)
‘‘‘
This term sets a reward for maximizing l2 distance between name_obj_A and name_obj_B so they
     get closer to each other.
name_obj_A and name_obj_B are selected from [<INSERT FIELDS HERE>].

‘‘‘
def set_obj_orientation_reward(name_obj_A, name_obj_B)
‘‘‘
This term encourages the orientation of name_obj_A to be close to the orientation of
     name_obj_B. name_obj_A and name_obj_B are selected from [<INSERT ORIENTATION FIELDS HERE
     >].

Example plan:
object1=object1 should be close to object2=object1_goal.
object1 needs to have a rotation orientation similar to object2.
To perform this task, the left manipulator’s palm should move close to object1.

Example answer code:
‘‘‘
set_min_l2_distance_reward("object1", "object1_goal")
set_min_l2_distance_reward("object1", "left_palm")
set_obj_orientation_reward("object1", "object1_goal")
‘‘‘

Remember:
1. Always format the code in code blocks.
2. Do not wrap your code in a function. Your output should only consist of function calls like
      the example above.
3. Do not invent new functions or classes. The only allowed functions you can call are the
     ones listed above, and do not implement them. Do not leave unimplemented code blocks in
     your response.
4. The only allowed library is numpy. Do not import or use any other library.
5. If you are not sure what value to use, just use your best judge. Do not use None for
     anything.
6. Do not calculate the position or direction of any object (except for the ones provided
     above). Just use a number directly based on your best guess.
7. You do not need to make the robot do extra things not mentioned in the plan such as
     stopping the robot.


For the sections surrounded by angle brackets <>, we specify a list of valid objects for each Dexterity
task. For example, ShadowHandPen’s list of objects is defined as follows:
"shadow_hand_pen": ["left_palm", "right_palm", "left_forefinger", "left_middlefinger", "
     left_ringfinger", "left_littlefinger", "left_thumb", "right_forefinger", "
     right_middlefinger", "right_ringfinger", "right_littlefinger", "right_thumb", "pen_cap",
     "pen"]


A summary of terms and their implementations for each experiment is in Table 3. Note that many
environments automatically randomize their target parameters during training after a reset or success
criteria is met, which L2R cannot account for during the reward generation stage. Thus, while L2R’s
experiments define targets in terms of quantitative values, it’s incompatible with our environments,
and we define targets instead as relations between two parameters (usually the object and the object’s
target).

C.1   L2R R EWARD E XAMPLES

              Example 1: L2R reward function on Humanoid, Human Normalized Score: 0.0
set_torso_height_reward(1.1)
set_torso_velocity_reward(3.6)
set_angle_to_target_reward(0.0)


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Reward Term                                      Formulation
                     Dexterity
                 Minimize distance                                  −∥p1 − p2 ∥2
                 Maximize distance                                   ∥p1 − p2 ∥2
                Minimize orientation                        2 arcsin(min(∥v(q1 q¯2 )∥2 , 1))
                   AllegroHand
                 Minimize distance                                −∥p1 − p2 ∥2
                 Maximize distance                                ∥p1 − p2 ∥2
            Minimize orientation difference          1/(|2 arcsin(min(∥v(q1 q¯2 )∥2 , 1))| + ϵ)
            Maximize orientation difference         −1/(|2 arcsin(min(∥v(q1 q¯2 )∥2 , 1))| + ϵ)
                         Ant
                    Torso height                                     −|h − ht |
                   Torso velocity                                  −|∥vxy ∥2 − vt |
                   Angle to target                                   −|θ − θt |
                      Anymal
                Minimize difference                                exp −(x − xt )2
                    BallBalance
                    Ball position                                1/(1 + ∥p − pt ∥2 )
                    Ball velocity                                1/(1 + ∥v − vt ∥2 )
                      Cartpole
                     Pole angle                                       −(θ − θt )2
                    Pole velocity                                     −|v − vt |
                    Cart velocity                                     −|v − vt |
                  FrankaCabinet
               Minimize hand distance                               −∥p1 − p2 ∥2
               Maximize hand distance                               ∥p1 − p2 ∥2
                 Drawer extension                                    −|p − pt |
                     Humanoid
                    Torso height                                     −|h − ht |
                   Torso velocity                                  −|∥vxy ∥2 − vt |
                   Angle to target                                   −|θ − θt |
                    Quadcopter
                Quadcopter position                              1/(1 + ∥p − pt ∥22 )
                 Upright alignment                                1/(1 + |1 − nz |2 )
                 Positional velocity                             1/(1 + ∥v − vt ∥22 )
                  Angular velocity                               1/(1 + ∥ω − ωt ∥22 )
                   ShadowHand
                 Minimize distance                                −∥p1 − p2 ∥2
                 Maximize distance                                ∥p1 − p2 ∥2
            Minimize orientation difference          1/(|2 arcsin(min(∥v(q1 q¯2 )∥2 , 1))| + ϵ)
            Maximize orientation difference         −1/(|2 arcsin(min(∥v(q1 q¯2 )∥2 , 1))| + ϵ)

Table 3: L2R reward primitives and their implementations. v(q) denotes the vector part of quaternion q, subscript
t denotes target value, and n denotes the normal vector (orientation). All components are weighed equally.



                 Example 2: L2R reward function on ShadowHandKettle, Success Rate: 0.07
set_min_l2_distance_reward("kettle_handle", "bucket_handle")
set_min_l2_distance_reward("kettle_spout", "bucket_handle")
set_min_l2_distance_reward("left_palm", "bucket_handle")
set_min_l2_distance_reward("right_palm", "kettle_handle")



                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


set_min_l2_distance_reward("left_thumb", "bucket_handle")
set_min_l2_distance_reward("right_thumb", "kettle_handle")


D    E UREKA D ETAILS

Environment as Context. In Isaac Gym, the simulator adopts a environment design pattern in
which the environment observation code is typically written inside a compute observations()
function within the environment object class; this applies to all our environments. Therefore, we have
written an automatic script to extract just the observation portion of the environment source code.
This is done largely to reduce our experiment cost as longer context induces higher cost. Furthermore,
given that current LLMs have context length limit, this task agnostic way of trimming the environment
code before feeing it to the context allows us to fit every environment source code into context.

                   Example 1: Humanoid environment observation given to E UREKA.
class Humanoid(VecTask):
    """Rest of the environment definition omitted."""
    def compute_observations(self):
        self.gym.refresh_dof_state_tensor(self.sim)
        self.gym.refresh_actor_root_state_tensor(self.sim)

        self.gym.refresh_force_sensor_tensor(self.sim)
        self.gym.refresh_dof_force_tensor(self.sim)
        self.obs_buf[:], self.potentials[:], self.prev_potentials[:], self.up_vec[:], self.
     heading_vec[:] = compute_humanoid_observations(
            self.obs_buf, self.root_states, self.targets, self.potentials,
            self.inv_start_rot, self.dof_pos, self.dof_vel, self.dof_force_tensor,
            self.dof_limits_lower, self.dof_limits_upper, self.dof_vel_scale,
            self.vec_sensor_tensor, self.actions, self.dt, self.contact_force_scale, self.
     angular_velocity_scale,
            self.basis_vec0, self.basis_vec1)

def compute_humanoid_observations(obs_buf, root_states, targets, potentials, inv_start_rot,
     dof_pos, dof_vel,
                                  dof_force, dof_limits_lower, dof_limits_upper, dof_vel_scale
     ,
                                  sensor_force_torques, actions, dt, contact_force_scale,
     angular_velocity_scale,
                                  basis_vec0, basis_vec1):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor,
     float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float, Tensor, Tensor) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor,
     Tensor, Tensor, Tensor]

    torso_position = root_states[:, 0:3]
    torso_rotation = root_states[:, 3:7]
    velocity = root_states[:, 7:10]
    ang_velocity = root_states[:, 10:13]

    to_target = targets - torso_position
    to_target[:, 2] = 0

    prev_potentials_new = potentials.clone()
    potentials = -torch.norm(to_target, p=2, dim=-1) / dt

    torso_quat, up_proj, heading_proj, up_vec, heading_vec = compute_heading_and_up(
        torso_rotation, inv_start_rot, to_target, basis_vec0, basis_vec1, 2)

    vel_loc, angvel_loc, roll, pitch, yaw, angle_to_target = compute_rot(
        torso_quat, velocity, ang_velocity, targets, torso_position)

    roll = normalize_angle(roll).unsqueeze(-1)
    yaw = normalize_angle(yaw).unsqueeze(-1)
    angle_to_target = normalize_angle(angle_to_target).unsqueeze(-1)
    dof_pos_scaled = unscale(dof_pos, dof_limits_lower, dof_limits_upper)

    obs = torch.cat((torso_position[:, 2].view(-1, 1), vel_loc, angvel_loc *
     angular_velocity_scale,
                     yaw, roll, angle_to_target, up_proj.unsqueeze(-1), heading_proj.unsqueeze
     (-1),
                     dof_pos_scaled, dof_vel * dof_vel_scale, dof_force * contact_force_scale,
                     sensor_force_torques.view(-1, 12) * contact_force_scale, actions), dim
     =-1)

    return obs, potentials, prev_potentials_new, up_vec, heading_vec



                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E UREKA Reward History. Given that LLMs have limited context, we also trim the E UREKA
dialogue such that only the last reward and its reward reflection (in addition to initial system prompt)
is kept in the context for the generation of the next reward. In other word, the reward improvement is
Markovian. This is standard in gradient-free optimization, and we find this simplification to work
well in practice.
E UREKA Reward Evaluation. All intermediate E UREKA reward functions are evaluated using 1
PPO run with the default task parameters. The final E UREKA reward, like all other baseline reward
functions, are evaluated using 5 PPO runs with the average performance on the task fitness function
F as the reward performance.
Human Normalized Score Reporting. Given that there are several significant outliers in human
normalized score when E UREKA is substantially better both Human and Sparse on a task, when
reporting the average normalized improvement in our abstract, we adjust the score so that the
normalized score must lie between [0, 3] per task before computing the average over all 29 tasks.

D.1    P EN S PINNING TASKS

The pen spinning environment builds on the original Shadow Hand environment in Isaac Gym without
any changes to the physics parameters; the cube object in the original task is swapped out with the pen
object, which is an unused asset in the Isaac Gym repository. In both the pre-training and fine-tuning
stages, the task is to reorient a pen to a target 3D pose, which is provided as a goal to the policy. When
the current target pose is deemed achieved (i.e., pose difference lower than certain threshold), then
a new target pose is provided. In the pre-training stage, a random pose from SO(3) 3D orientation
group is sampled uniformly; this mechanism is identical to the original benchmark cube reorientation
task. During the fine-tuning stage, the target poses are a predetermined sequence of waypoints that
specify the pen spinning patterns to be achieved. When the policy reaches the current waypoint, the
target pose will switch to the next waypoint in the sequence. If the policy can consecutively reach all
the waypoints, then it has accomplished one cycle of the pen spinning pattern. The waypoints will
relay continuously, allowing the policy to spin the pen for as many cycles as the policy is capable of
until the episode length is reached.

D.2    E UREKA FROM H UMAN I NITIALIZATION

In our human initialization experiments, we use Eureka to improve human-written reward functions.
This can be done by modifying the first E UREKA iteration to use the human reward in place of the
LLM-generated one, thereby ”assuming” that Eureka’s first proposed reward is the human reward. To
complete this iteration, we use the human reward in IsaacGym, compute feedback, and query the
LLM to generate new reward functions based on the human reward and the reward reflections. Future
iterations are identical to the default E UREKA setting.
To provide the human reward in the first iteration, we refactor the code slightly to be consistent
with the E UREKA reward format, which exposes the individual reward components in a dictionary.
Furthermore, as human reward functions are often written in less interpretable fashion than E UREKA
rewards (see App. G.5 for an example) , we also strip away excess variables and parameters besides
those needed for the actual reward computation.

D.3    E UREKA FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK

In our human reward reflection experiment, we investigate whether humans can provide reward
reflection for desideratum such as “running with natural gait” that may be difficult to express via a
task fitness function. We repeat the E UREKA procedure with the following modifications: (1) We
only sample 1 reward per iteration, and (2) a human textual input will replace the automatically
constructed reward reflection as in the main experiment. To ensure that the human textual input
do not require domain expertise, we have used feedback that is as colloquial as possible; the full
conversation is shown in App. G.4.
After the E UREKA-HF agent is trained, we have asked 20 unfamiliar users to indicate their preferences
between two videos shown in random order, one depicting the E UREKA-HF Humanoid agent and
the other one depicting the original best E UREKA agent. These 20 users are other graduate and


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: E UREKA on Mujoco Humanoid environment. As in Isaac Gym Humanoid, the task fitness function is
the Humanoid’s forward velocity.


                              Task                     E UREKA     Human
                              Mujoco Humanoid           7.68        5.92


undergraduate students that have a wide range of familiarity in reinforcement learning, but are not
involved with this research.

D.4     C OMPUTATION R ESOURCES

All our experiments took place on a single 8 A100 GPU station. Each individual Eureka run took less
than one day of wall clock time on our GPU station. Given that Eureka evaluates at most 16 reward
functions at a time, and each RL run on Isaac Gym takes at most 8GB of GPU memory, Eureka can
be run on 4 V100 GPUs, which is readily accessible on an academic compute budget.


E     E UREKA ON M UJOCO E NVIRONMENTS

To fully test the generality of E UREKA with regard to code syntax and physics simulation, we also
evaluate E UREKA on the OpenAI Gym Humanoid environment (Brockman et al., 2016) implemented
using Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012). We make no changes to the prompts in App. A except the
formatting tip that instructs the LLM to use numpy array instead of pytorch tensor when performing
matrix operations in the generated program. The observation code for E UREKA context is displayed
in Example 1 below. As shown, compared to the observation code for the Isaac Gym Humanoid task
(Example 1 in App. D), this variant conveys the observation information in a very different manner: a
commented block reveals the state and action spaces, and the variables themselves have to be indexed
from a monolithic observation array.
The comparison against the official human-written reward function is in Tab. 4. Despite vastly different
observation space and code syntax, E UREKA remains effective and generates reward functions that
outperform the official human reward function.

              Example 1: Mujoco Humanoid environment observation code given to E UREKA.
class HumanoidEnv(MujocoEnv, utils.EzPickle):
    """Rest of the environment definition omitted."""

      """
      ### Observation Space

      Observations consist of positional values of different body parts of the Humanoid,
       followed by the velocities of those individual parts (their derivatives) with all the
       positions ordered before all the velocities.

      Byy default, the observation is a ‘ndarray‘ with shape ‘(376,)‘ where the elements
       correspond to the following:

      | Num | Observation
                                     | Min | Max | Name (in corresponding XML file) | Joint |
       Unit                       |
      | --- | -------------------------------------------------------------| ---- | --- |
       -------------------------------- | ----- | -------------------------- |
      | 0   | z-coordinate of the torso (centre)
                                     | -Inf | Inf | root                             | free |
       position (m)               |
      | 1   | x-orientation of the torso (centre)
                                     | -Inf | Inf | root                             | free |
       angle (rad)                |
      | 2   | y-orientation of the torso (centre)
                                     | -Inf | Inf | root                             | free |
       angle (rad)                |
      | 3   | z-orientation of the torso (centre)
                                     | -Inf | Inf | root                             | free |
       angle (rad)                |



                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   | 4   | w-orientation of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 5   | z-angle of the abdomen (in lower_waist)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_z                       | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 6   | y-angle of the abdomen (in lower_waist)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_y                       | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 7   | x-angle of the abdomen (in pelvis)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_x                       | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 8   | x-coordinate of angle between pelvis and right hip (in right_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_x                     | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 9   | z-coordinate of angle between pelvis and right hip (in right_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_z                     | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 19 | y-coordinate of angle between pelvis and right hip (in right_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_y                     | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 11 | angle between right hip and the right shin (in right_knee)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_knee                      | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 12 | x-coordinate of angle between pelvis and left hip (in left_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_x                      | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 13 | z-coordinate of angle between pelvis and left hip (in left_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_z                      | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 14 | y-coordinate of angle between pelvis and left hip (in left_thigh)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_y                      | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 15 | angle between left hip and the left shin (in left_knee)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_knee                       | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 16 | coordinate-1 (multi-axis) angle between torso and right arm (in right_upper_arm)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_shoulder1                 | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 17 | coordinate-2 (multi-axis) angle between torso and right arm (in right_upper_arm)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_shoulder2                 | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 18 | angle between right upper arm and right_lower_arm
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_elbow                     | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 19 | coordinate-1 (multi-axis) angle between torso and left arm (in left_upper_arm)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_shoulder1                  | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 20 | coordinate-2 (multi-axis) angle between torso and left arm (in left_upper_arm)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_shoulder2                  | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 21 | angle between left upper arm and left_lower_arm
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_elbow                      | hinge |
    angle (rad)                |
   | 22 | x-coordinate velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    velocity (m/s)             |
   | 23 | y-coordinate velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    velocity (m/s)             |
   | 24 | z-coordinate velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    velocity (m/s)             |
   | 25 | x-coordinate angular velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 26 | y-coordinate angular velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 27 | z-coordinate angular velocity of the torso (centre)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | root                            | free |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 28 | z-coordinate of angular velocity of the abdomen (in lower_waist)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_z                       | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 29 | y-coordinate of angular velocity of the abdomen (in lower_waist)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_y                       | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 30 | x-coordinate of angular velocity of the abdomen (in pelvis)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | abdomen_x                       | hinge |
    aanglular velocity (rad/s) |



                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   | 31 | x-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and right hip (in
     right_thigh)                 | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_x                     | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 32 | z-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and right hip (in
     right_thigh)                 | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_z                     | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 33 | y-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and right hip (in
     right_thigh)                 | -Inf | Inf | right_hip_y                     | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 34 | angular velocity of the angle between right hip and the right shin (in right_knee)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_knee                      | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 35 | x-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and left hip (in
    left_thigh)                   | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_x                      | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 36 | z-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and left hip (in
    left_thigh)                   | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_z                      | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 37 | y-coordinate of the angular velocity of the angle between pelvis and left hip (in
    left_thigh)                   | -Inf | Inf | left_hip_y                      | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 38 | angular velocity of the angle between left hip and the left shin (in left_knee)
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_knee                       | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 39 | coordinate-1 (multi-axis) of the angular velocity of the angle between torso and
    right arm (in right_upper_arm) | -Inf | Inf | right_shoulder1                 | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 40 | coordinate-2 (multi-axis) of the angular velocity of the angle between torso and
    right arm (in right_upper_arm) | -Inf | Inf | right_shoulder2                 | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 41 | angular velocity of the angle between right upper arm and right_lower_arm
                                  | -Inf | Inf | right_elbow                     | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 42 | coordinate-1 (multi-axis) of the angular velocity of the angle between torso and
    left arm (in left_upper_arm)   | -Inf | Inf | left_shoulder1                  | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 43 | coordinate-2 (multi-axis) of the angular velocity of the angle between torso and
    left arm (in left_upper_arm)   | -Inf | Inf | left_shoulder2                  | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |
   | 44 | angular velocitty of the angle between left upper arm and left_lower_arm
                                  | -Inf | Inf | left_elbow                      | hinge |
    anglular velocity (rad/s) |

   Additionally, after all the positional and velocity based values in the table,
   the observation contains (in order):
   - *cinert:* Mass and inertia of a single rigid body relative to the center of mass
   (this is an intermediate result of transition). It has shape 14*10 (*nbody * 10*)
   and hence adds to another 140 elements in the state space.
   - *cvel:* Center of mass based velocity. It has shape 14 * 6 (*nbody * 6*) and hence
   adds another 84 elements in the state space
   - *qfrc_actuator:* Constraint force generated as the actuator force. This has shape
   ‘(23,)‘ *(nv * 1)* and hence adds another 23 elements to the state space.
   - *cfrc_ext:* This is the center of mass based external force on the body. It has shape
   14 * 6 (*nbody * 6*) and hence adds to another 84 elements in the state space.
   where *nbody* stands for the number of bodies in the robot and *nv* stands for the
   number of degrees of freedom (*= dim(qvel)*)

   The (x,y,z) coordinates are translational DOFs while the orientations are rotational
   DOFs expressed as quaternions.

   Note that the obs argument passed to the reward function is a concatenation of obs across
    all environments, so it will have shape (n, 376).
   """

   def _get_obs(self):
       position = self.data.qpos.flat.copy()
       velocity = self.data.qvel.flat.copy()

       com_inertia = self.data.cinert.flat.copy()
       com_velocity = self.data.cvel.flat.copy()

       actuator_forces = self.data.qfrc_actuator.flat.copy()
       external_contact_forces = self.data.cfrc_ext.flat.copy()

       if self._exclude_current_positions_from_observation:
           position = position[2:]

       return np.concatenate(
           (
               position,
               velocity,



                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 com_inertia,
                 com_velocity,
                 actuator_forces,
                 external_contact_forces,
             )
        )


F    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


Reinforcement Learning Training Curves. In Fig. 10, we present the aggregate RL training curves
on the Dexterity benchmark. As shown, E UREKA reward functions enjoy improved sample efficiency
compared to all baseline rewards. We do notice that E UREKA reward functions, on average, exhibits
less smooth trend than the Human reward functions. We hypothesize that this is due to the fact that
the underlying RL algorithm is not tuned for the E UREKA rewards; instead, they are tuned for the
Human reward functions.


Figure 10: E UREKA reward functions enjoy improved sample efficiency compared to various baseline reward
functions on aggregate over 20 Dexterity tasks.
Additional Evaluation Metrics. In Fig. 11, we present holistic evaluation metrics, such as mean,
median, and interquantile mean, as suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021). All metrics and associated
95% confidence intervals are computed over the set of 100 RL runs from 5 RL runs for each method’s
final reward function on all 20 Dexterity tasks. As shown, on all evaluation metrics, E UREKA is
consistently effective and outperforms all baselines.
Furthermore, using the same set of runs, we also compute the probability that E UREKA outperforms
the baselines with 95% confidence intervals. The results are shown in Fig. 12. As shown, our experi-
mental results provide strong evidence that E UREKA’s improvement over baselines are statistically
significant.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: E UREKA reward functions enjoy improved sample efficiency compared to various baseline reward
functions on aggregate over 20 Dexterity tasks.


Figure 12: E UREKA reward functions enjoy improved sample efficiency compared to various baseline reward
functions on aggregate over 20 Dexterity tasks.
Dexterity Performance Breakdown. We present the raw success rates of E UREKA, L2R, Human,
and Sparse in Fig. 13.


Figure 13: E UREKA rewards are less correlated with human rewards when the tasks are more high-dimensional
and less common in the reinforcement learning literature.
Reward Reflection Ablations. In Fig. 14, we provide a detailed per-task breakdown on the impact
of removing reward reflection in the E UREKA feedback. In this ablation, we are interested in the
average human normalized score over independent E UREKA restarts because the average is more
informative than the max (the metric used in all other experiments) in revealing LLM behavior change


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on aggregate. As shown, removing reward reflection generally has a negative impact on the reward
performance. The deterioration is more pronounced for high-dimensional tasks, demonstrating that
reward reflection indeed can provide targeted reward editing that is more instrumental for difficult
tasks that require many state components to interact in the reward functions.


Figure 14: E UREKA rewards are less correlated with human rewards when the tasks are more high-dimensional
and less common in the reinforcement learning literature.
E UREKA with GPT-3.5. In Fig. 15, we compare the performance of E UREKA with GPT-
4 (the original one reported in the paper) and E UREKA with GPT-3.5; specifically, we use
gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 in the OpenAI API. While the absolute performance goes down,
we see that E UREKA (GPT-3.5) still performs comparably and exceeds human-engineered rewards
on the dexterous manipulation tasks. These results suggest that the E UREKA principles are general
and can be also applied to less performant base coding LLMs.


Figure 15: Using GPT3.5 observes performance degradation in E UREKA but still remains comparable to GPT-4
on a majority of the tasks.
Reward Correlation Experiments. To provide a more bird-eye view comparison against human
rewards, we assess the novelty of E UREKA rewards. Given that programs that syntactically differ
may functionally be identical, we propose to evaluate the Pearson correlation between E UREKA
and human rewards on all the Isaac task. These tasks are ideal for this test because many of them
have been widely used in RL research, even if the IsaacGym implementation may not have been
seen in GPT-4 training, so it is possible that E UREKA produces rewards that are merely cosmetically
different. To do this, for a given policy training run using a E UREKA reward, we gather all training
transitions and compute their respectively E UREKA and human reward values, which can then be
used to compute their correlation. Then, we plot the correlation against the human normalized score
on a scatter-plot. The resulting scatter-plot is displayed in Fig. 6. In Fig. 16, we also provide the
average correlation per task. As shown, as the tasks become more high-dimensional and harder to
solve, the correlations exhibit a downward trend. This validates our hypothesis that the harder the
task is, the less optimal the human rewards are, and consequently more room for E UREKA to generate
truly novel and different rewards.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: E UREKA rewards are less correlated with human rewards when the tasks are more high-dimensional
and less common in the reinforcement learning literature.


G      E UREKA R EWARD E XAMPLES

In this section, we provide several unmodified E UREKA reward examples from various experiments
we detailed in the main paper.

G.1     R EWARD R EFLECTION E XAMPLES .

We illustrate E UREKA reward reflection step by displaying the sequence of previous E UREKA reward,
E UREKA reward reflection, and then the subsequent E UREKA reward.

 Example 1: E UREKA Reward Reflection on ShadowHand. Iteration 1 Score: 9.29, Iteration 2 Score: 10.43
Iteration 1: Eureka Output:
‘‘‘python
import torch
from typing import Tuple, Dict

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(object_rot: torch.Tensor, goal_rot: torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor,
     Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:
    rot_diff = torch.abs(torch.sum(object_rot * goal_rot, dim=1) - 1) / 2
    rotation_reward = torch.exp(-20 * rot_diff)

      # Scaling factor for the rotation reward
      rotation_temp = 20.0

      total_reward = rotation_reward

      reward_components = {
          "rotation_reward": rotation_reward
      }

    return total_reward, reward_components
‘‘‘
This reward function computes the difference between the current object rotation and the
     target rotation. It calculates a rotation_reward based on the absolute difference, scaled
      by a temperature parameter (rotation_temp). The total reward is the rotation_reward.

#########################################################################

Iteration 1: Reward Reflection:
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of the
     individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
     success rates and episode lengths after every 300 epochs and the maximum, mean, minimum
     values encountered:
rotation_reward: [’0.03’, ’0.31’, ’0.30’, ’0.32’, ’0.34’, ’0.34’, ’0.34’, ’0.34’, ’0.34’, ’
     0.32’], Max: 0.36, Mean: 0.32, Min: 0.03
success_rate: [’0.00’, ’0.83’, ’1.85’, ’2.89’, ’3.72’, ’4.94’, ’5.99’, ’6.90’, ’7.71’, ’8.83’
     ], Max: 9.29, Mean: 4.81, Min: 0.00
episode_lengths: [’7.07’, ’384.30’, ’378.22’, ’378.06’, ’406.11’, ’415.43’, ’402.64’, ’412.50’
     , ’384.10’, ’434.24’], Max: 482.35, Mean: 396.02, Min: 7.07

Please carefully analyze the policy feedback and provide a new, improved reward function that
     can better solve the task. Some helpful tips for analyzing the policy feedback:
    (1) If the success rates are always near zero, then you must rewrite the entire reward
     function
    (2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this
     means RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written. You may consider
        (a) Changing its scale or the value of its temperature parameter



                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (b) Re-writing the reward component
          (c) Discarding the reward component
      (3) If some reward component magnitude is significantly larger, then you must re-scale its
        value to a proper range

Please analyze each existing reward component in the suggested manner above first, and then
     write the reward function code. The output of the reward function should consist of two
     items:
    (1) the total reward,
    (2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "‘‘‘python ... ‘‘‘".

Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
    (1) You may find it helpful to normalize the reward to a fixed range by applying
     transformations like torch.exp to the overall reward or its components
    (2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
     temperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named
     variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed
     reward component should have its own temperature variable
    (3) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input
     variable should not be specified as torch.Tensor
    (4) Most importantly, the reward code input variables must contain only attributes of the
     provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.). Under
     no circumstance can you introduce new input variables.

...

#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Eureka Output:
Based on the analysis of the policy feedback, the rotation_reward component has minimum,
     maximum, and mean values within a fairly close range and seems stable. The success_rate
     has increased gradually, indicating that the agent is learning to some degree. However,
     the episode_lengths have quite some variance, which could indicate that the agent does
     not consistently perform well during training.

Since the rotation_reward component seems mostly adequate, I would recommend introducing
     another component, such as a penalty for large angular velocities, to reinforce stable
     spinning behavior. Here is a new reward function that incorporates an
     angular_velocity_penalty:

‘‘‘python
import torch
from typing import Tuple, Dict

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(object_rot: torch.Tensor, goal_rot: torch.Tensor, object_angvel: torch.
     Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:
    # Rotation reward
    rot_diff = torch.abs(torch.sum(object_rot * goal_rot, dim=1) - 1) / 2
    rotation_reward = torch.exp(-20 * rot_diff)
    rotation_temp = 20.0

      # Angular velocity penalty
      angvel_norm = torch.norm(object_angvel, dim=1)
      angvel_threshold = 5.0
      angvel_penalty_temp = 10.0
      angular_velocity_penalty = torch.where(angvel_norm > angvel_threshold, torch.exp(-
       angvel_penalty_temp * (angvel_norm - angvel_threshold)), torch.zeros_like(angvel_norm))

      total_reward = rotation_reward - angular_velocity_penalty

      reward_components = {
          "rotation_reward": rotation_reward,
          "angular_velocity_penalty": angular_velocity_penalty
      }

      return total_reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

The new reward function applies a penalty for large angular velocities (larger than the
     angvel_threshold) using a temperature parameter (angvel_penalty_temp) to scale the
     penalty. The total reward now combines the rotation_reward with the
     angular_velocity_penalty.


      Example 2: E UREKA Reward Reflection on Humanoid. Iteration 2 Score: 3.79, Iteration 3 Score: 4.37
Iteration 2: Eureka Output:
Based on the provided feedback, it seems like the ‘track_reward‘ component is not contributing
      to the learning process as all its values are 0. Therefore, I will discard the ‘



                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      track_reward‘ and write a new reward function that emphasizes the ‘velocity_reward‘
      component. I will also add a new component to the reward function to encourage the agent
      to maintain upright posture.

Below is the updated reward function:

‘‘‘python
import torch
from typing import Tuple, Dict

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(root_states: torch.Tensor, dt: float) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict[str,
     torch.Tensor]]:
    # Calculate the forward velocity
    forward_velocity = root_states[:, 7]

      # Reward for forward velocity
      velocity_temperature = 1.0 # You can tune this temperature parameter to adjust how much
       weight the forward velocity gets
      velocity_reward = torch.exp(forward_velocity / velocity_temperature)

      # Calculate the height of the humanoid torso
      torso_height = root_states[:, 2]

      # Reward for maintaining upright posture
      posture_temperature = 1.0 # Tune this temperature parameter to adjust the weight of the
       posture reward component
      posture_reward = torch.exp(torso_height / posture_temperature)

      # Combine rewards
      total_reward = velocity_reward + posture_reward

      reward_components = {’velocity_reward’: velocity_reward, ’posture_reward’: posture_reward}

      return total_reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

I have removed the ‘track_reward‘ component and added a new component, ‘posture_reward‘, to
     encourage the humanoid to maintain an upright posture. The posture reward is computed as
     the exponential of the humanoid’s torso height divided by a temperature parameter. Adjust
      the temperature parameters of both components to fine-tune the model’s learning process.

#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Reward Reflection:
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and track the values of the
     individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
     success rates and episode lengths after every 100 epochs and the maximum, mean, minimum
     values encountered:
velocity_reward: [’1.05’, ’6.33’, ’30.09’, ’66.72’, ’101.08’, ’133.44’, ’148.37’, ’175.90’, ’
     188.68’, ’204.21’], Max: 235.50, Mean: 116.81, Min: 1.05
posture_reward: [’3.26’, ’3.31’, ’3.28’, ’3.27’, ’3.27’, ’3.25’, ’3.28’, ’3.28’, ’3.28’, ’3.27
     ’], Max: 3.33, Mean: 3.27, Min: 3.02
consecutive_successes: [’-0.05’, ’1.18’, ’2.31’, ’2.95’, ’3.20’, ’3.45’, ’3.52’, ’3.61’, ’3.66
     ’, ’3.67’], Max: 3.79, Mean: 2.95, Min: -0.05
episode_lengths: [’31.94’, ’85.50’, ’104.58’, ’123.72’, ’128.38’, ’130.28’, ’135.18’, ’138.20’
     , ’134.81’, ’136.41’], Max: 142.11, Mean: 120.44, Min: 25.89
Please carefully analyze the policy feedback and provide a new, improved reward function that
     can better solve the task. Some helpful tips for analyzing the policy feedback:
    (1) If the success rates are always near zero, then you must rewrite the entire reward
     function
    (2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this
     means RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written. You may consider
        (a) Changing its scale or the value of its temperature parameter
        (b) Re-writing the reward component
        (c) Discarding the reward component
    (3) If some reward component magnitude is significantly larger, then you must re-scale its
      value to a proper range
Please analyze each existing reward component in the suggested manner above first, and then
     write the reward function code. The output of the reward function should consist of two
     items:
    (1) the total reward,
    (2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "‘‘‘python ... ‘‘‘".

Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
    (1) You may find it helpful to normalized the reward to a fixed range by applying
     transformations like torch.exp to the overall reward or its components
    (2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
     temeperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed
       reward component should have its own temperature variable
      (3) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input
       variable should not be specified as torch.Tensor
      (4) most importantly, the reward code input variables must contain only attributes of the
       provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.). Under
       no circumstance can you introduce new input variables.

#########################################################################

Iteration 3: Eureka Output:
Based on the provided feedback, it seems that the ‘posture_reward‘ component has little impact
      on the learning process, as its values are near identical throughout the training. I
     will modify the reward function to better balance the ‘velocity_reward‘ and ‘
     posture_reward‘ components, and also add a new reward component to encourage the agent to
      minimize the energy consumption of its action (i.e., ‘action_energy‘).

Here is the updated reward function:

‘‘‘python
import torch
from typing import Tuple, Dict

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(root_states: torch.Tensor, actions: torch.Tensor, dt: float) -> Tuple[torch
     .Tensor, Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:
    # Calculate the forward velocity
    forward_velocity = root_states[:, 7]

      # Reward for forward velocity
      velocity_temperature = 5.0 # I increased the value from 1.0 to 5.0 to balance the impact
       of the velocity reward.
      velocity_reward = torch.exp(forward_velocity / velocity_temperature)

      # Calculate the height of the humanoid torso
      torso_height = root_states[:, 2]

      # Reward for maintaining upright posture
      posture_temperature = 10.0 # Increased the value from 1.0 to 10.0 to balance the impact
       of the posture reward.
      posture_reward = torch.exp(torso_height / posture_temperature)

      # Reward for minimizing energy consumption in actions
      action_energy = torch.norm(actions, p=2, dim=-1)
      energy_temperature = 5.0
      energy_reward = -torch.exp(action_energy / energy_temperature)    # Subtract this component
       to minimize energy consumption.

      # Combine rewards
      total_reward = velocity_reward + posture_reward + energy_reward

      reward_components = {’velocity_reward’: velocity_reward, ’posture_reward’: posture_reward,
        ’energy_reward’: energy_reward}

      return total_reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

I increased the temperature parameters for both the ‘velocity_reward‘ and ‘posture_reward‘
     components to balance their impact on the learning process. Additionally, I added a new
     reward component, ‘energy_reward‘, to encourage the agent to minimize the energy
     consumption in its actions. Experiment with different temperature parameter values if
     necessary to fine-tune the policy further.



G.2     N EGATIVELY C ORRELATED E UREKA R EWARD E XAMPLES

We display several negatively correlated but superior rewards that E UREKA discovers in our experi-
ments.
            Example 1: Task: ShadowHand, Human Normalized Score: 1.45, Correlation:−0.26
@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(object_rot: torch.Tensor, goal_rot: torch.Tensor, fingertip_pos: torch.
     Tensor, object_pos: torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:
    # Compute the quaternion distance between the object’s current orientation and the goal
     orientation
    q_dist = torch.sum((object_rot * goal_rot), dim=-1)
    q_dist = torch.min(q_dist, 1 - q_dist) # Make sure the q_dist is in the range [0, 1]


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   # Normalize the quaternion distance using a temperature parameter
   temp_rot = 0.5
   rot_reward = torch.exp(-temp_rot * q_dist)

   # Compute the distance between the fingertips and the object center
   fingertips_object_dist = torch.norm(fingertip_pos - object_pos[:, None], dim=-1)

   # Apply a threshold for the distance
   distance_threshold = 0.1
   close_enough = (fingertips_object_dist < distance_threshold).to(torch.float32)

   # Normalize the distance between fingertips and object center using an updated temperature
     parameter
   temp_dist = 10.0
   distance_reward = torch.mean(torch.exp(-temp_dist * fingertips_object_dist * close_enough)
    , dim=-1)

   # Apply a penalty if the agent is not close enough to the object
   distance_penalty = 0.5 * (1 - torch.prod(close_enough, dim=-1))

   # Combine the reward components
   total_reward = rot_reward * distance_reward - distance_penalty

   # Store the reward components in a dictionary
   reward_components = {
       "rot_reward": rot_reward,
       "distance_reward": distance_reward,
       "distance_penalty": distance_penalty,
       "total_reward": total_reward,
   }

   return total_reward, reward_components


         Example 2: Task: FrankaCabinet, Human Normalized Score: 11.98, Correlation:−0.30
@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(franka_grasp_pos: torch.Tensor, drawer_grasp_pos: torch.Tensor,
     cabinet_dof_pos: torch.Tensor,
                   franka_lfinger_pos: torch.Tensor, franka_rfinger_pos: torch.Tensor) ->
     Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:

   # Calculate the distance between the Franka grasping position and the cabinet grasping
    position
   grasp_distance = torch.norm(franka_grasp_pos - drawer_grasp_pos, dim=-1)

   # Calculate the distances between franke_lfinger_pos, franka_rfinger_pos and
    drawer_grasp_pos
   lfinger_distance = torch.norm(franka_lfinger_pos - drawer_grasp_pos, dim=-1)
   rfinger_distance = torch.norm(franka_rfinger_pos - drawer_grasp_pos, dim=-1)

   # Calculate the drawer opening distance
   drawer_opening = cabinet_dof_pos[:, 3]

   # Define temperature parameters for transforming the reward components
   grasp_distance_scaling = torch.tensor(20.0)
   handle_grasping_temperature = torch.tensor(20.0)
   drawer_opening_temperature = torch.tensor(20.0)

   # Transform the reward components
   grasp_distance_reward = 1.0 / (1.0 + grasp_distance_scaling * grasp_distance)
   handle_grasping_reward = torch.exp(-handle_grasping_temperature * (lfinger_distance +
    rfinger_distance))
   drawer_opening_reward = torch.exp(drawer_opening_temperature * drawer_opening)

   # Compute the total reward
   reward = grasp_distance_reward + handle_grasping_reward + drawer_opening_reward

   # Create a dictionary of individual reward components
   reward_components = {
       "grasp_distance_reward": grasp_distance_reward,
       "handle_grasping_reward": handle_grasping_reward,
       "drawer_opening_reward": drawer_opening_reward
   }

   return reward, reward_components


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3     E UREKA FROM H UMAN I NITIALIZATION E XAMPLES

We display several examples of a single step in the E UREKA from Human Initialization setting. In
these examples, the first reward (Iteration 0) is the original human-written task reward, and Iteration 1
is the best reward after one step of E UREKA improvement.


Example 1: E UREKA Human Initialization on Kettle. Human Success Rate: 0.11, E UREKA Success Rate: 0.91
Iteration 1: Human Initialization:
‘‘‘python
import torch

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(
    kettle_handle_pos, bucket_handle_pos, kettle_spout_pos,
    right_hand_ff_pos, right_hand_mf_pos, right_hand_rf_pos, right_hand_lf_pos,
     right_hand_th_pos,
    left_hand_ff_pos, left_hand_mf_pos, left_hand_rf_pos, left_hand_lf_pos, left_hand_th_pos,
):
    right_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
      torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                            + torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
      torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                            + torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim=-1))
    left_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
     torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                            + torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
     torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                            + torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim=-1))

      right_hand_dist_rew = right_hand_finger_dist
      left_hand_dist_rew = left_hand_finger_dist

      up_rew = torch.zeros_like(right_hand_dist_rew)
      up_rew = torch.where(right_hand_finger_dist < 0.7,
                      torch.where(left_hand_finger_dist < 0.7,
                                      0.5 - torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - kettle_spout_pos, p
       =2, dim=-1) * 2, up_rew), up_rew)

      reward = 1 + up_rew - right_hand_dist_rew - left_hand_dist_rew
      reward_components = {
          ’up_reward’: up_rew,
          ’right_hand_dist_reward’: right_hand_dist_rew,
          ’left_hand_dist_reward’: left_hand_dist_rew,
      }

      return reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

#########################################################################

Iteration 1: Reward Reflection:
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of the
     individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
     success rates and episode lengths after every 300 epochs and the maximum, mean, minimum
     values encountered:
up_reward: [’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.02’, ’-0.01’, ’0.04’, ’-0.02’, ’0.03’, ’-0.01’, ’0.02’, ’0.04’
     ], Max: 0.12, Mean: 0.03, Min: -0.06
right_hand_dist_reward: [’0.93’, ’0.34’, ’0.40’, ’0.38’, ’0.36’, ’0.44’, ’0.43’, ’0.42’, ’0.38
     ’, ’0.42’], Max: 0.96, Mean: 0.41, Min: 0.27
left_hand_dist_reward: [’1.47’, ’0.87’, ’0.69’, ’0.89’, ’0.83’, ’0.81’, ’0.83’, ’1.02’, ’0.84’
     , ’0.85’], Max: 3.57, Mean: 0.88, Min: 0.39
consecutive_successes: [’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’
     , ’0.00’], Max: 0.01, Mean: 0.00, Min: 0.00
episode_lengths: [’125.00’, ’122.45’, ’123.92’, ’124.24’, ’124.22’, ’124.83’, ’124.86’, ’
     124.42’, ’124.89’, ’124.18’], Max: 125.00, Mean: 123.81, Min: 111.56
Please carefully analyze the policy feedback and provide a new, improved reward function that
     can better solve the task. Some helpful tips for analyzing the policy feedback:
    (1) If the success rates are always near zero, then you must rewrite the entire reward
     function
    (2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this
     means RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written. You may consider
        (a) Changing its scale or the value of its temperature parameter
        (b) Re-writing the reward component
        (c) Discarding the reward component
    (3) If some reward component magnitude is significantly larger, then you must re-scale its
      value to a proper range



                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Please analyze each existing reward component in the suggested manner above first, and then
     write the reward function code. The output of the reward function should consist of two
     items:
    (1) the total reward,
    (2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "‘‘‘python ... ‘‘‘".

Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
    (1) You may find it helpful to normalize the reward to a fixed range by applying
     transformations like torch.exp to the overall reward or its components
    (2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
     temperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named
     variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed
     reward component should have its own temperature variable
    (3) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input
     variable should not be specified as torch.Tensor
    (4) Most importantly, the reward code input variables must contain only attributes of the
     provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.). Under
     no circumstance can you introduce new input variables.

#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Eureka Output:
From the feedback data you provided, it is evident that up_reward has a rather small value and
      success rate is always near zero. We can try some modifications to improve the reward
     function. First, we can update the distance rewards by adjusting their scale and applying
      an exponential transformation with an associated temperature. This will make their
     values range between 0 and 1. We will also slightly adjust the up_reward to get more
     value when the kettle and bucket are closer. Finally, we will add some weights to the
     reward components to balance their contribution to the total reward.

Here is the updated reward function:

‘‘‘python
import torch

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(
    kettle_handle_pos, bucket_handle_pos, kettle_spout_pos,
    right_hand_ff_pos, right_hand_mf_pos, right_hand_rf_pos, right_hand_lf_pos,
     right_hand_th_pos,
    left_hand_ff_pos, left_hand_mf_pos, left_hand_rf_pos, left_hand_lf_pos, left_hand_th_pos,
):
    dist_temp = torch.tensor(0.1)

      right_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
        torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                              + torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
        torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                              + torch.norm(kettle_handle_pos - right_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim=-1))
      left_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
       torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                              + torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim=-1) +
       torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                              + torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - left_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim=-1))

      right_hand_dist_rew = 1 - torch.exp(-dist_temp * right_hand_finger_dist)
      left_hand_dist_rew = 1 - torch.exp(-dist_temp * left_hand_finger_dist)

      up_rew = torch.zeros_like(right_hand_dist_rew)
      up_rew = torch.where(right_hand_finger_dist < 0.7,
                      torch.where(left_hand_finger_dist < 0.7,
                                      1 - torch.norm(bucket_handle_pos - kettle_spout_pos, p=2,
       dim=-1) * 2, up_rew), up_rew)

      reward = 5 * up_rew - 3 * right_hand_dist_rew - 2 * left_hand_dist_rew
      reward_components = {
          ’up_reward’: up_rew,
          ’right_hand_dist_reward’: right_hand_dist_rew,
          ’left_hand_dist_reward’: left_hand_dist_rew,
      }

      return reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

Please test this updated reward function and provide new policy feedback data for further
     analysis if needed.


                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Example 2: E UREKA Human Initialization on CatchUnderarm. Human Success Rate: 0.33, E UREKA Success
Rate: 0.64
Iteration 1: Human Initialization:
‘‘‘python
import torch
from isaacgym.torch_utils import quat_mul, quat_conjugate

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(
    object_pos, object_rot, goal_pos, goal_rot,
):

      goal_dist = torch.norm(goal_pos - object_pos, p=2, dim=-1)

      quat_diff = quat_mul(object_rot, quat_conjugate(goal_rot))
      rot_dist = 2.0 * torch.asin(torch.clamp(torch.norm(quat_diff[:, 0:3], p=2, dim=-1), max
       =1.0))

      dist_rew = goal_dist
      reward = torch.exp(-0.2*(dist_rew * 50 + rot_dist))
      reward_components = {
          "dist_reward": dist_rew,
          "rot_reward": rot_dist,
      }


      return reward, reward_components
‘‘‘

#########################################################################

Iteration 1: Reward Reflection:
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of the
     individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
     success rates and episode lengths after every 300 epochs and the maximum, mean, minimum
     values encountered:
dist_reward: [’0.41’, ’0.34’, ’0.34’, ’0.29’, ’0.26’, ’0.25’, ’0.23’, ’0.21’, ’0.21’, ’0.21’],
      Max: 0.42, Mean: 0.26, Min: 0.19
rot_reward: [’2.21’, ’2.21’, ’2.19’, ’2.22’, ’2.20’, ’2.21’, ’2.22’, ’2.21’, ’2.20’, ’2.20’],
     Max: 2.27, Mean: 2.21, Min: 2.16
consecutive_successes: [’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.00’, ’0.04’, ’0.14’, ’0.25’, ’0.17’, ’0.14’
     , ’0.03’], Max: 0.33, Mean: 0.08, Min: 0.00
episode_lengths: [’28.00’, ’59.83’, ’56.22’, ’51.10’, ’56.34’, ’57.48’, ’61.40’, ’64.13’, ’
     66.47’, ’67.11’], Max: 75.00, Mean: 60.98, Min: 28.00
Please carefully analyze the policy feedback and provide a new, improved reward function that
     can better solve the task. Some helpful tips for analyzing the policy feedback:
    (1) If the success rates are always near zero, then you must rewrite the entire reward
     function
    (2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this
     means RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written. You may consider
        (a) Changing its scale or the value of its temperature parameter
        (b) Re-writing the reward component
        (c) Discarding the reward component
    (3) If some reward component magnitude is significantly larger, then you must re-scale its
      value to a proper range
Please analyze each existing reward component in the suggested manner above first, and then
     write the reward function code. The output of the reward function should consist of two
     items:
    (1) the total reward,
    (2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "‘‘‘python ... ‘‘‘".

Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
    (1) You may find it helpful to normalize the reward to a fixed range by applying
     transformations like torch.exp to the overall reward or its components
    (2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
     temperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named
     variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed
     reward component should have its own temperature variable
    (3) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input
     variable should not be specified as torch.Tensor
    (4) Most importantly, the reward code input variables must contain only attributes of the
     provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.). Under
     no circumstance can you introduce new input variables.

#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Eureka Output:
Based on the policy feedback, we can observe that the success rates and episode lengths are
     improving over time. However, the values for ‘rot_reward‘ are near identical throughout



                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      policy learning, which means the RL agent is not able to optimize the current rotation
      reward component. We can change the scale/temperature parameter of the rotation reward
      and try to make it more sensitive to the changes in rotation. We will keep the distance
      reward component as it is because it seems to be optimized during training.

Here is an updated reward function for the given task:

‘‘‘python
import torch
from isaacgym.torch_utils import quat_mul, quat_conjugate

@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(
    object_pos: torch.Tensor, object_rot: torch.Tensor,
    goal_pos: torch.Tensor, goal_rot: torch.Tensor
) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict[str, torch.Tensor]]:

      goal_dist = torch.norm(goal_pos - object_pos, p=2, dim=-1)

      quat_diff = quat_mul(object_rot, quat_conjugate(goal_rot))
      rot_dist = 2.0 * torch.asin(torch.clamp(torch.norm(quat_diff[:, 0:3], p=2, dim=-1), max
       =1.0))

      dist_rew = goal_dist
      rot_rew_temp = 0.1
      rot_rew = torch.exp(-rot_rew_temp * rot_dist)

      reward = torch.exp(-0.25 * dist_rew * 50) * rot_rew

      reward_components = {
          "dist_reward": dist_rew,
          "rot_reward": rot_dist,
      }

    return reward, reward_components
‘‘‘
The new reward function changes the scale of the rotation reward component by introducing a
     temperature parameter ‘rot_rew_temp‘ and applying a transformation using ‘torch.exp‘.
     This should help the RL agent better optimize the rotation reward component during policy
      learning.



G.4     E UREKA FROM H UMAN R EWARD R EFLECTION

We display the raw dialogue that includes all human reward reflection texts as well as the generated
E UREKA rewards in our E UREKA from human reward reflection experiment.
                          Example 1: E UREKA from Human Reward Reflection
#########################################################################

Iteration 1: Eureka Output:

The task is to make the humanoid run as fast as possible.
Therefore, the reward function should encourage forward movement.
This can be achieved by rewarding the agent based on the velocity in the forward direction.
We can also penalize the agent for using too much energy, as this would encourage efficient
     movement.

Here is a possible reward function:

‘‘‘python
def compute_humanoid_reward(obs_buf, reset_buf, progress_buf, actions, up_weight,
     heading_weight, potentials, prev_potentials, actions_cost_scale, energy_cost_scale,
     joints_at_limit_cost_scale, max_motor_effort, motor_efforts, termination_height,
     death_cost, max_episode_length):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float
     , float, Tensor, float, float, float) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor]

      # Reward is based on forward velocity
      reward = obs_buf[:, 1]

      # Penalize energy usage
      energy_cost = energy_cost_scale * torch.sum(actions**2, dim=-1)
      reward -= energy_cost

      # Penalize joints at limit
      joints_at_limit_cost = joints_at_limit_cost_scale * torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:32] > 0.99,
       dim=-1)



                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      reward -= joints_at_limit_cost

      # Penalize for falling
      not_upright = torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10]) > 0.25
      reward = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reward) * death_cost, reward)

      # Reset if fallen
      reset = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
      reset = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length - 1, torch.ones_like(reset_buf),
       reset)

      return reward, reset
‘‘‘

This reward function encourages the agent to move forward as fast as possible, while also
     encouraging efficient movement and penalizing the agent for falling or reaching joint
     limits.

#########################################################################

Iteration 1: Human Reward Reflection:
The learned behavior resembles forward squat jump;
please revise the reward function so that the behavior resembles forward running.

#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Eureka Output:
 To encourage a running behavior, we can modify the reward function to reward the agent for
     alternating leg movements and penalize for jumping (both feet off the ground).
  We can also reward the agent for maintaining a relatively upright torso to resemble a
     running posture.

Here is a revised reward function:

‘‘‘python
def compute_humanoid_reward(obs_buf, reset_buf, progress_buf, actions, up_weight,
     heading_weight, potentials, prev_potentials, actions_cost_scale, energy_cost_scale,
     joints_at_limit_cost_scale, max_motor_effort, motor_efforts, termination_height,
     death_cost, max_episode_length):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float
     , float, Tensor, float, float, float) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor]

      # Reward is based on forward velocity
      reward = obs_buf[:, 1]

      # Penalize energy usage
      energy_cost = energy_cost_scale * torch.sum(actions**2, dim=-1)
      reward -= energy_cost

      # Penalize joints at limit
      joints_at_limit_cost = joints_at_limit_cost_scale * torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:32] > 0.99,
       dim=-1)
      reward -= joints_at_limit_cost

      # Reward for alternating leg movements
      leg_difference = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 12] - obs_buf[:, 13])
      reward += leg_difference

      # Penalize for jumping (both feet off the ground)
      feet_off_ground = torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 54:56] == 0)
      reward -= feet_off_ground

      # Reward for maintaining an upright torso
      upright_torso = 1 - torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10])
      reward += upright_torso

      # Penalize for falling
      not_upright = torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10]) > 0.25
      reward = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reward) * death_cost, reward)

      # Reset if fallen
      reset = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
      reset = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length - 1, torch.ones_like(reset_buf),
       reset)

      return reward, reset
‘‘‘

This reward function encourages the agent to move forward as fast as possible, while also
     encouraging efficient movement, alternating leg movements, maintaining an upright torso,
     and penalizing the agent for jumping or reaching joint limits.



                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


#########################################################################

Iteration 2: Human Reward Reflection:
The learned behavior now looks like duck walk;
the legs are indeed alternating but the torso is very low.
Could you improve the reward function for upright running?

#########################################################################

Iteration 3: Eureka Output:
To encourage a more upright running posture,
  we can increase the reward for maintaining an upright torso and penalize the agent more
     heavily for having a low torso position.
   We can also add a reward for maintaining a certain height,
   which would discourage the "duck walk" behavior.

Here is a revised reward function:

‘‘‘python
def compute_humanoid_reward(obs_buf, reset_buf, progress_buf, actions, up_weight,
     heading_weight, potentials, prev_potentials, actions_cost_scale, energy_cost_scale,
     joints_at_limit_cost_scale, max_motor_effort, motor_efforts, termination_height,
     death_cost, max_episode_length):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float
     , float, Tensor, float, float, float) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor]

      # Reward is based on forward velocity
      reward = obs_buf[:, 1]

      # Penalize energy usage
      energy_cost = energy_cost_scale * torch.sum(actions**2, dim=-1)
      reward -= energy_cost

      # Penalize joints at limit
      joints_at_limit_cost = joints_at_limit_cost_scale * torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:32] > 0.99,
       dim=-1)
      reward -= joints_at_limit_cost

      # Reward for alternating leg movements
      leg_difference = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 12] - obs_buf[:, 13])
      reward += leg_difference

      # Penalize for jumping (both feet off the ground)
      feet_off_ground = torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 54:56] == 0)
      reward -= feet_off_ground

      # Reward for maintaining an upright torso
      upright_torso = 1 - torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10])
      reward += 2 * upright_torso # Increase reward for upright torso

      # Penalize for low torso position
      low_torso = obs_buf[:, 0] < 1.0
      reward = torch.where(low_torso, torch.ones_like(reward) * -1.0, reward)

      # Reward for maintaining a certain height
      height_reward = obs_buf[:, 0]
      reward += height_reward

      # Penalize for falling
      not_upright = torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10]) > 0.25
      reward = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reward) * death_cost, reward)

      # Reset if fallen
      reset = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
      reset = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length - 1, torch.ones_like(reset_buf),
       reset)

      return reward, reset
‘‘‘

This reward function encourages the agent to move forward as fast as possible, while also
     encouraging efficient movement, alternating leg movements, maintaining an upright torso,
     maintaining a certain height, and penalizing the agent for jumping, having a low torso
     position, or reaching joint limits.

#########################################################################

Iteration 3: Human Reward Reflection:
The learned behavior has the robot hopping on one of its foot in order to move forward.
 Please revise the reward function to encourage upright running behavior.



                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


#########################################################################

Iteration 4: Eureka Output:
 To discourage hopping and encourage a more balanced running behavior,
  we can add a penalty for not using both legs equally.
   We can also increase the reward for maintaining an upright torso and add a penalty for high
      angular velocity,
    which would discourage spinning or hopping.

Here is a revised reward function:

‘‘‘python
def compute_humanoid_reward(obs_buf, reset_buf, progress_buf, actions, up_weight,
     heading_weight, potentials, prev_potentials, actions_cost_scale, energy_cost_scale,
     joints_at_limit_cost_scale, max_motor_effort, motor_efforts, termination_height,
     death_cost, max_episode_length):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float
     , float, Tensor, float, float, float) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor]

      # Reward is based on forward velocity
      reward = obs_buf[:, 1]

      # Penalize energy usage
      energy_cost = energy_cost_scale * torch.sum(actions**2, dim=-1)
      reward -= energy_cost

      # Penalize joints at limit
      joints_at_limit_cost = joints_at_limit_cost_scale * torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:32] > 0.99,
       dim=-1)
      reward -= joints_at_limit_cost

      # Reward for alternating leg movements
      leg_difference = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 12] - obs_buf[:, 13])
      reward += leg_difference

      # Penalize for not using both legs equally
      leg_usage_difference = torch.abs(torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:14], dim=-1) - 1.0)
      reward -= leg_usage_difference

      # Penalize for jumping (both feet off the ground)
      feet_off_ground = torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 54:56] == 0)
      reward -= feet_off_ground

      # Reward for maintaining an upright torso
      upright_torso = 1 - torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10])
      reward += 2 * upright_torso # Increase reward for upright torso

      # Penalize for high angular velocity
      high_ang_velocity = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 4:7]).sum(dim=-1) > 1.0
      reward = torch.where(high_ang_velocity, torch.ones_like(reward) * -1.0, reward)

      # Penalize for falling
      not_upright = torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10]) > 0.25
      reward = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reward) * death_cost, reward)

      # Reset if fallen
      reset = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
      reset = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length - 1, torch.ones_like(reset_buf),
       reset)

      return reward, reset
‘‘‘

This reward function encourages the agent to move forward as fast as possible, while also
     encouraging efficient movement, alternating leg movements, maintaining an upright torso,
     and penalizing the agent for jumping, not using both legs equally, having high angular
     velocity, or reaching joint limits.

#########################################################################

Iteration 4: Human Reward Reflection:
This reward function removed the penalty for low torse position that you added last time;
     could you just add it back in?

#########################################################################

Iteration 5: Eureka Output:
 Sure, I apologize for the oversight. We can add back the penalty for low torso position to
     discourage the "duck walk" behavior. Here is the revised reward function:


                                                41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


‘‘‘python
def compute_humanoid_reward(obs_buf, reset_buf, progress_buf, actions, up_weight,
     heading_weight, potentials, prev_potentials, actions_cost_scale, energy_cost_scale,
     joints_at_limit_cost_scale, max_motor_effort, motor_efforts, termination_height,
     death_cost, max_episode_length):
    # type: (Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, Tensor, Tensor, float, float, float
     , float, Tensor, float, float, float) -> Tuple[Tensor, Tensor]

      # Reward is based on forward velocity
      reward = obs_buf[:, 1]

      # Penalize energy usage
      energy_cost = energy_cost_scale * torch.sum(actions**2, dim=-1)
      reward -= energy_cost

      # Penalize joints at limit
      joints_at_limit_cost = joints_at_limit_cost_scale * torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:32] > 0.99,
       dim=-1)
      reward -= joints_at_limit_cost

      # Reward for alternating leg movements
      leg_difference = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 12] - obs_buf[:, 13])
      reward += leg_difference

      # Penalize for not using both legs equally
      leg_usage_difference = torch.abs(torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 12:14], dim=-1) - 1.0)
      reward -= leg_usage_difference

      # Penalize for jumping (both feet off the ground)
      feet_off_ground = torch.sum(obs_buf[:, 54:56] == 0)
      reward -= feet_off_ground

      # Reward for maintaining an upright torso
      upright_torso = 1 - torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10])
      reward += 2 * upright_torso # Increase reward for upright torso

      # Penalize for low torso position
      low_torso = obs_buf[:, 0] < 1.0
      reward = torch.where(low_torso, torch.ones_like(reward) * -1.0, reward)

      # Penalize for high angular velocity
      high_ang_velocity = torch.abs(obs_buf[:, 4:7]).sum(dim=-1) > 1.0
      reward = torch.where(high_ang_velocity, torch.ones_like(reward) * -1.0, reward)

      # Penalize for falling
      not_upright = torch.abs(1 - obs_buf[:, 10]) > 0.25
      reward = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reward) * death_cost, reward)

      # Reset if fallen
      reset = torch.where(not_upright, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
      reset = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length - 1, torch.ones_like(reset_buf),
       reset)

      return reward, reset
‘‘‘

This reward function encourages the agent to move forward as fast as possible, while also
     encouraging efficient movement, alternating leg movements, maintaining an upright torso,
     and penalizing the agent for jumping, not using both legs equally, having a low torso
     position, having high angular velocity, or reaching joint limits.



G.5     E UREKA AND H UMAN R EWARD C OMPARISON

We display the human reward on a Dexterity task verbatim and contrast it with a E UREKA-generated
reward on the same task. As shown, the human reward is difficult to parse and has many commented-
out blocks of reward components, suggesting history of trial-and-error reward design. In contrast,
E UREKA reward is clean and interpretable, amenable to post-hoc human inspection and editing.

                               Example 1: Human reward for PushBlock
@torch.jit.script
def compute_hand_reward(
    rew_buf, reset_buf, reset_goal_buf, progress_buf, successes, consecutive_successes,
    max_episode_length: float, object_pos, object_rot, left_target_pos, left_target_rot,
     right_target_pos, right_target_rot, block_right_handle_pos, block_left_handle_pos,
    left_hand_pos, right_hand_pos, right_hand_ff_pos, right_hand_mf_pos, right_hand_rf_pos,
     right_hand_lf_pos, right_hand_th_pos,



                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     left_hand_ff_pos, left_hand_mf_pos, left_hand_rf_pos, left_hand_lf_pos, left_hand_th_pos,
     dist_reward_scale: float, rot_reward_scale: float, rot_eps: float,
     actions, action_penalty_scale: float,
     success_tolerance: float, reach_goal_bonus: float, fall_dist: float,
     fall_penalty: float, max_consecutive_successes: int, av_factor: float, ignore_z_rot: bool
):
     # Distance from the hand to the object
     left_goal_dist = torch.norm(left_target_pos - block_left_handle_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
     right_goal_dist = torch.norm(right_target_pos - block_right_handle_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
     # goal_dist = target_pos[:, 2] - object_pos[:, 2]

     right_hand_dist = torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
     left_hand_dist = torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_pos, p=2, dim=-1)

     right_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim
      =-1) + torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                             + torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim
      =-1) + torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                             + torch.norm(block_right_handle_pos - right_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim
      =-1))
     left_hand_finger_dist = (torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_ff_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
       + torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_mf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                             + torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_rf_pos, p=2, dim
      =-1) + torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_lf_pos, p=2, dim=-1)
                             + torch.norm(block_left_handle_pos - left_hand_th_pos, p=2, dim
      =-1))
     # Orientation alignment for the cube in hand and goal cube
     # quat_diff = quat_mul(object_rot, quat_conjugate(target_rot))
     # rot_dist = 2.0 * torch.asin(torch.clamp(torch.norm(quat_diff[:, 0:3], p=2, dim=-1), max
      =1.0))

     right_hand_dist_rew = 1.2-1*right_hand_finger_dist
     left_hand_dist_rew = 1.2-1*left_hand_finger_dist

     # rot_rew = 1.0/(torch.abs(rot_dist) + rot_eps) * rot_reward_scale

     action_penalty = torch.sum(actions ** 2, dim=-1)

     # Total reward is: position distance + orientation alignment + action regularization +
      success bonus + fall penalty
     # reward = torch.exp(-0.05*(up_rew * dist_reward_scale)) + torch.exp(-0.05*(
      right_hand_dist_rew * dist_reward_scale)) + torch.exp(-0.05*(left_hand_dist_rew *
      dist_reward_scale))
     up_rew = torch.zeros_like(right_hand_dist_rew)
     up_rew = 5 - 5*left_goal_dist - 5*right_goal_dist

     # reward = torch.exp(-0.1*(right_hand_dist_rew * dist_reward_scale)) + torch.exp(-0.1*(
      left_hand_dist_rew * dist_reward_scale))
     reward = right_hand_dist_rew + left_hand_dist_rew + up_rew

     resets = torch.where(right_hand_finger_dist >= 1.2, torch.ones_like(reset_buf), reset_buf)
     resets = torch.where(left_hand_finger_dist >= 1.2, torch.ones_like(resets), resets)

     # Find out which envs hit the goal and update successes count
     successes = torch.where(successes == 0,
                     torch.where(torch.abs(left_goal_dist) <= 0.1,
                         torch.where(torch.abs(right_goal_dist) <= 0.1, torch.ones_like(
      successes), torch.ones_like(successes) * 0.5), successes), successes)

     resets = torch.where(progress_buf >= max_episode_length, torch.ones_like(resets), resets)

     goal_resets = torch.zeros_like(resets)

     num_resets = torch.sum(resets)
     finished_cons_successes = torch.sum(successes * resets.float())

     cons_successes = torch.where(resets > 0, successes * resets, consecutive_successes).mean()
     # reward = successes

     return reward, resets, goal_resets, progress_buf, successes, cons_successes


                              Example 2: Eureka reward for PushBlock
@torch.jit.script
def compute_reward(object_pos: Tensor,
                   left_hand_pos: Tensor,
                   right_hand_pos: Tensor,
                   left_goal_pos: Tensor,
                   right_goal_pos: Tensor) -> Tuple[Tensor, Dict[str, Tensor]]:


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    # Temperature parameters for reward components
    temp_left_proximity: float = 0.5
    temp_right_proximity: float = 0.5
    temp_hand_distance: float = 0.1

    # Proximity reward for pushing the block to the left goal
    left_push_distance = torch.norm(object_pos - left_goal_pos, dim=1)
    left_proximity_reward = torch.exp(-temp_left_proximity * left_push_distance)

    # Proximity reward for pushing the block to the right goal
    right_push_distance = torch.norm(object_pos - right_goal_pos, dim=1)
    right_proximity_reward = torch.exp(-temp_right_proximity * right_push_distance)

    # Proximity rewards for the hands to be close to the block for better control
    left_hand_to_block = torch.norm(object_pos - left_hand_pos, dim=1)
    left_hand_reward = torch.exp(-temp_hand_distance * left_hand_to_block)

    right_hand_to_block = torch.norm(object_pos - right_hand_pos, dim=1)
    right_hand_reward = torch.exp(-temp_hand_distance * right_hand_to_block)

    # Final reward as a weighted sum of individual reward components
    reward = 0.25 * (left_proximity_reward + right_proximity_reward) + 0.25 * (
     left_hand_reward + right_hand_reward)

    reward_components = {
        "left_proximity_reward": left_proximity_reward,
        "right_proximity_reward": right_proximity_reward,
        "left_hand_reward": left_hand_reward,
        "right_hand_reward": right_hand_reward,
    }

    return reward, reward_components


H    L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss several limitations and discuss promising future work directions to address
these limitations.
One limitation is that E UREKA currently is evaluated on simulation-based tasks with the exception of
the preliminary real-robot experiment in App. F, which demonstrates real-world hopping behavior
learned via E UREKA reward in a Sim2Real pipeline. There are two promising directions in extending
E UREKA to the real-robot setting. First, as demonstrated in App. F, E UREKA can be combined with
Sim2Real approaches to first learn a policy in simulation and then transfer to the real-world (Akkaya
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2021); this is a well-established approach in the robotics community. Isaac
Gym, in particular, has been used in many Sim2Real results (Margolis et al., 2022; Handa et al.,
2023). Therefore, we believe Eureka’s strong simulation results on various Isaac Gym tasks bodes
well for real-world transfer. Another approach is to instrument the real-world environments with
sensors that can detect state measurements and then directly generate reward functions over these
state variables, thereby enabling direct real-world reinforcement learning (Gu et al., 2017; Smith
et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023). For either direction, progress in Sim2Real and state estimation will
enhance the applicability of E UREKA to the real-world setting.
Another limitation is that E UREKA requires a task fitness function F to exist and easily definable by
humans. While this assumption holds for a wide range of robot tasks (including all our benchmark
tasks) and is required for reward design problem to be well-defined (Definition 2.1), there are certain
behavior that is hard to specify mathematically, such as “running in a stable gait”. In those cases,
we have presented E UREKA from Human Feedback (Section 4.4) that uses human textual feedback
to directly steer the reward generation, sidestepping having to specify F that accurately captures
the human intent. A promising future work direction is to use vision-language models (VLMs) to
automatically provide textual feedback by feeding the policy videos into the VLMs (Liu et al., 2023b;
Zhu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023).
Finally, our experiments currently take place on a single simulator and a fixed RL algorithm, with
the exception of the Mujoco Humanoid experiment in App. E. Given that E UREKA does not take the
identity of the simulation engine or RL algorithm as input, we believe that it should be straightforward
to extend E UREKA to custom simulators and optimizers. With regard to latter, it would be interesting


                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to explore using model-predictive control methods (Williams et al., 2015; Howell et al., 2022), which
can potentially lead to faster behavior synthesis in terms of wall clock time.


                                                 45
