Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A NO R AND :   D EEP L EARNING -BASED S EMI -
S UPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION WITH S YN -
THETIC L ABELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Anomaly detection, or more generally outlier detection, is one of the most popu-
         lar and challenging topics in theoretical and applied machine learning. The main
         challenge is that in general we have access to very few labeled data or no labels
         at all. In this paper, we present a new semi-supervised anomaly detection method
         called AnoRand by combining a deep learning architecture with random synthetic
         label generation. The proposed architecture has two building blocks: (1) a noise
         detection (ND) block composed of feed forward perceptron and (2) an autoen-
         coder (AE) block. The main idea of this new architecture is to learn one class
         (e.g. the majority class in case of anomaly detection) as well as possible by taking
         advantage of the ability of auto encoders to represent data in a latent space and
         the ability of Feed Forward Perceptron (FFP) to learn one class when the data is
         highly imbalanced. First, we create synthetic anomalies by randomly disturbing
         a few samples (e.g., 2%) from the training set. Second, we use the normal and
         synthetic samples as input to our model. We compared the performance of the
         proposed method to 17 state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection method
         on synthetic datasets and 57 real-world datasets. Our results show that this new
         method generally outperforms most of the state-of-the-art methods and has the
         best performance (AUC ROC and AUC PR) on the vast majority of reference
         datasets.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Anomaly detection is one of the most exciting and challenging subject in theoretical and applied
machine learning. nowadays, deep learning methods are increasingly used for anomaly detection.
One of the main challenges in anomaly detection or more generally outlier detection is that you
don’t have enough samples labeled as anomalous. In this situation, most of the classical machine
learning methods fail to learn the minority (anomaly) class, which is most of the time the class of in-
terest. Furthermore, label accuracy can be problematic, with some anomalies mislabeled as normal
and vice versa. Unsupervised methods have gained traction because they don’t require labeled data.
They model the normal sample distribution and detect anomalies by identifying outliers. However,
unsupervised methods have limitations; they assume anomalies are in low-density regions, relying
on these assumptions for performance. Moreover, it has been shown Collin & De Vleeschouwer
(2021); You et al. (2022) that the reconstruction-based anomaly detection method such as auto en-
coders leads to a high number of false alarms.
To detect anomalies and outliers in a semi-supervised way, we propose a method that combines a
deep auto encoder and feed forward perceptrons (FFP). This new method that we call AnoRand,
jointly optimizes the deep autoencoder and the FFP model in an end-to-end neural network fashion.
AnoRand has two building blocks: a Feed Forward Perceptron block and an autoencoder block.
The inspiration for this method comes from two ideas: (i) Anomaly detection problem can be cast
as a supervised learning between normal samples and noise Steinwart et al. (2005); (ii) Supervised
algorithms tend to learn only the majority class in presence of highly imbalance data Anand et al.
(1993). The main objective of thi new method is to learn one class (e.g. the majority class in
case of anomaly detection) as well as possible by taking advantage of the ability of auto encoders
to represent data in a latent space and the ability of Feed Forward Perceptron (FFP) to learn one


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


class when the data is highly imbalanced. In our method, the FFP block has a role in informing and
strengthening the capacity of the auto-encoder block to embed the normal samples. We compared the
performance of the proposed method to 17 state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection method
on synthetic data sets and 57 real-world data sets from the ADBench benchmark paper Han et al.
(2022). Our results show that this new method generally outperforms most of the state-of-the-art
methods and has the best performance (AUC ROC and AUC PR) on the vast majority of reference
datasets. In particular, AnoRand outperforms Deep auto encoder, Variational auto encoder and MLP
even though they have the same kind of building blocks.
The main contributions of this paper are:

• Novel Anomaly Detection Method (AnoRand): This new method does not require any assump-
  tions about the underlying shape of the decision boundary that separates normal data points from
  anomalous ones. This flexibility makes it highly adaptable to various real-world datasets and
  scenarios.
• Learning from Limited Information: AnoRand learns a reliable decision boundary using only
  normal samples and noisy version of few of them. This feature is particularly valuable in situations
  where obtaining labeled anomalous data is challenging or costly.
• Extensive Benchmarking and Superior Performance: To assess the effectiveness of AnoRand, we
  conducted comprehensive experiments on 57 diverse real-world anomaly detection benchmark
  datasets. The results demonstrate that AnoRand achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ma-
  jority of these datasets. Its robustness and versatility make it a promising choice for a wide range
  of applications.

2   R ELATED WORKS

Anomaly detection. Anomaly detection, also called outlier detection, is a technique in machine
learning and statistics for identifying unusual data points. These outliers are instances that signif-
icantly deviate from the expected normal behavior found in most data. The main goal is to detect
and investigate these rare events, which may indicate potential issues or unusual patterns in the data.
It finds applications in various industries, including healthcare, finance, manufacturing, cybersecu-
rity, and more. Anomalies can result from equipment malfunctions, data errors, fraud, or unusual
behavior. In the literature, there are three main types of anomaly detection methods: supervised,
semi-supervised, and unsupervised.
Fully supervised and Semi-supervised algorithms. These methods use labeled or partially la-
beled data to train a classifier capable of distinguishing normal from anomalous samples. Fully
supervised methods require complete access to labeled data and excel when high-quality labeled
data and a clear distinction between normal and anomalous samples are available. In contrast, semi-
supervised methods offer more flexibility and adaptability in situations with limited labeled data
or when detecting novel anomalies is required. They can outperform supervised methods as they
leverage unlabeled data to learn the normal data distribution and are more robust to noise. However,
both fully supervised and semi-supervised methods are constrained by the quality and representa-
tiveness of labeled data. They may struggle when encountering novel anomalies not seen during
training and can be challenged by imbalanced class distributions, leading to a high rate of false neg-
atives. Imbalanced classes can introduce bias, causing algorithms to fail in learning the minority
class effectively. These algorithms include classical methods such as SVM, random forest Zhao
& Hryniewicki (2018); Bayes (1763); Cortes & Vapnik (1995); Breiman (2001); Chen & Guestrin
(2016); Ke et al. (2017); Prokhorenkova et al. (2018) and deep learning based methods Akcay et al.
(2019); Ruff et al. (2020); Pang et al. (2018; 2019a); Zhou et al. (2021); Rosenblatt (1958); Gorish-
niy et al. (2021); Pang et al. (2019b).
Unsupervised algorithms. Unsupervised methods on the other hand are more flexible, especially
when labeled anomalies are scarce or when novel anomalies need to be detected. They have gained
popularity due to the fact that they don’t required labeled data. They make the assumption that
anomalies are located in low-density regions, and therefore their performance is highly dependent
on the alignment of these assumptions and the underlying anomaly type. They are effective when
the input data and the algorithm assumption(s) meet. The main limitations of unsupervised methods
is that, the detection accuracy may be lower than supervised or semi-supervised methods, especially
in cases with high noise or complex data distributions. They also struggle with class imbalance,


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as it treats all anomalies equally. These algorithms can be grouped into two categories: classi-
cal algorithms and deep learning-based algorithms. Classical algorithms include distribution and
distance-based unsupervised methods Ramaswamy et al. (2000); Liu et al. (2008); Schölkopf et al.
(1999); Li et al. (2022); Breunig et al. (2000); He et al. (2003); Tang et al. (2002); Goldstein & Den-
gel (2012); Kriegel et al. (2009); Li et al. (2020); Shyu et al. (2003); Pevnỳ (2016); Han et al. (2022);
Zhao et al. (2019); Steinwart et al. (2005). Deep learning based algorithms includes algorithm that
use deep learning representation to cluster data into homogeneous classes. Deep Support Vector
Data Description (DeepSVDD) Ruff et al. (2018) uses the idea of OCSVM by training a neural net-
work to learn a transformation that minimizes the volume of a hypersphere in the output space that
encloses the samples of one class. All the samples that are far from the center of the hypersphere are
labeled as anomalies. Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model (DAGMM) Zong et al. (2018)
optimizes jointly a deep autoencoder and a Gaussian mixture model in the same learning loop. Auto
encoders have also been used for anomaly detection by some authors Kingma & Welling (2013);
Zhou et al. (2020); Zavrtanik et al. (2021); Shi et al. (2021). They used the reconstruction error
as an anomaly score. It has been shown Collin & De Vleeschouwer (2021); You et al. (2022) that
reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods such as auto encoders lead to high number of false
alarms. Indeed, auto encoder tend to produced blurry output. This behavior can lead to a kind of
smoothing or blurring the anomalies such that it will look like normal samples.


3     P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

Most anomaly detection methods in the literature face challenges such as algorithm selection, pa-
rameter tuning, heavy reliance on labels, and unsatisfactory performance. Label-based approaches
depend on the quality and representativeness of labeled data, struggling with novel anomalies and
class imbalances. Unsupervised methods, though label-independent, often underperform compared
to supervised or semi-supervised methods, particularly with noisy or complex data. Deep learning-
based unsupervised methods Collin & De Vleeschouwer (2021); You et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2018),
like autoencoders, can yield high false alarms due to ”blurry” reconstructed outputs, making subtle
anomaly detection difficult.
In this study, our objective is to overcome certain limitations observed in previous approaches, such
as label dependency and the need for predefined assumptions. We introduce a novel semi-supervised
anomaly detection method named Anorand to address these challenges. Our method operates by
harmoniously optimizing a deep autoencoder (AE) and a Feed Forward Perceptrons (FFP) within a
single neural network architecture. This method is closely related to the theoretical work of Stein-
wart et al. Steinwart et al. (2005), where they have shown that an anomaly detection problem can be
cast as supervised learning between normal samples and noise. Unlike their work, we have learned
the discriminative function in a deep learning framework.


4     A NO R AND METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

4.1   P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE

Lets first define (x, y) = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . (xN , yN )} in the machine learning framework such
that yi is the target (label) vector and xi ∈ Rd the feature vector for the ith sample.
In this paper, we proposed to combine an autoencoder architecture with a fully connected architec-
ture to detect anomalies. The proposed architecture has two building blocks: a noise detection (ND)
block composed of Feed Forward Perceptron (FFP) and an autoencoder (AE) block. We call this new
method AnoRand. AnoRand jointly optimizes a deep autoencoder and a FFP model in an end-to-
end neural network fashion. lassesThe joint optimization in AnoRand empowers the autoencoder to
escape from suboptimal local optima, ultimately reducing reconstruction errors. Autoencoders excel
in their ability to learn compact data representations in a latent space. However, their effectiveness
in anomaly detection can be limited in cases of imbalanced lasses. Autoencoders, by design, aim
to capture essential features of the input data in the encoding while discarding some fine-grained
details. This process often results in the reconstructed output being somewhat ”blurry” compared to
the original input. The blurring effect is particularly noticeable in image data, where autoencoders
are widely applied. This blurriness can make it challenging to distinguish anomalies from normal


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Inputs                                                                    ND anomaly score
          x1
                        FFP F (x, θ0 )                                                     ŷ
          x2
                                                      Concat                                            Reconstructed
          x3                                            z1                                                   x̂1

          x4                                            z0                                                   x̂2
           ..
            .         Encoder E(x, θ1 )                                             Decoder D(x, θ1 )        x̂3
          xn
                                                                                                             x̂4
                                                                                                              ..
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                             x̂n



                                                                       1
                                                             ŷ0 = 1+e−(x− x̂)2            ŷ0

                                                                                  AE anomaly score


                                Figure 1: Overall architecture of AnoRand


data, especially if anomalies involve subtle deviations or fine details. Anomalies may appear less
distinct from normal samples in the reconstructed data. This can lead to anomalies being incorrectly
classified as normal because their characteristics are smoothed out during reconstruction.
AnoRand addresses this limitation by adding the FFP’s last-layer output to the AE latent vector.
Indeed, the FFP model is particularly adapted for supervised balanced data, but in the presence of
skewed class distributions, FFP tend to learn the characteristics of the majority class. AnoRand’s
primary objective is to learn one class of data, typically the majority class in the context of anomaly
detection, as effectively as possible. It leverages the strengths of autoencoders to represent data in
a latent space and the capability of Feed Forward Perceptrons (FFP) to learn a single class when
the data is highly imbalanced. AnoRand method is performed in two steps: (i) Synthetic anomaly
generation: In the first step, synthetic anomalies are created as described in Section 4.2. This
process enriches the training dataset with anomalous instances, effectively allowing the model to
learn and adapt to a wider range of anomalies. (ii) Model input and training: In the second step,
both normal data samples and synthetic anomalies are used as input to the AnoRand model. The
model is then trained on this combined dataset to distinguish between normal data and anomalies.
The FFP block, plays a pivotal role, serves as a critical component within the AnoRand architecture.
We refer to this block as the ”noise detection block” because it exhibits a remarkable ability to
identify instances with anomalies, particularly when synthetic labels are generated with a high level
of noise. Let’s denote by z1 = F (x, θ0 ) the mapping of the input features by FFP and z0 =
E(x, θ1 ) its mapping by the encoder from the auto encoder architecture. θ1 is the weights of the
Feed Forward Perceptron (FFP) and θ0 the weights of the auto encoder block. The final latent vector
of the autoencoder block is defined as follows:
                                         z = (z0 , z1 ) = (F (x, θ0 ), E(x, θ1 ))                                       (1)
 The last layer of the FFP, denoted as z1 = F (x, θ0 ), produces an output based on the features
it has learned. The combination of z0 and z1 allows for the integration of information captured
by the autoencoder (data-specific features) with the features learned by the FFP (task-specific or
high-level features). This combined vector is particularly powerful when we want to perform tasks
like generating data samples that are consistent with both the learned data distribution and the task-
specific features. The final model has one input and two outputs. The model takes as input the
features X and the synthetic labels Y generated as described in subsection 4.2. The first output ŷ
is the probability of the sample being a noisy or anomaly sample estimated by the noise detection
block, the second output x̂ is the reconstructed signal of the autoencoder block. The full network
architecture is described in Figure 1.

4.2   S YNTHETIC LABEL GENERATION

To create our semi-supervised model, we introduced synthetic anomalies into our training dataset
(see Appendix 8.1 for more details about synthetic anomaly generation). We began by randomly


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


selecting a subset of samples from the training data, denoted as X0 , with a subset X00 representing
anomalies. We then transformed X00 into synthetic anomalies by adding noise to simulate real-world
anomaly data. The noisy samples can be generated by using Gaussian noise or other sophisticated
methods such as in Cai et al.Cai & Fan (2022). In our experiments, we used a hybrid approach that
combined Gaussian noise with the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) Chawla
et al. (2002) to generate synthetic anomalies. SMOTE oversampled X00 until it constituted 5% of the
total training dataset. This approach ensured that synthetic anomalies closely resembled the feature
distribution of normal samples. The resulting training dataset, Xtr , consisted of three components:
X1 representing the majority of normal samples, X00 as the foundation for synthetic anomalies, and
X01 representing the noisy synthetic anomalies created through SMOTE and Gaussian noise. This
composition allowed Xtr to contain 5% ”anomalous” samples, including both originally selected
X00 samples and the synthetic anomalies created.

4.3   O BJECTIVE FUNCTION
The final loss function L(θ) combines two individual loss components with a weight factor w.
L(θ0 ): This component represents the reconstruction error from the autoencoder (AE) block. It is
computed for each data point xi and its corresponding reconstructed output x̂i . This term encourages
the AE to learn a meaningful representation of the normal samples.
                                        N
                                        X                         N
                                                                  X
                           L(θ0 ) =           L(xi , x̂i ) = −      (1 − yi )(xi − x̂i )2                          (2)
                                        i=1                       i=1

 The term 1 − yi acts as a filter, considering only the normal samples (yi = 0) in the loss calculation.
L(θ1 ): This is the loss calculated using the predictions from the noise detection (ND) block. It
evaluates the model’s capacity to correctly classify data points as either normal or anomalous. It
measures how well the ND block distinguishes between regular data points and outliers or anomalies
in the dataset.
                               N
                               X                        N
                                                        X
                    L(θ1 ) =         L(yi , ŷi ) = −         yi log(ŷi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ŷi )               (3)
                               i=1                      i=1

The overall loss function is constructed as a weighted sum of these two components, with the weight
w determining the relative importance assigned to each. The loss function is defined as follows:
                                     L(θ) = w · L(θ1 ) + (1 − w) · L(θ0 )                                          (4)

• θ = (θ0 , θ1 ). θ0 and θ1 are respectively the parameters of the ND block and the AE block and
  θ represents the overall model parameters. N is the total number of samples. ŷi is the estimated
  probability that sample i is an anomaly calculated by the ND block.
• 0 ≤ w ≤ 1 determines the relative importance assigned to each component of the loss function.
  The weight parameter w plays a pivotal role in shaping the model’s behavior. It acts as a tun-
  ing knob that adjusts the balance between the AE block’s reconstruction capabilities and the ND
  block’s noise detection capabilities within the loss function. When w is set to a higher value, the
  ND blocks contribution is accentuated, indicating a greater focus on anomaly detection. This can
  be especially useful in situations where accurate anomaly identification is of paramount impor-
  tance. In contrast, when w is set lower, it places more emphasis on the autoencoder’s ability to
  faithfully reconstruct the input data, which can be advantageous when the quality of the normal
  data reconstruction is a primary concern. When w = 0, L(θ1 ) is entirely ignored, and when
  w = 1, L(θ0 ) is ignored. The final loss can be rewritten as follows:
                                                               N
                                                               X                              N
                                                                                              X
           L(θ) = w · L(θ1 ) + (1 − w) · L(θ0 ) = w                  L(yi , ŷi ) + (1 − w)         L(xi , x̂i )
                                                               i=1                            i=1
                     N
                     X
                           (1 − w) · (1 − yi )(xi − x̂i )2 + w [·yi log(ŷi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ŷi )]

                =−
                     i=1
                     N
                     X
                           w · yi log(ŷi ) + (1 − yi ) (1 − w) · (xi − x̂i )2 + w · log(1 − ŷi )

                =−
                     i=1


• w · yi log(ŷi ): This term is associated with the noise detection (ND) block and focuses on the
  classification of data points as either anomalous (yi = 1) or non-anomalous (yi = 0). It calculates
  the logarithm of the predicted probability ŷi for the true class labels yi . When yi = 1 (indicating


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  an anomaly), this term encourages ŷi to be close to 1 indicating high confidence in the anomaly
  prediction. It measures how well the model’s predictions ŷi align with the true labels yi . When
  yi = 1, this term evaluates how well the model predicts the probability of an anomaly (ŷi ).

• (1 − yi ) (1 − w) · (xi − x̂i )2 + w · log(1 − ŷi ) : This part combines contributions from both the
  autoencoder (AE) block and the ND block. It quantifies how each block contributes into the loss
  of a negative sample. This part combines contributions from both the autoencoder (AE) block and
  the ND block:
  (1 − w) · (xi − x̂i )2 : This component reflects the reconstruction error from the AE block. When
  yi = 0 (non-anomaly), it encourages the difference between the input data xi and its reconstruc-
  tion x̂i to be minimized. This term drives the AE to capture meaningful data representations.
  When w is closer to 1, this term contributes less to the loss, emphasizing data reconstruction.
  w · log(1 − ŷi ): This component is related to the anomaly detection objective. It encourages the
  logarithm of (1 − ŷi ) when yi = 0. In other words, it encourages the model to assign lower prob-
  abilities to non-anomalous data points. It assesses how well the model predicts the probability of
  a non-anomaly (1 − ŷi ) when yi = 0 (indicating a negative class or non-anomaly).
• Reconstruction Quality: Encouraged by the (1−w)·(xi − x̂i )2 term, this part of the loss function
  motivates the AE block to learn meaningful data representations. It measures how accurately the
  model can reconstruct input data when the data is non-anomalous (yi = 0. A lower reconstruction
  error implies that the AE is successful in capturing essential features of the data.
• Anomaly Detection: Guided by the w · yi log(ŷi ) and w · log(1 − ŷi ) terms, the ND block focuses
  on accurately classifying data points as anomalies or non-anomalies. It encourages the model to
  assign high probabilities (ŷi close to 1) to anomalies (yi = 1) and low probabilities (ŷi close to 0)
  to non-anomalies (yi = 0).

The objective during model training is to find the optimal configuration of model parameters θ̂ that
minimizes the training loss L(θ). The optimization objective is defined as follows:
                                                               N
                                                               X
                              θ̂ = arg min L(θ) = arg min             L(xi , yi , θ)                  (5)
                                        θ                  θ
                                                                i=1


4.4   A NOMALY SCORE
In the AnoRand model, we use two outputs: ŷ from the ND block and x̂ from the AE block’s
reconstruction, for classifying input samples as anomalies or normal data. We combine these outputs
to calculate the final anomaly score. This leverages the model’s ability to detect anomalies via the
ND block’s focus on data noise and to produce high-quality reconstructions using the autoencoder.
We define ŷ0 as the predicted probability of a sample being an anomaly based on the AE block
reconstruction x̂. Higher reconstruction errors indicate a higher likelihood of being an anomaly. To
balance ŷ and ŷ0 , we introduce a weight parameter α, which adapts the model’s behavior based on
the dataset and the noise detection versus reconstruction trade-off. α is calculated from the third
quantile of the anomaly score from both blocks. Specifically, α and ŷ0 are determined as follows:
                                         1                                     Q13
                           ŷ0 =                                      α=
                                   1 + e−(x−x̂)2                            Q3 + Q13
                                                                             0



• Q03 represents the third quantile of the autoencoder block’s predicted probabilities ŷ0 .
• Q13 represents the third quantile of the noise detection block’s predicted probabilities ŷ.

Using quantiles, such as the third quantile, provides a robust measure for estimating the range of
predicted probabilities. This approach is less sensitive to extreme values and outliers, making it
suitable for ensuring that the weight α is derived from a reliable range of values. With the weight α
determined, the final anomaly score denoted as ŷscore is computed as a weighted sum of ŷ and ŷ0 :
                                        ŷscore = ŷ · (1 − α) + α · ŷ0                              (6)
 This final prediction formula allows the model to adaptively combine the strengths of the ND block
and the AE block. When α is close to 0, the ND block’s output has more influence, prioritizing noise
detection. When α is close to 1, the AE block’s output plays a more significant role, emphasizing
autoencoder reconstruction. This dynamic adjustment ensures that the model can effectively handle
various anomaly detection challenges.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5                  E XPERIMENT
For all upcoming experiments, each dataset has been separated into a training dataset (80 %) and test
(20 %) dataset. To avoid any risk of data leakage, models are trained using a k-fold cross-validation
(k = 10 in our case). Each model is therefore trained and validated on 10 different subsamples. The
final value of each performance metric is computed by taking the average of the ten measurements
obtained during the ten iterations of the cross-validation. We choose the best hyperparameters using
the library Omar et al. (2020) and on a small holdout set (10%) of the validation dataset. We com-
pared the performances of our method to those of 17 baseline unsupervised clustering algorithms
available in the python Outlier Detection (PyOD) package Zhao et al. (2019).In the simulated ex-
periments, we generated classification datasets using the make classification module from sklearn.
Each generated a training set has an imbalance rate of 2%. Note that for iteration in each experiment,
we generated new samples by varying the random state parameter. We evaluate the algorithms using
two widely used metrics: AUC ROC (Area Under Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) and
AUC PR (Area Under Precision-Recall Curve). In all incoming experiments, we report these two
metrics as performance metrics. The higher the values, the better is the algorithm. In their article,
Saito et al. Saito & Rehmsmeier (2015) showed that AUC ROC could be misleading when applied
in imbalanced classification scenarios, instead AUC PR should be used. The experimental setting is
described in details in the Appendix 8.2.

5.1                    C OMPARATIVE S TUDY OF A NOMALY D ETECTION A LGORITHMS

To ensure a robust evaluation, we divided the dataset into a training set and a test set, with 70%
of the samples allocated to training and the remaining 30% reserved for testing. Recall that at this
stage, only a small subse (2%) of the training data was used to create synthetic labels, as discussed
in detail in subsection 4.2. This meticulous label generation process ensured that our model’s perfor-
mance remained independent of the specific samples chosen during label creation. We conducted a
comprehensive comparative analysis, pitting our proposed method against 17 baseline unsupervised
clustering algorithms. For a rigorous assessment of algorithmic performance, we performed multi-
ple iterations of training and testing for each algorithm (10 times). During these iterations, synthetic
labels were consistently derived from 2% of the training data to ensure fairness and impartiality.
Figure 2 and Figure 7 show that our proposed method consistently outperformed all other algorithms
in terms of AUC PR and AUC ROC. When compared to deep learning-based unsupervised methods
like Deep Autoencoder (AE), Variational Autoencoder (VAE), and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP),
our approach demonstrated superior performance, despite sharing similar architectural foundations.
Intriguingly, deep learning-based unsupervised methods, such as DeepSVDD and Autoencoder, ex-
hibited unexpectedly subpar performance compared to classical techniques.
It is worth noting that while our method achieved good performance, it came at the cost of increased
training time. In Figure 2b, we provide a visual representation of the comparison of training duration
between the algorithms. The reasons behind this prolonged training time may be attributed to the
complexity of our model, the number of training iterations and the number of parameters.
          0.9


          0.8                                                                                                                                                80


          0.7
                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                             Time(seconds)
ROC AUC


          0.6
                                                                                                                                                             40



          0.5

                                                                                                                                                             20


          0.4


                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                  rs

                                                                                                                                                                       P

                                                                                                                                                                              OD

                                                                                                                                                                                     OF

                                                                                                                                                                                          FB


                                                                                                                                                                                                 OS

                                                                                                                                                                                                      IF


                                                                                                                                                                                                           N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DA
                  rs


                       P

                              OD


                                     OF

                                          FB


                                                 OS

                                                      IF


                                                              N


                                                                     F


                                                                             M

                                                                                      A


                                                                                          F


                                                                                                  D


                                                                                                       D

                                                                                                           OD



                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                        E


                                                                                                                                     D

                                                                                                                                    DA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                                                                       ML


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PO
                                                                                                                     de


                                                                                                                                                                  Ou
                                                                  LO


                                                                                          CO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   od
                       ML


                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                  PC
                                                           KN


                                                                                               SO


                                                                                                      PO


                                                                                                                                D
                                                                           SV


                                                                                                                                                                                   CL
                Ou


                                                                                                                                                                                               HB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LO
                                                                                                                                                                            AB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EC
                                   CL


                                               HB


                                                                                                                                 LO
                            AB


                                                                                                                             SV
                                                                                                           EC



                                                                                                                    co


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                      CO
                                                                         OC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               En


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ep
                                                                                                                  En


                                                                                                                            ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to
                                                                                                                to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      De
                                                                                                                            De
                                                                                                                Au


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Au


                                                                         Algorithms                                                                                                                                    Algorithms
                                                           (a) AUC PR                                                                                                                 (b) Training time in seconds

                               Figure 2: Performance metrics on synthetic data set for unsupervised algorithms


                                                                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2                E NHANCED L ATENT R EPRESENTATIONS : A NO R AND VS . T RADITIONAL AUTOENCODER

In Figure 3, we delve into the latent representations extracted from the MNIST handwriting dataset,
where we compare the outcomes achieved by a traditional deep autoencoder with those generated
by our innovative AnoRand model. In our experiment using the MNIST dataset, we compared
three models: a traditional deep autoencoder (AE), a variational autoencoder (VAE), and our novel
AnoRand model. Notably, all three models shared a similar architecture, featuring a comparable
number of layers and neurons. We focused on distinguishing the challenging digits 1 and 7, desig-
nating 2% of digit 7 samples as anomalies. The results from Figure 3d indicate that AE and VAE
outperform AnoRand in image reconstruction due to their broader learning objectives. However,
the results in Figure 8(in Appendix) demonstrate that AnoRand excels in anomaly detection, with
fewer false negatives, thanks to its specialized focus on the normal class. Visual inspection of the
latent vectors, as depicted in Figure 3 confirms AnoRand’s ability to distinguish between classes,
while AE and VAE struggle in this regard. Overall, AnoRand demonstrates superior performance in
crafting latent representations for anomaly detection, surpassing traditional autoencoders.

                                             label                 label                                      2.0                                             label

          4
                                                0.0
                                                1.0           25
                                                                      0.0
                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          Original
                                                                                                              1.5

                                                              20                                              1.0
          2
                                                                                                              0.5                                                                             AE
                                                              15
 Dim 2


                                                      Dim 2


                                                                                                     Dim 2
          0                                                                                                   0.0

                                                              10                                                                                                                          AnoRand
                                                                                                             −0.5
         −2

                                                              5                                              −1.0
         −4
                                                                                                             −1.5                                                                             VAE
                                                              0
              −4    −2   0           2   4                         0         2   4           6   8                  −2.0   −1.5   −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5   1.0    1.5
                             Dim 1                                                   Dim 1                                                Dim 1


              (a) AnoRand latent                                            (b) AE latent                                  (c) VAE latent                                (d) Reconstruction

                                                 Figure 3: AnoRand compared to traditional autoencoders


6                  U NSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON REAL WORLD DATASETS
We compared the performance of our method (AnoRand) to those of state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods on the ADBench anomaly detection benchmark Han et al. (2022). In their paper, they com-
pared the performance of 17 algorithms on 57 benchmark datasets (see Table 3 in Appendix for full
data description). In our experiments, we choose 44 of the most difficult datasets to compare the
algorithms. The datasets cover different fields including healthcare, security and more. We grouped
the datasets into four categories to make the comparison easy: Image datasets, NLP datasets, Health-
care datasets, Science datasets and datasets from other fields (documents, web etc.). In their paper,
the authors compared supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised anomaly detection methods on
these datasets. In our study, we only focus on the semi-supervised and unsupervised algorithms of
the benchmark. We reported the average performances over teen different iterations. In Table 1,
Table 2 and Figure 9, we report the algorithms performance and their rankings on the ADBench
real-world datasets. In Figure 4a and 9a, the boxplots show that our model has the best overall
ranking among all its counterpart unsupervised algorithms. Indeed, Figure 4b shows that in terms of
AUC PR, AnoRand is ranked first (1st ) on 20 datasets, second (2nd ) on 5, third (3rd ) on 6 and fourth
(4th ) on 3. Figure 9b on the other hand shows that in terms of AUC ROC, AnoRand is ranked first
(1st ) on 18 datasets, second (2nd ) on 3, third (3rd ) on 6 and fourth (4th ) on 4. The results also show
that, in situations where another algorithm outperforms ours, the performance gap is very small in
most cases. The results and performances (AUC ROC and AUC PR) of all experiments are fully
reported in Table 1 (AUC PR values) and Table 2 (AUC ROC values) in the Appendix.
Results on image classification data sets. This category encompasses diverse datasets curated
for computer vision tasks, including image classification (e.g., Mnist, CIFAR10, and MVTec). Pre-
trained ResNet18 models He et al. (2016) have been used to extract data embedding from the original
images. AnoRand, our algorithm, outperforms all reference algorithms on 6 of 11 image datasets,
demonstrating its robustness and adaptability (see Table 1 and 2 in Appendix). It achieves the
second-best performance on 2 additional datasets, highlighting its versatility.
Results on NLP data sets. The natural language processing (NLP) data sets consist of text data and
are vital for training and evaluating models that handle language-related tasks, including text classi-
fication, sentiment analysis, named entity recognition, machine translation and more. These datasets
often comprise a collection of text documents, sentences or tokens, each associated with specific la-


                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bels or annotations. For these datasets, they used a BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers) Devlin et al. (2019) pre-trained on the BookCorpus and English Wikipedia to
extract the embedding of the token. In Table 1 and 2, we report the performances of anomaly detec-
tion algorithms in the NLP datasets. On these datasets, AnoRand outperforms the other algorithms
on the speech and Imdb dataset, showcasing its remarkable ability to distinguish outliers in spoken
and written language. Even in scenarios where it does not clinch the top spot, it consistently holds
its own, securing a respectable third place on the remaining datasets. The algorithm’s performance
in the NLP benchmark datasets underscores its versatility and effectiveness in grappling with the
nuances of linguistic data.
Results on Healthcare data sets. Table 1 and 2 (in Appendix) shows the algorithms performance
on the 10 healthcare benchmark datasets. These datasets encapsulate a diverse array of medical
data, ranging from Hepatitis detection to cancer diagnosis, each carrying profound implications for
patient care and health monitoring. These results show that AnoRand consistently outperforms its
algorithmic counterparts on a significant 40% of the benchmark datasets. Moreover, AnoRand has
the best overall ranking across all ten healthcare datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in address-
ing the unique challenges posed by healthcare data. Whether it’s identifying anomalies in patient
records or clinical observations, AnoRand proves to be a promising and robust solution.
Results on Other datasets. In this category, we include all other datasets from other fields such
as experiment science, Sociology, Botany, Finance etc. The inclusion of datasets from such dis-
parate fields underscores the universality of anomaly detection as a critical analytical tool. On these
datasets, AnoRand outperforms the other algorithms on 10 out of 19 datasets. Moreover, even in
cases where AnoRand doesn’t achieve the best performance, it maintains its competitive edge, se-
curing a position no lower than fourth on six(6) additional datasets.These results underscore the
algorithm’s potential to address anomalies across a wide spectrum of scenarios, ranging from scien-
tific experiments to social phenomena and financial markets.


                                                                                                                                             20.0
       16

                                                                                                                                             17.5
       14

                                                                                                                                             15.0
       12

                                                                                                                                             12.5
                                                                                                                                     count


       10

                                                                                                                                             10.0
Rank


       8

                                                                                                                                              7.5
       6

                                                                                                                                              5.0
       4

                                                                                                                                              2.5
       2
                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                    1   2   3   4        5       6   7   8   10
                                                                                                                                                                    AnoRand Rank
            rs


                  A


                            M


                                  F


                                          F


                                                F


                                                      OS


                                                           N


                                                                   D


                                                                             OD


                                                                                  OD



                                                                                           DD


                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                        DA


                                                                                                                st

                                                                                                                     AE


                                                                                                                             E
                                LO


                                       LO


                                              CO


                                                                                                                          VA
                 PC


                                                           KN


                                                                 SO
                         SV


                                                                                                GM


                                                                                                              re
            Ou


                                                    HB


                                                                                                     LO
                                                                                        SV
                                                                            P

                                                                                  EC
                                      CB


                                                                                                             Ifo
                                                                         CO
                      OC


                                                                                            DA
                                                                                       ep
                                                                                       De


                                                                Algorithms

                                      (a) Overall AUC PR ranks                                                                                      (b) AnoRand AUC PR overall ranks

                  Figure 4: Algorithms performance rankings on real-world data sets (lower the better).



7                C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new semi supervised anomaly detection method based on deep autoen-
coder architecture. This new method that we called AnoRand, jointly optimizes the deep autoen-
coder and the FFP model in an end-to-end neural network fashion. Our method is performed in two
steps: we first create synthetic anomalies by randomly adding noise to few samples from the training
data; secondly, we train our deep learning model in supervised way with the new labeled data. Our
method takes advantage of these limitations of FFP models in case of imbalance classes and use them
to reinforce the autoencoder capabilities. Our experimental results show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on synthetic datasets and 57 real-world datasets, significantly outper-
forming existing unsupervised alternatives. Moreover, on most benchmark datasets, regardless of
the category, AnoRand outperforms all its deep learning-based counterparts. The main limitation of
our method is that the training time is longer compared to most state-of-the-art non-deep learning
algorithms, although it remains shorter than that of deep learning algorithms.


                                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Samet Akcay, Amir Atapour-Abarghouei, and Toby P Breckon. Ganomaly: Semi-supervised
  anomaly detection via adversarial training. In Computer Vision–ACCV 2018: 14th Asian Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, Perth, Australia, December 2–6, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part
  III 14, pp. 622–637. Springer, 2019.
Rangachari Anand, Kishan G Mehrotra, Chilukuri K Mohan, and Sanjay Ranka. An improved
  algorithm for neural network classification of imbalanced training sets. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks, 4(6):962–969, 1993.
Thomas Bayes. Lii. an essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances. by the late
  rev. mr. bayes, frs communicated by mr. price, in a letter to john canton, amfr s. Philosophical
  transactions of the Royal Society of London, (53):370–418, 1763.
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45:5–32, 2001.
Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T Ng, and Jörg Sander. Lof: identifying density-
 based local outliers. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
 Management of data, pp. 93–104, 2000.
Jinyu Cai and Jicong Fan. Perturbation learning based anomaly detection. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh
   Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
   cessing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=-Xdts90bWZ3.
Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. Smote: synthetic
  minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 16:321–357, 2002.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794,
  2016.
Anne-Sophie Collin and Christophe De Vleeschouwer. Improved anomaly detection by training an
  autoencoder with skip connections on images corrupted with stain-shaped noise. In 2020 25th
  International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 7915–7922. IEEE, 2021.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20:273–297,
  1995.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ArXiv, abs/1810.04805, 2019.
Markus Goldstein and Andreas Dengel. Histogram-based outlier score (hbos): A fast unsupervised
 anomaly detection algorithm. KI-2012: poster and demo track, 1:59–63, 2012.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18932–18943,
  2021.
Songqiao Han, Xiyang Hu, Hailiang Huang, Minqi Jiang, and Yue Zhao. Adbench: Anomaly
  detection benchmark. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:32142–32159,
  2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Zengyou He, Xiaofei Xu, and Shengchun Deng. Discovering cluster-based local outliers. Pattern
  recognition letters, 24(9-10):1641–1650, 2003.
Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-
  Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.          Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Hans-Peter Kriegel, Peer Kröger, Erich Schubert, and Arthur Zimek. Outlier detection in axis-
  parallel subspaces of high dimensional data. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
  Mining: 13th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2009 Bangkok, Thailand, April 27-30, 2009 Pro-
  ceedings 13, pp. 831–838. Springer, 2009.

Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and Xiyang Hu. Copod: copula-based outlier
  detection. In 2020 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM), pp. 1118–1123. IEEE,
  2020.

Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Xiyang Hu, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and George Chen. Ecod: Unsuper-
  vised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution functions. IEEE Transactions on
  Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022.

Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In 2008 Eighth IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Data Mining, pp. 413–422, 2008. doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2008.17.

Abdul Omar et al. Keras tuner. GitHub, 2020. URL https://github.com/keras-team/
  keras-tuner.

Guansong Pang, Longbing Cao, Ling Chen, and Huan Liu. Learning representations of ultrahigh-
  dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2041–2050, 2018.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, Huidong Jin, and Anton van den Hengel. Deep weakly-supervised
  anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13601, 2019a.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Deep anomaly detection with deviation
  networks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
  discovery & data mining, pp. 353–362, 2019b.

Tomáš Pevnỳ. Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies. Machine Learning, 102:275–304,
  2016.

Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey
  Gulin. Catboost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.

Sridhar Ramaswamy, Rajeev Rastogi, and Kyuseok Shim. Efficient algorithms for mining outliers
  from large data sets. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
  Management of data, pp. 427–438, 2000.

Frank Rosenblatt. The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and organization
  in the brain. Psychological review, 65(6):386, 1958.

Lukas Ruff, Robert Vandermeulen, Nico Goernitz, Lucas Deecke, Shoaib Ahmed Siddiqui, Alexan-
  der Binder, Emmanuel Müller, and Marius Kloft. Deep one-class classification. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 4393–4402. PMLR, 2018.

Lukas Ruff, Robert A. Vandermeulen, Nico Görnitz, Alexander Binder, Emmanuel Müller, Klaus-
  Robert Müller, and Marius Kloft. Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=HkgH0TEYwH.

Takaya Saito and Marc Rehmsmeier. The precision-recall plot is more informative than the roc plot
  when evaluating binary classifiers on imbalanced datasets. PloS one, 10(3):e0118432, 2015.

Bernhard Schölkopf, Robert C Williamson, Alex Smola, John Shawe-Taylor, and John Platt. Support
  vector method for novelty detection. Advances in neural information processing systems, 12,
  1999.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yong Shi, Jie Yang, and Zhiquan Qi. Unsupervised anomaly segmentation via deep feature recon-
  struction. Neurocomputing, 424:9–22, 2021.
Mei-Ling Shyu, Shu-Ching Chen, Kanoksri Sarinnapakorn, and LiWu Chang. A novel anomaly
 detection scheme based on principal component classifier. Technical report, Miami Univ Coral
 Gables Fl Dept of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2003.
Ingo Steinwart, Don Hush, and Clint Scovel. A classification framework for anomaly detection.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(2), 2005.
Jian Tang, Zhixiang Chen, Ada Wai-Chee Fu, and David W Cheung. Enhancing effectiveness of
   outlier detections for low density patterns. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
   ing: 6th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2002 Taipei, Taiwan, May 6–8, 2002 Proceedings 6,
   pp. 535–548. Springer, 2002.
Haowen Xu, Wenxiao Chen, Nengwen Zhao, Zeyan Li, Jiahao Bu, Zhihan Li, Ying Liu, Youjian
  Zhao, Dan Pei, Yang Feng, et al. Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
  for seasonal kpis in web applications. In Proceedings of the 2018 world wide web conference, pp.
  187–196, 2018.
Zhiyuan You, Lei Cui, Yujun Shen, Kai Yang, Xin Lu, Yu Zheng, and Xinyi Le. A unified
  model for multi-class anomaly detection. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=bMYU8_qD8PW.
Vitjan Zavrtanik, Matej Kristan, and Danijel Skočaj. Draem-a discriminatively trained reconstruc-
  tion embedding for surface anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8330–8339, 2021.
Yue Zhao and Maciej K Hryniewicki. Xgbod: improving supervised outlier detection with unsu-
  pervised representation learning. In 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
  (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
Yue Zhao, Zain Nasrullah, and Zheng Li. Pyod: A python toolbox for scalable outlier detec-
  tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(96):1–7, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/
  papers/v20/19-011.html.
Kang Zhou, Yuting Xiao, Jianlong Yang, Jun Cheng, Wen Liu, Weixin Luo, Zaiwang Gu, Jiang
  Liu, and Shenghua Gao. Encoding structure-texture relation with p-net for anomaly detection
  in retinal images. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK,
  August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XX 16, pp. 360–377. Springer, 2020.
Yingjie Zhou, Xucheng Song, Yanru Zhang, Fanxing Liu, Ce Zhu, and Lingqiao Liu. Feature
  encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(6):2454–2465, 2021.
Bo Zong, Qi Song, Martin Renqiang Min, Wei Cheng, Cristian Lumezanu, Daeki Cho, and Haifeng
  Chen. Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Inter-
  national conference on learning representations, 2018.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8     A PPENDIX

8.1   S YNTHETIC LABEL GENERATION

Recall that to build our semi-supervised model, we created the synthetic anomalies. In the initial
stage, we randomly select a subset of samples from the training dataset that we denoted by X0 .
These specially selected samples are designated as X00 . The remaining samples, those not included
in X00 , are referred to as X1 . To transform X00 into synthetic anomalies, we introduce noise to these
samples, resulting in a new set named X01 . The addition of noise helps us simulate the variabil-
ity and unpredictability often found in real-world anomaly data. The choice of noise generation
technique plays a crucial role in the quality of synthetic anomalies. In our experiments, we opted
for a hybrid approach, combining Gaussian noise with the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Tech-
nique (SMOTE), a well-established method in the field of anomaly detection. This technique was
introduced by Chawla et al.Chawla et al. (2002) and has proven to be one of the best techniques
for synthesizing samples of the minority class in the presence of unbalanced data. The core princi-
ple of SMOTE is to generate synthetic samples by selecting a sample from the minority class and
identifying its k nearest neighbors. For each selected neighbor, a synthetic sample is created by
computing the difference between the feature vectors of the chosen sample and its nearest neighbor.
This difference is then scaled by a random value between 0 and 1 and added to the feature vector of
the chosen sample. In our experiments, we applied the SMOTE technique to X00 , the subset orig-
inally designated as anomalous. SMOTE was applied to oversample this subset until it constituted
5% of the total training dataset. To ensure that our synthetic anomalies closely resemble the fea-
ture distribution of normal samples, we thoughtfully merged the SMOTE technique with Gaussian
noise. This hybrid approach ensures that the synthetic anomalies are not too dissimilar from the
normal samples in terms of their feature distribution. This reflects the nuanced nature of anomalies
in practical applications and enhances the model’s ability to identify them accurately. Indeed, in
real-world scenarios, anomalies are often subtle variations or ”broken” versions of normal data. Our
ultimate training dataset, denoted as Xtr , comprises three fundamental components: X1 , represent-
ing the majority of normal samples; X00 , initially serving as the foundation for synthetic anomalies;
and X01 , the noisy, synthetic anomalies created through the combination of SMOTE and Gaussian
noise. It is worth highlighting that this composition ensures that Xtr now contains 5% of ”anoma-
lous” samples, encompassing both the originally selected X00 samples and the synthetic anomalies
generated through our innovative approach.


8.2   D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENT S ETTING

For all upcoming experiments, each dataset has been separated into a training dataset (80 %) and
test (20 %) dataset. To avoid any risk of data leakage, models are trained using a k-fold cross-
validation (k = 10 in our case). Each model is therefore trained and validated on 10 different
sub-samples. The final performance is computed on the test set. Note that the test sets do not
intervene at any time in the training steps. The final value of each performance metric is computed by
taking the average of the ten measurements obtained during the ten iterations of the cross-validation.
The final models are compared using the AUC (PRC) metric. We set the number of epochs to 50
for each model and used early stopping to avoid overfitting. We used the version of the mini-
batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) called SGD Adam with a batch size of 256. We kept the
default values of the other hyperparameters: lr=0.001, β1 = 0.9 and β1 = 0.999. The rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activation function is used in neurons of the hidden layers, and the sigmoid
activation function is used for output layer to estimate posterior probabilities. We choose the best
hyperparameters using the KerasTuner library and on a small holdout set (10%) of the validation
dataset. KerasTuner is an easy-to-use, scalable hyperparameter optimization framework that solves
the pain points of hyperparameter search Omar et al. (2020). We also added between the hidden
layers a Batch Normalization layer followed by a dropout layer.
For the state-of-the-art algorithms, we used their implementation in the python Outlier Detection
(PyOD) package Zhao et al. (2019). PyOD package is an open-source, comprehensive, and widely
used toolkit for detecting outliers in multivariate data. It provides a collection of algorithms and
tools to identify and analyze these outliers across various application domains. PyOD contains a
wide range of outlier detection algorithms, both traditional and state-of-the-art. These algorithms


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cover various statistical, distance-based and machine learning-based approaches. PyOD is built with
efficiency in mind, enabling the processing of large datasets with complex structures.
In these experiments, we simulated a classification dataset using the make classification module
from sklearn. The make classification module creates clusters of samples normally distributed about
the vertices of a hypercube and assigns an equal number of clusters to each class. It then introduces
interdependence between the created features and adds various types of noise to the data. We gen-
erated a training set of 20000 samples with an imbalance rate of 2%. This means that the minority
class represents 2% of the training dataset. Note that for iteration in each experiment, we generated
new samples by varying the random state parameter.

8.3                                  C HOICE OF THE OPTIMAL VALUE FOR w.

Recall that w is the weight assigned to the loss of the noise detection block. We hypothesize that
when w tends to 1, the influence of the autoencoder block tends to 0 and the final model is equivalent
to a simple feed-forward perceptron (FFP) model. So, by varying the weights, we expect to see
the impact of each part of our architecture to the final model loss. For each value of w ∈ [0, 1],
we trained our model 10 times on 10 different samples and report its AUC PR in figure 5a and
the AUCROC in figure 5b. The figures show that the model performance increases until 0.2 and
decreases very fast when w is greater than 0.2. The boxplot at 0.2 shows that the model’s AUC PR
and AUCROC are stable. Indeed, at this point, the interquartile ranges of the boxplots are small
and there are fewer outliers. These results suggest that, in the proposed architecture, the ND block
positively contributes to the performance of the final model up to a certain level. The optimal value
of w lays around 0.2.

                       0.9
                       0.8                                                                                                                            0.9
                       0.7
Precision recall AUC


                       0.6                                                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                            ROC AUC


                       0.5
                       0.4                                                                                                                            0.7
                       0.3
                       0.2                                                                                                                            0.6

                       0.1
                              4

                                    8

                                          2

                                                  6
                                                0.2

                                                       4

                                                             8

                                                                   2

                                                                           6
                                                                         0.4

                                                                                4

                                                                                      8

                                                                                            2

                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                        0.6

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                4

                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                  6


                                                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                                                        8

                                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                             0.0

                                   0.0

                                         0.1

                                               0.1



                                                      0.2

                                                            0.2

                                                                  0.3

                                                                        0.3



                                                                               0.4

                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                           0.5

                                                                                                 0.5



                                                                                                       0.6

                                                                                                       0.7

                                                                                                       0.7



                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                     0.8

                                                                                                                           0.9

                                                                                                                                 0.9


                                                                                                                                                            0.0

                                                                                                                                                                  0.0

                                                                                                                                                                        0.1

                                                                                                                                                                              0.1



                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3



                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                      W                                                                                                            W


                                                                        (a) AUC PR                                                                                                     (b) AUC ROC

                                                                                             Figure 5: Performance metrics by varying w


8.4                                  R EMOVING SOME NEURONS FROM THE ND BLOCK LATENT

In this subsection, we aim to assess the impact of the noise detection (ND) block’s high-level em-
bedding z1 = F (x, θ0 ) within our trained model. Our primary objective is to gain a deeper under-
standing of the significance of the ND block and its role in shaping the model’s overall performance.
To achieve this goal, we begin with a fundamental hypothesis: if the ND block doesn’t play a crucial
role or doesn’t significantly contribute to the autoencoder block’s performance, then it should be
possible to set its latent embedding vector to zeros without substantially diminishing the model’s
overall performance. In other words, we test whether our proposed architecture adds value beyond a
simple autoencoder. Our experimental setup involves training a model according to the architecture
we have designed. We then proceed to selectively zero out certain neurons within the last layer of
the ND block. The number of neurons to be zeroed out is represented by the variable β.
In our ND block, there are a total of Nlatent neurons within the last layer. To determine the number
of unique combinations for selecting β neurons out of Nlatent , we employ the combination formula
C(Nlatent , β) , yielding N0 possible combinations.

                                                                                                                                                            Nlatent !
                                                                                                  N0 = C(Nlatent , β) =
                                                                                                                                                        β!(Nlatent − β)!
For each specific value of β, we randomly generate a set of 100 different combinations of neurons
to set to zeros within the ND block. The performance of our model is then evaluated under each


                                                                                                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


configuration. Figures 6a and 6b show the variation in performance of the model. The plotted figures
reveal a notable trend: as the number of neurons within the ND block set to zero (β)increases, the
model’s performance decreases exponentially. This observation strongly supports the hypothesis that
our proposed architecture, with the ND block intact, significantly enhances the model’s learning.

                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.85
                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.80
Precision recall AUC


                       0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ROC AUC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.70
                       0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.65
                       0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.60
                             1


                                              2


                                                          3


                                                                        4


                                                                                    5


                                                                                              6


                                                                                                          7


                                                                                                                        8


                                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                                                           11


                                                                                                                                                                        12


                                                                                                                                                                                                     13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                         nbre of disabled neurons                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nbre of disabled neurons



                                                                                          (a) AUC PR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) AUC ROC

                                                                                                              Figure 6: Performance metrics by disabling some neurons


8.5                                          E NHANCED L ATENT R EPRESENTATIONS : A NO R AND VS . T RADITIONAL AUTOENCODER

Within this experimental framework, we constructed three distinct models: an AE, a variational
AE, and our novel AnoRand. Notably, all three models shared a similar architecture, featuring a
comparable number of layers and neurons, and were implemented within an unsupervised learn-
ing framework. Our results show that when it comes to image reconstruction, both AE and VAE
showed superior capabilities (see figure 3d). This phenomenon can be attributed to their inherent
nature, which drives them to learn representations of all classes present in the data. In contrast,
AnoRand, by design, primarily focuses on a single class during training, akin to a one-class model.
Consequently, it excels at reconstructing instances from the normal class (digit 1) but faces limita-
tions when dealing with digit 7, which it considers as an anomaly. However, the results in figure 8
demonstrate that AnoRand surpasses AE and VAE in anomaly detection tasks. The primary reason
behind this performance differential lies in AnoRand’s exclusive focus on learning the normal class.
This specialized training equips AnoRand to effectively spot data points from the anomaly class,
thereby minimizing false negatives. In contrast, AE and VAE, due to their broader learning objec-
tives, exhibit a higher incidence of false positives, primarily because data from the anomaly class
produces reconstructions very similar to those of the normal class.
                                       0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.35


                                       0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.30



                                       0.7                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                             Precision recall AUC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Time(seconds)
                             ROC AUC


                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.20
                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40

                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15

                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.10                                                                                                                                    20


                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           rs

                                                                                                                                                                                                                P

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OF

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FB

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OD



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rs

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OF

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  F


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OD



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            de


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 de
                                               rs


                                                      P

                                                            OD


                                                                   OF

                                                                        FB


                                                                               OS

                                                                                    IF


                                                                                         N


                                                                                                 F


                                                                                                         M

                                                                                                                  A


                                                                                                                         F


                                                                                                                             D


                                                                                                                                    D

                                                                                                                                          OD



                                                                                                                                                       r
                                                                                                                                                       E


                                                                                                                                                                  DD

                                                                                                                                                                   DA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ML


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ML
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SV
                                                                                                                                                    de


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ou


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ou
                                                                                              LO


                                                                                                                      CO
                                                    ML


                                                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                                              PC
                                                                                         KN


                                                                                                                             SO


                                                                                                                                  PO
                                                                                                       SV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CL
                                             Ou


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               co
                                                                 CL


                                                                             HB


                                                                                                                                                                LO
                                                          AB


                                                                                                                                                            SV
                                                                                                                                        EC



                                                                                                                                                co


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OC
                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                     OC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           En


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                En
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ep
                                                                                                                                               En


                                                                                                                                                           ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to
                                                                                                                                               to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                De


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     De
                                                                                                                                                           De
                                                                                                                                           Au


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Au


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Au


                                                                                                     Algorithms                                                                                                                                             Algorithms                                                                                                                                Algorithms


                                                                             (a) AUC ROC                                                                                                                                                (b) AUC PR                                                                                                (c) Training time in seconds

                                                            Figure 7: Performance metrics on synthetic data set for unsupervised algorithms


8.6                                          U NSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON REAL WORLD DATASETS

We compared the performances of our method to those of 16 baseline unsupervised clustering algo-
rithms including: CBLOF He et al. (2003), HBOS Goldstein & Dengel (2012), KNNRamaswamy
et al. (2000), IForest Liu et al. (2008), LOF Breunig et al. (2000), OCSVM Schölkopf et al. (1999),
PCAShyu et al. (2003), COFTang et al. (2002), SOD Kriegel et al. (2009), COPOD Li et al. (2020),
ECOD Li et al. (2022), AutoEncoder Kingma & Welling (2013), DeepSVDD Ruff et al. (2018),
GMM Zong et al. (2018) and LODAPevnỳ (2016).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           1.00                                                                                              1.000                                                                                  1.00


                                           0.95                                                                                                                                                                                     0.99
                                                                                                                                             0.995
                                           0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.98
                    Precision recall AUC

                                           0.85                                                                                              0.990


                                                                                                                                   ROC AUC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.97


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACC
                                           0.80
                                                                                                                                             0.985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.96
                                           0.75
                                                                                                                                             0.980
                                           0.70                                                                                                                                                                                     0.95

                                           0.65                                                                                              0.975
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.94
                                                            d


                                                                                  AE


                                                                                                            E


                                                                                                                                                                  d


                                                                                                                                                                                     AE


                                                                                                                                                                                                              E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                         VA


                                                                                                                                                                                                           VA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VA
                                                            an


                                                                                                                                                                an


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                          oR


                                                                                                                                                              oR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oR
                                                      An


                                                                                                                                                           An


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             An
                                                                              Algorithms                                                                                           Algorithms                                                                         Algorithms
                                               (a) Precision recall AUC                                                                                           (b) AUCROC                                                                           (c) Accuracy

                                             Figure 8: Performance of AnoRand compared to autoencoders on Mnist 2 classes data


Table 1: AUCPR (in %) of 16 unsupervised algorithms on 44 real-world datasets. For our method,
we computed the average AUCPR over 10 runs and added the standard deviation. The performance
rank is shown in parentheses (the lower, the better), and mark the best performing method(s) in bold.
Category                                   Dataset                PCA         OCSVM        LOF                CBLOF       COF                HBOS           KNN          SOD           COPOD          ECOD        Deep SVDD   DA GMM       LODA           Iforest     AutoEncoder   VAE          AnoRand(Ours)
                                           mnist                  39,93(3)    33,2(6)      20,9(14)           28,82(8)    25,51(11)          12,51(17)      35,53(5)     19,15(16)     21,35(13)      31,93(7)    19,72(15)   23,75(12)    25,86(10)      27,71(9)    40,28(2)      39,87(4)     50.17 ±1.25 (1)
                                           optdigits              2,76(14)    2,92(13)     6,06(4)            10,08(2)    4,42(7)            10,03(3)       3,06(12)     4,39(8)       4,36(9)        3,43(11)    -           5,59(5)      3,95(10)       5,09(6)     2,64(16)      2,67(15)     56.34 ±5.42(1)
                                           skin                   17,4(14)    19,03(9)     18,25(12)          29,82(2)    16,38(15)          23,7(8)        28,72(4)     24,61(7)      17,99(13)      15,96(16)   18,48(10)   -            18,44(11)      26,08(6)    28,08(5)      29,78(3)     52.20 ±12.26(1)
Image and CV


                                           FashionMNIST           31,42(9)    31,97(8)     16,85(16)          38,9(2)     20,73(14)          29,43(11)      33,87(3)     28,72(12)     30,32(10)      32,53(5)    17,43(15)   14,44(17)    27,32(13)      32,35(7)    32,46(6)      32,66(4)     43.16 ±2.48(1)
                                           MNIST-C                16,88(10)   17,72(7)     13,84(15)          27,62(2)    14,53(14)          15,46(13)      22,98(3)     15,68(12)     15,9(11)       18,24(5)    8,34(17)    11,37(16)    18,63(4)       17,99(6)    17,03(9)      17,24(8)     35.21 ±1.26(1)
                                           satimage-2             85,69(6)    82,71(7)     4,29(16)           97,09(1)    8,81(15)           78,04(9)       39,14(12)    26,11(13)     76,55(10)      63,25(11)   3,08(17)    22,07(14)    80,52(8)       93,45(3)    86,36(5)      87,52(4)     94.12 ±01.80(2)
                                           MVTec-AD               54,06(9)    51,44(13)    54,9(7)            58,52(1)    46,59(15)          55,22(6)       55,55(4)     51,48(12)     54,64(8)       55,44(5)    36,5(17)    45,66(16)    49,73(14)      56,04(3)    51,57(11)     51,62(10)    57.65±0.12(2)
                                           letter                 6,86(15)    6,11(17)     34,02(1)           14,8(6)     21,43(5)           8,38(10)       30(2)        28,63(3)      6,77(16)       6,94(13)    9,29(8)     11,68(7)     6,87(14)       8,49(9)     8,25(12)      8,31(11)     28.47 ±1.84(4)
                                           celeba                 15,89(1)    10,73(8)     1,71(17)           11,33(7)    1,77(16)           13,82(2)       3,14(12)     2,66(13)      13,69(3)       12,37(4)    2,34(14)    1,95(15)     4,04(11)       8,96(9)     11,39(5)      11,39(5)     5.61 ±0.50(10)
                                           CIFAR10                10,59(6)    10,19(9)     13,02(1)           10,61(5)    11,61(2)           8,38(15)       11,13(3)     11,06(4)      8,77(14)       9,29(12)    8,05(16)    7,73(17)     9,72(11)       8,97(13)    10,32(8)      10,45(7)     10.04 ±0.91 (10)
                                           speech                 1,97(13)    1,96(14)     2,52(3)            1,99(12)    2,25(5)            2,09(9)        2,02(11)     2,13(8)       1,94(15)       1,77(17)    5,12(2)     2,03(10)     1,79(16)       2,31(4)     2,16(6)       2,16(6)      7.65 ±0.11 (1)
                                           Imdb                   4,55(15)    4,44(17)     4,83(8)            4,75(9)     5,16(4)            4,74(10)       4,49(16)     4,7(12)       4,9(6)         4,9(6)      5,06(5)     4,65(13)     4,59(14)       4,74(10)    6,18(3)       6,3(2)       7.65±0.25 (1)
NLP


                                           Agnews                 5,74(11)    5,69(12)     14,35(1)           7,02(6)     12,21(2)           5,58(13)       8,61(4)      8,4(5)        5,43(14)       5,43(14)    4,45(17)    5,41(16)     5,93(10)       6,04(9)     6,18(8)       6,3(7)       9.04 ±1.58 (3)
                                           Amazon                 5,85(10)    5,64(16)     5,72(13)           6,07(5)     5,74(12)           5,98(7)        6,23(2)      6,4(1)        6,08(4)        6,06(6)     3,84(17)    5,65(15)     5,92(9)        5,95(8)     5,75(11)      5,69(14)     6.20 ±0.23 (3)
                                           Yelp                   7,62(13)    7,75(10)     8,52(5)            7,68(11)    8,68(4)            7,81(9)        9,85(1)      9,2(2)        8,01(6)        7,98(7)     6,39(17)    6,72(16)     7,65(12)       7,88(8)     7,05(15)      7,14(14)     8.80 ±1.32 (3)
                                           WBC                    82,29(9)    89,87(6)     5,57(16)           92,27(4)    9,73(14)           73,56(11)      66,55(12)    54(13)        86,19(7)       86,19(7)    6,38(15)    #N/A         78,67(10)      90,49(5)    94,3(3)       94,45(2)     94.55 ±4.66(1)
                                           Cardiotocography       47,95(6)    52,61(2)     30,66(14)          45,44(7)    28,21(16)          38,28(11)      34,79(12)    27,99(17)     40,46(10)      43,57(8)    34,03(13)   30,61(15)    48(5)          41,47(9)    48,49(3)      48,16(4)     61.39 ±5.74(1)
                                           Lymphography           97,02(6)    93,59(7)     23,08(14)          97,62(2)    36,68(13)          91,83(8)       38,69(12)    22,65(15)     88,68(10)      90,87(9)    4,58(17)    19,52(16)    44,54(11)      97,31(3)    97,22(5)      97,24(4)     99.68 ±0.01(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 98.17 ±0.40(3)
Healthcare


                                           breastw                95,11(7)    82,7(13)     28,55(15)          91,54(10)   27,6(16)           97,71(4)       92,19(9)     84,88(12)     99,4(1)        98,54(2)    50,92(14)   -            97,04(5)       96,04(6)    89,17(11)     94,96(8)
                                           WPBC                   23,01(8)    22,93(9)     20,29(17)          21,32(15)   21,3(16)           23,04(7)       21,49(13)    25,37(3)      22,81(10)      21,38(14)   26,24(1)    22,49(11)    25,58(2)       22,42(12)   23,91(4)      23,44(5)     23.06 ±0.44(6)
                                           Hepatitis              36,65(4)    29,44(10)    13,69(17)          31,54(8)    14,39(16)          37,73(3)       21,95(15)    24,89(12)     41.5(1)        37,82(2)    22,17(14)   22,96(13)    30,9(9)        26,25(11)   33,81(6)      33,58(7)     35.20 ±7.17(5)
                                           thyroid                44,34(6)    21,23(12)    20,81(13)          29,95(9)    28,5(10)           50,98(3)       34,98(8)     23,56(11)     19,64(14)      54,05(2)    2,5(17)     16,06(15)    14,68(16)      63.11(1)    46,16(5)      36,9(7)      47.79 ±2.77(4)
                                           annthyroid             16,12(11)   10,37(15)    15,71(12)          13,69(14)   14,39(13)          16,99(8)       16,74(9)     18,84(6)      16,58(10)      24,65(2)    21,95(4)    9,64(16)     7,06(17)       30.47(1)    22,73(3)      19,4(5)      17.02 ±0.80 (5)
                                           Pima                   54,03(5)    50(8)        47,18(11)          53,19(6)    44,7(13)           56.61(1)       55,14(4)     48,24(10)     55,19(3)       37,3(16)    35,87(17)   41,55(15)    44,09(14)      55,82(2)    46,56(12)     49,53(9)     50.09±0.89(7)
                                           cardio                 66,06(2)    62,89(5)     23,79(16)          61,95(6)    28,67(14)          52,1(11)       40,72(12)    28,54(15)     60,42(7)       68.59(1)    22,5(17)    28,92(13)    53,41(9)       59,95(8)    64,72(3)      62,9(4)      52.53 ±4.68 (8)
                                           musk                   99,89(4)    10,61(11)    2,82(15)           100(1)      2,61(16)           100(1)         9,65(12)     7,59(13)      34,79(9)       34,95(8)    5,39(14)    32,75(10)    47(7)          99,61(6)    100(1)        99,89(4)     100 ±0(1)
                                           Waveform               5,79(12)    4,37(16)     11,33(5)           18,98(2)    14,11(3)           5,86(11)       13,04(4)     9,6(6)        6,9(7)         6,8(8)      4,83(13)    3,11(17)     4,71(14)       6,2(9)      6,2(9)        4,65(15)     33.26 ±0.79(1)
                                           cover                  9,8(7)      11,41(5)     8,1(9)             5,83(15)    4(16)              6,83(13)       6,16(14)     3,88(17)      11,37(6)       15,63(3)    8,1(9)      27,59(2)     13,06(4)       8,8(8)      7,27(11)      7,25(12)     34.19 ±0.54(1)
                                           fault                  32,76(14)   38,44(8)     38,38(9)           43,98(4)    41,56(5)           36,47(10)      54,45(2)     48,01(3)      30,54(17)      30,82(16)   39,15(7)    33,48(13)    31,03(15)      41,09(6)    34,58(11)     34,46(12)    63.20 ±1.51 (1)
                                           donors                 17(6)       9,8(11)      7,88(14)           6,89(15)    8,8(13)            23,36(2)       14,75(7)     9,69(12)      21,58(4)       14,17(8)    6,38(16)    10,53(10)    3,78(17)       12,74(9)    22,74(3)      18,78(5)     90.85 ±6.83(1)
                                           PageBlocks             51,71(5)    49,14(8)     39,64(13)          49,65(7)    41,02(12)          33,32(16)      45,39(11)    37,83(14)     37,65(15)      49(9)       31,45(17)   53,25(3)     51,29(6)       46,04(10)   59,18(2)      51,96(4)     65.26 ±11.50(1)
                                           magic.gamma            59,27(7)    51,43(15)    54,76(12)          68,85(3)    54,12(14)          62,41(6)       75,63(2)     67,89(4)      59,18(8)       54,38(13)   49,17(16)   46,92(17)    58,49(11)      64,72(5)    59,18(8)      59,11(10)    77.93 ±1.29(1)
                                           fraud                  22,91(11)   47,58(2)     47(4)              47,52(3)    22,86(12)          25,89(10)      47(4)        31,37(9)      42,82(8)       42,99(7)    8,97(17)    21,32(14)    46,37(6)       21,67(13)   15,88(15)     15,88(15)    60.08 ±0.15 (1)
Others


                                           vertebral              10,49(11)   10,94(9)     14,24(3)           11,58(6)    13,85(4)           9,23(16)       10,57(10)    11,79(5)      8,89(17)       11,24(7)    10,49(11)   15,24(2)     9,68(15)       10,46(13)   11,18(8)      9,85(14)     20.47 ±0.11(1)
                                           SpamBase               41,57(7)    40,12(12)    35,16(15)          41,18(11)   34,73(16)          50,03(5)       41,42(8)     40,03(13)     56.68(1)       53,95(3)    42,23(6)    -            35,88(14)      51,75(4)    41,21(10)     41,42(8)     55.17 ±0.50(2)
                                           landsat                16,18(17)   16,21(16)    24,69(7)           30,97(3)    24,95(6)           22,03(10)      24,65(8)     26,38(4)      17,48(14)      25,17(5)    38.83(1)    24,48(9)     18,86(13)      19,81(12)   16,75(15)     20,58(11)    38.54 ±4.54 (2)
                                           shuttle                92,35(7)    85,29(10)    13,76(16)          60,98(11)   12,17(17)          96(4)          20,38(13)    20,27(14)     96,56(2)       95,76(5)    15,86(15)   93,2(6)      48,75(12)      91,27(9)    91,49(8)      97.62(1)     96.52 ±0.05(3)
                                           Stamps                 41,09(4)    31,39(11)    21,29(14)          23,66(12)   16,5(16)           35,24(9)       23,53(13)    20,28(15)     43(2)          38,17(7)    11,4(17)    43.72(1)     34(10)         39,49(5)    38,35(6)      38,11(8)     41.66 ±0.39(3)
                                           satellite              59,64(9)    57,61(11)    37,68(17)          61,48(8)    39,7(16)           67,25(2)       50,01(13)    47,23(14)     56,58(12)      65,94(4)    40,11(15)   58,33(10)    61,94(6)       65,92(5)    61,7(7)       67,24(3)     73.24 ±0.49(1)
                                           wine                   30,87(5)    21,56(8)     7,77(16)           5,83(17)    8,45(13)           43,08(3)       8,43(14)     7,95(15)      45,71(2)       18,37(11)   21,14(9)    17,51(12)    48.82(1)       25,96(6)    19,1(10)      22,02(7)     41.59 ±1.76(4)
                                           campaign               27(9)       29,22(5)     14,51(14)          23,99(10)   13,01(16)          37,99(2)       27,18(8)     18,88(12)     38.58(1)       37(3)       11,6(17)    14,62(13)    13,47(15)      32,26(4)    28,51(6)      28,51(6)     23.99 ±1.76 (10)
                                           http                   56,43(3)    46,86(5)     3,82(14)           47,53(4)    9,57(12)           44,79(6)       0,7(15)      8,32(13)      35,19(7)       16,61(11)   29(8)                    0,67(16)       90.83(1)    25,49(10)     25,55(9)     60.24 ±0.07(2)
                                           InternetAds            32,55(11)   54,68(2)     40,49(9)           58.13(1)    38,67(10)          53,97(3)       43,23(7)     27,69(15)     50,97(5)       51,07(4)    27,91(12)   -            23,89(16)      48(6)       27,72(14)     27,73(13)    42.79 ±1.43 (8)
                                           census                 10.02(1)    6,76(12)     5,45(13)           7,4(9)      4,88(16)           8,6(6)         9(4)         8,5(7)        9,9(2)         9,7(3)      6,87(11)    8,7(5)       5,01(15)       7,7(8)      5,41(14)      4,45(17)     7.31 ±0.10 (10)


                                                                                                                                                                                               17.5
               16



               14
                                                                                                                                                                                               15.0

               12                                                                                                                                                                              12.5

                                                                                                                                                                                               10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       count


               10
 Rank


               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                7.5

               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                5.0
               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5
               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.0 13.0 15.0 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AnoRand Rank
                      rs


                                              A


                                                      M


                                                              F


                                                                       F


                                                                              F


                                                                                    OS


                                                                                             N


                                                                                                     D


                                                                                                               D

                                                                                                                     OD



                                                                                                                               D


                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                  DA



                                                                                                                                                            t

                                                                                                                                                                  AE


                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                              s
                                                           LO


                                                                    LO


                                                                             CO


                                                                                                                                                                        VA
                                            PC


                                                                                          KN


                                                                                                  SO


                                                                                                              PO


                                                                                                                               D
                                                     SV


                                                                                                                                     GM


                                                                                                                                                           re
                    Ou


                                                                                  HB


                                                                                                                                               LO
                                                                                                                            SV
                                                                                                                    EC
                                                                   CB


                                                                                                                                                        IFo
                                                                                                          CO
                                                     OC


                                                                                                                                   DA
                                                                                                                          ep
                                                                                                                          De


                                                                                                 Algorithms

                                                              (a) Overall AUC ROC rank                                                                                                                             (b) AnoRand AUC ROC rank

                                               Figure 9: Algorithms performance rankings on real-world data sets (lower the better).



                                                                                                                                                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: AUC ROC of algorithms on various datasets. For our method, we computed the aver-
age AUC ROC over 10 runs and added the standard deviation. The performance rank is shown in
parentheses (the lower, the better), and mark the best performing method(s) in bold.
Datasets           PCA         OCSVM       LOF         CBLOF       COF         HBOS        KNN         SOD         COPOD       ECOD        Deep SVDD   DA GMM      LODA        IForest     AutoEncoder   VAE          AnoRand(Ours)
ALOI               56,65(6)    55,85(8)    66,63(1)    55,22(9)    64,68(2)    52,63(14)   61,47(3)    61,09(4)    53,75(12)   56,6(7)     50,29(17)   51,96(15)   51,33(16)   56,66(5)    54,96(10)     54,89(11)    53,42±2, 89(13)
annthyroid         66,25(11)   57,23(15)   70,2(7)     62,26(13)   65,92(12)   60,15(14)   71,69(6)    77,38(3)    76,8(4)     78,03(2)    76,62(5)    56,53(16)   41,02(17)   82,01(1)    69,17(8)      67,45(10)    67,93±9, 69(9)
backdoor           80,13(9)    86,2(4)     85,68(5)    81,16(6)    73,03(10)   71,43(12)   80,82(8)    69,54(13)   80,97(7)    86,33(3)    55,16(17)   56,26(16)   69,22(14)   72,15(11)   88,7(1)       88,65(2)     64,67±3, 78(15)
breastw            95,13(10)   80,3(13)    40,61(15)   96,81(8)    38,84(16)   98,94(4)    97,01(7)    93,97(11)   99,68(1)    99,17(2)    65,66(14)               98,49(5)    98,32(6)    90,02(12)     95,31(9)     99,11±0, 87(3)
campaign           72,78(6)    65,52(12)   58,85(13)   66,61(11)   57,26(14)   78,61(1)    72,1(7)     69,04(9)    77,69(2)    76,78(3)    48,7(17)    56,08(15)   51,43(16)   71,71(8)    73,42(4)      73,42(4)     67,02±3, 77(10)
cardio             95,55(1)    93,91(5)    66,33(16)   89,93(9)    71,41(15)   84,67(11)   76,64(12)   73,25(14)   92,35(7)    94,44(4)    58,96(17)   75,01(13)   90,34(8)    93,19(6)    95,47(2)      95,08(3)     89,59±16, 24(10)
Cardiotocography   74,67(5)    77,86(2)    59,51(13)   64,54(10)   53,77(15)   60,86(12)   56,23(14)   51,69(17)   67,02(9)    68,92(7)    53,53(16)   62,01(11)   73,65(6)    67,57(8)    75,07(4)      75,22(3)     78,13±6, 76(1)
celeba             79,38(1)    70,7(8)     38,55(17)   73,99(6)    38,58(16)   76,18(4)    59,63(12)   47,85(14)   75,68(5)    72,82(7)    50,36(13)   44,74(15)   60,11(11)   70,41(9)    78,36(3)      78,37(2)     67,51±5, 36(10)
census             68,74(2)    54,58(11)   47,19(13)   59,41(9)    41,35(14)   64,94(5)    66,75(4)    62,31(6)    69,07(1)    68,44(3)    51,07(12)   59,29(10)   36,86(15)   59,52(8)    0(16)         0(16)        61,16±5, 21(7)
cover              93,73(1)    92,62(5)    84,58(13)   89,3(8)     76,91(15)   80,24(14)   85,97(12)   74,46(16)   88,64(10)   93,42(3)    46,2(17)    89,89(7)    92,34(6)    86,74(11)   93,43(2)      93,42(3)     88,72±16, 18(9)
fault              46,02(13)   47,69(12)   58,93(6)    64,06(4)    62,1(5)     51,28(9)    72,98(2)    68,11(3)    43,88(15)   43,41(16)   51,67(8)    45,86(14)   41,71(17)   57,02(7)    48,38(11)     48,45(10)    76,28±11, 09(1)
fraud              90,35(11)   90,62(9)    94,92(2)    91,7(8)     93,05(7)    90,29(12)   93,56(6)    94,97(1)    88,32(16)   89,85(13)   64,98(17)   89,53(14)   88,99(15)   90,38(10)   94,45(4)      94,45(4)     94,54±17, 99(3)
glass              66,29(15)   35,36(17)   69,2(14)    82,94(2)    72,24(12)   77,23(4)    82,29(3)    73,36(8)    72,43(11)   75,7(7)     47,49(16)   76,09(6)    73,13(9)    77,13(5)    73,11(10)     71,25(13)    87,1±3, 47(1)
Hepatitis          75,95(5)    67,75(10)   38,02(17)   66,4(11)    41,45(16)   79,85(3)    52,76(14)   68,17(9)    82,05(2)    79,67(4)    50,96(15)   54,8(13)    64,87(12)   69,75(8)    74,88(6)      73,54(7)     83,37±5, 29(1)
http               99,72(2)    99,59(5)    27,46(14)   99,6(3)     88,78(11)   99,53(7)    3,37(16)    78,04(12)   99,29(9)    98,1(10)    69,05(13)   -           12,48(15)   99,96(1)    99,6(3)       99,59(5)     99,48±47, 51(8)
InternetAds        61,67(12)   68,28(4)    65,83(8)    70,58(1)    63,79(10)   68,03(5)    69,99(2)    61,85(11)   67,05(7)    67,1(6)     60,2(15)    -           55,38(16)   69,01(3)    60,97(13)     60,97(13)    65,72±8(9)
Ionosphere         79,19(11)   75,92(13)   90,59(2)    90,72(1)    86,76(4)    62,49(16)   88,26(3)    86,41(5)    79,34(10)   75,59(14)   50,89(17)   73,41(15)   78,42(12)   84,5(6)     80,78(8)      79,39(9)     80,88±9, 68(7)
landsat            35,76(17)   36,15(16)   53,9(8)     63,55(3)    53,5(9)     55,14(7)    57,95(5)    59,54(4)    41,55(13)   56,61(6)    63,61(2)    43,92(12)   38,17(14)   47,64(11)   37,49(15)     50,88(10)    65,21±7, 46(1)
letter             50,29(15)   46,18(17)   84,49(2)    75,62(6)    80,03(5)    59,74(8)    86,19(1)    84,09(3)    54,32(10)   50,76(13)   56,64(9)    50,42(14)   50,24(16)   61,07(7)    51,58(12)     52,68(11)    82,34±8, 02(4)
Lymphography       99,82(5)    99,54(7)    89,86(12)   99,83(4)    90,85(11)   99,49(9)    55,91(16)   72,49(14)   99,48(10)   99,52(8)    32,29(17)   72,11(15)   85,55(13)   99,81(6)    99,84(2)      99,84(2)     99,98±11, 89(1)
magic.gamma        67,22(10)   60,65(15)   68,51(7)    75,13(3)    66,64(12)   70,86(6)    82,38(1)    75,4(2)     68,33(8)    64,36(14)   60,26(16)   58,58(17)   68,02(9)    73,25(5)    66,53(13)     66,86(11)    73,96±3, 7(4)
mammography        88,72(4)    84,95(7)    74,39(15)   83,74(10)   77,53(14)   86,27(6)    84,53(8)    81,51(13)   90,69(2)    90,75(1)    56,98(16)   -           83,91(9)    86,39(5)    83,55(11)     88,86(3)     82,07±29, 37(12)
mnist              85,29(2)    82,95(6)    67,13(14)   79,45(9)    70,78(12)   60,42(15)   80,58(8)    60,1(16)    77,74(10)   84,6(5)     53,4(17)    67,23(13)   72,27(11)   80,98(7)    85,44(1)      84,99(3)     84,67±8, 61(4)
musk               100(1)      80,58(11)   41,18(16)   100(1)      38,69(17)   100(1)      69,89(14)   74,09(13)   94,2(10)    95,11(8)    43,52(15)   76,85(12)   95,11(8)    99,99(7)    100(1)        100(1)       100±28, 67(1)
optdigits          51,65(12)   54(11)      56,1(10)    87,51(2)    49,15(15)   81,63(3)    41,73(16)   58,92(9)    68,71(5)    61,04(8)    38,89(17)   62,57(6)    61,74(7)    70,92(4)    50,71(14)     51,25(13)    97,76±26, 28(1)
PageBlocks         90,64(4)    88,76(8)    75,9(15)    85,04(10)   72,65(16)   80,58(13)   81,94(12)   77,75(14)   88,05(9)    90,92(2)    57,77(17)   89,61(6)    83,34(11)   89,57(7)    92,08(1)      90,66(3)     90,5±4, 42(5)
pendigits          93,73(4)    93,75(3)    47,99(15)   90,4(10)    45,07(16)   93,04(7)    72,95(12)   66,29(13)   90,68(9)    91,22(8)    39,92(17)   64,22(14)   89,1(11)    94,76(2)    93,72(5)      93,71(6)     97,41±23, 13(1)
Pima               70,77(5)    66,92(8)    65,71(10)   71,42(3)    61,05(13)   71,07(4)    73,43(1)    61,25(12)   69,1(6)     51,54(16)   51,03(17)   55,92(15)   65,93(9)    72,87(2)    59,94(14)     64,18(11)    68,98±3, 18(7)
satellite          59,62(13)   59,02(14)   55,88(15)   71,32(3)    54,74(17)   74,8(2)     65,18(7)    63,96(8)    63,2(9)     75,06(1)    55,3(16)    62,33(10)   61,98(11)   70,43(4)    61(12)        69,61(5)     69,15±6, 95(6)
satimage-2         97,62(7)    97,35(9)    47,36(17)   99,84(1)    56,7(15)    97,65(6)    92,6(13)    83,08(14)   97,21(10)   97,11(11)   53,14(16)   96,29(12)   97,56(8)    99,16(3)    97,68(5)      98,59(4)     99,79±37, 18(2)
shuttle            98,62(8)    97,4(10)    57,11(15)   83,48(11)   51,72(17)   98,63(7)    69,64(12)   69,51(13)   99,35(3)    99,4(2)     52,05(16)   97,92(9)    60,95(14)   99,56(1)    99,01(5)      98,98(6)     99,13±26, 94(4)
smtp               88,41(4)    80,7(7)     71,84(13)   79,68(8)    79,6(9)     70,52(15)   89,62(3)    59,85(17)   79,09(10)   71,86(12)   78,24(11)   71,32(14)   67,43(16)   89,73(2)    82,23(5)      81,66(6)     96,77±8, 46(1)
SpamBase           54,66(9)    52,47(12)   43,33(14)   54,97(7)    40,96(16)   64,74(5)    53,35(11)   52,35(13)   70,09(2)    66,89(3)    53,55(10)   -           41,99(15)   64,76(4)    54,8(8)       55,23(6)     70,84±17, 04(1)
speech             50,79(10)   50,19(14)   52,48(7)    50,58(13)   55,97(1)    50,59(12)   51,03(9)    55,86(2)    52,89(5)    51,58(8)    53,43(4)    52,75(6)    49,84(15)   50,74(11)   46,89(16)     46,89(16)    55,53±2, 93(3)
Stamps             91,47(5)    83,86(11)   51,26(17)   68,18(14)   53,81(16)   90,73(8)    68,61(13)   73,26(12)   93,4(2)     91,41(6)    55,84(15)   88,88(9)    87,18(10)   91,21(7)    92,65(3)      92,48(4)     94,56±18, 47(1)
thyroid            96,34(5)    87,92(13)   86,86(14)   94,73(9)    90,87(12)   95,62(7)    95,93(6)    92,81(11)   94,3(10)    97,78(2)    49,64(17)   79,75(15)   74,3(16)    98,3(1)     96,74(4)      95,55(8)     97,08±9, 13(3)
vertebral          37,06(11)   37,99(8)    49,29(3)    41,41(6)    48,71(4)    28,56(16)   33,79(14)   40,32(7)    25,64(17)   37,51(10)   36,67(12)   53,2(2)     30,57(15)   36,66(13)   45,26(5)      37,58(9)     71,15±2, 91(1)
vowels             65,29(9)    61,59(11)   93,12(3)    89,92(5)    94,04(2)    72,21(7)    97,26(1)    92,65(4)    53,15(14)   45,81(17)   52,49(15)   60,58(12)   70,36(8)    73,94(6)    59,25(13)     61,91(10)    47,43±13, 94(16)
Waveform           65,48(11)   56,29(15)   73,32(3)    72,42(7)    72,56(5)    68,77(9)    73,78(2)    68,57(10)   75,03(1)    73,25(4)    54,47(16)   49,35(17)   60,13(14)   71,47(8)    63,9(12)      63,86(13)    72,43±6, 34(6)
WBC                98,2(10)    99,03(7)    54,17(16)   99,46(3)    60,9(14)    98,72(9)    90,56(13)   94,6(12)    99,11(5)    99,11(5)    55,5(15)    -           96,91(11)   99,01(8)    99,28(4)      99,57(2)     99,66±0, 53(1)
WDBC               99,05(4)    98,86(6)    89(15)      99,32(3)    96,26(12)   99,5(1)     91,72(14)   91,9(13)    99,42(2)    97,2(10)    65,69(17)   76,67(16)   98,26(8)    98,95(5)    98,72(7)      98,22(9)     96,75±4, 96(11)
Wilt               20,39(17)   31,28(15)   50,65(2)    32,54(13)   49,66(3)    32,49(14)   48,42(4)    53,25(1)    33,4(11)    39,43(8)    46,08(6)    37,29(9)    26,42(16)   41,94(7)    34,51(10)     33,03(12)    46,66±13, 48(5)
wine               84,37(4)    73,07(9)    37,74(16)   25,86(17)   44,44(15)   91,36(1)    44,98(14)   46,11(13)   88,65(3)    71,34(10)   59,52(12)   61,7(11)    90,12(2)    80,37(6)    73,1(8)       78,23(7)     83,79±3, 12(5)
WPBC               46,01(13)   45,35(15)   41,41(17)   44,77(16)   45,88(14)    51,24(1)   46,59(12)   51,14(2)    49,34(7)    46,83(10)   49,79(3)    47,8(9)     49,31(8)    46,63(11)   49,6(4)       49,53(5)     49,4±7, 51(6)
CIFAR10            63,87(9)    63,76(10)   68,57(1)    64,23(6)    64,7(5)     57,5(16)    64,75(4)    64,22(7)    58,64(14)   61,04(13)   56,04(17)   58,08(15)   62,34(11)   61,28(12)   65,978(3)     66,097(2)    64,133±8, 71(8)
FashionMNIST       86,09(4)    85,24(7)    67,57(15)   88,17(2)    71,44(14)   78,68(13)   86,6(3)     81,73(10)   81,07(11)   83,63(9)    63,32(17)   67,29(16)   80,28(12)   84,89(8)    85,35(6)      85,735(5)    89,557±8, 18(1)
MNIST-C            73,75(8)    72,21(11)   68,27(15)   80,86(3)    69,81(14)   70,82(13)   81,26(2)    74(7)       71,26(12)   72,64(10)   51,85(17)   58,56(16)   74,37(5)    73,74(9)    74,04(6)      74,62(4)     82,38±13, 54(1)
MVTec-AD           72,42(9)    69,84(13)   74,19(3)    75,98(1)    69,7(14)    73,36(5)    72,96(7)    71,57(10)   72,91(8)    73,46(4)    57,1(17)    66,47(16)   68,51(15)   73,19(6)    70,872(12)    71,248(11)   75,49±13, 25(2)
SVHN               60,53(7)    60,73(5)    64,51(1)    60,3(8)     63,47(2)    56,08(16)   62,63(3)    61,09(4)    56,75(15)   58,27(12)   53,47(17)   57,22(14)   58,26(13)   58,62(11)   60,001(9)     60,697(6)    59,531±4, 85(10)
Agnews             54,7(11)    54,34(12)   71,8(1)     60,02(6)    68,97(2)    53,87(13)   64,11(4)    62,81(5)    52,98(15)   53,04(14)   42,51(17)   52,02(16)   55,47(10)   56,74(8)    56,575(9)     57,495(7)    64,15±4, 40(3)
Amazon             55,06(11)   54,14(15)   56,11(10)   57,36(4)    56,96(5)    56,52(8)    60,03(2)    60,05(1)    56,94(6)    56,79(7)    39,08(17)   53,58(16)   54,2(14)    56,13(9)    54,95(12)     54,53(13)    57,43±6, 97(3)
Imdb               47,06(15)   46,07(17)   48,71(10)   49,35(7)    49,64(6)    49,1(8)     47,83(11)   49,86(5)    50,68(4)    50,73(2)    50,73(2)    47,67(14)   46,43(16)   49,09(9)    47,81(12)     47,72(13)    51,79±7, 83(1)
Yelp               60,71(12)   60,28(13)   67,09(4)    64,9(6)     66,11(5)    61,85(10)   69,84(1)    67,74(3)    62,36(8)    62,15(9)    54,62(17)   56,28(16)   61,36(11)   62,53(7)    59,23(15)     59,79(14)    68,77±11, 73(2)
20news             56,66(8)    56,45(9)    62,14(2)    57,59(6)    61,8(3)     56,28(10)   59,33(4)    58,56(5)    55,79(12)   56(11)      50,24(17)   54,17(16)   55,53(13)   56,9(7)     54,23(15)     54,38(14)    63,78±7, 45(1)


                                                                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Table 3: Experimental datasets descriptions.

          Data               Samples   Features    Anomaly   % Anomaly     Category
          cover              286048       10         2747       0,96        Botany
          speech               3686      400           61       1,65      Linguistics
          pendigits            6870       16          156       2,27        Image
          optdigits            5216       64          150       2,88        Image
          Waveform             3443       21          100        2,9       Physics
          musk                 3062      166           97       3,17      Chemistry
          Lymphography         148        18            6       4,05      Healthcare
          WBC                  223         9           10       4,48      Healthcare
          FashionMNIST         6315      512          315         5         Image
          MNIST-C             10000      512          500         5         Image
          Imdb                10000      768          500         5          NLP
          donors             619326       10        36710       5,93      Sociology
          mnist                7603      100          700       9,21        Image
          PageBlocks           5393       10          510       9,46      Document
          skin               245057        3        50859      20,75        Image
          Cardiotocography     2114       21          466      22,04      Healthcare
          fault                1941       27          673      34,67       Physical
          satimage-2           5803       36           71       1,22     Astronautics
          SpamBase             4207       57         1679      39,91      Document
          MVTec-AD               -         -            -         -         Image
          Agnews              10000      768          500         5          NLP
          Amazon              10000      768          500         5          NLP
          Yelp                10000      768          500         5          NLP
          shuttle             49097        9         3511       7,15     Astronautics
          Stamps               340         9           31       9,12      Document
          landsat              6435       36         1333      20,71     Astronautics
          breastw              683         9          239      34,99      Healthcare
          letter               1600       32          100       6,25        Image
          wine                 129        13           10       7,75      Chemistry
          WPBC                 198        33           47      23,74      Healthcare
          satellite            6435       36         2036      31,64     Astronautics
          magic.gamma         19020       10         6688      35,16       Physical
          thyroid              3772        6           93       2,47      Healthcare
          Hepatitis             80        19           13      16,25      Healthcare
          annthyroid           7200        6          534       7,42      Healthcare
          Pima                 768         8          268       34,9      Healthcare
          http               567498        3         2211       0,39         Web
          celeba             202599       39         4547       2,24        Image
          glass                214         7            9       4,21       Forensic
          CIFAR10              5263      512          263         5         Image
          cardio               1831       21          176       9,61      Healthcare
          campaign            41188       62         4640      11,27       Finance
          vertebral            240         6           30       12,5       Biology
          InternetAds          1966     1555          368      18,72        Image
          fraud              284807       29          492       0,17       Finance
          SVHN                 5208      512          260         5         Image
          mammography         11183        6          260       2,32      Healthcare
          Wilt                 4819        5          257       5,33        Botany
          census             299285      500        18568       6,2       Sociology
          Ionosphere           351        33          126       35,9     Oryctognosy
          20newsgroups           -         -            -         -          NLP
          WDBC                 367        30           10       2,72      Healthcare
          smtp                95156        3           30       0,03         Web
          vowels               1456       12           50       3,43      Linguistics
          backdoor            95329      196         2329       2,44       Network
          ALOI                49534       27         1508       3,04        Image
          yeast                1484        8          507      34,16       Biology


                                              18
