Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ANGUAGE M ODELS L INEARLY R EPRESENT S ENTI -
MENT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Sentiment is a pervasive feature in natural language text, yet it is an open question
         how sentiment is represented within Large Language Models (LLMs). In this
         study, we reveal that across a range of models, sentiment is represented linearly:
         a single direction in activation space mostly captures the feature across a range
         of tasks with one extreme for positive and the other for negative. Through causal
         interventions, we isolate this direction and show it is causally relevant in both toy
         tasks and real world datasets such as Stanford Sentiment Treebank.
         We further uncover the mechanisms that involve this direction, highlighting the
         roles of a small subset of attention heads and neurons. Finally, we discover a
         phenomenon which we term the summarization motif: sentiment is not solely
         represented on emotionally charged words, but is additionally summarised at in-
         termediate positions without inherent sentiment, such as punctuation and names.
         We show that in Stanford Sentiment Treebank zero-shot classification, ablating
         the sentiment direction across all tokens results in a drop in accuracy from 100%
         to 62%, while ablating the summarized sentiment direction at comma positions
         alone produces close to half this result (reducing accuracy to 82%).


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have displayed increasingly impressive capabilities (Brown et al.,
2020; Radford et al., 2019; Bubeck et al., 2023), but their internal workings remain poorly un-
derstood. Nevertheless, recent evidence (Li et al., 2023) has suggested that LLMs are capable of
forming models of the world, i.e., inferring hidden variables of the data generation process rather
than simply modeling surface word co-occurrence statistics. There is significant interest (Christiano
et al. (2021), Burns et al. (2022)) in deciphering the latent structure of such representations.
In this work, we investigate how LLMs represent sentiment, a variable in the data generation process
that is relevant and interesting across a wide variety of language tasks(Cui et al., 2023). Approaching
our investigations through the frame of causal mediation analysis (Vig et al., 2020; Pearl, 2022), we
show that these sentiment features are represented linearly by the models, are causally significant,
and are utilized by human-interpretable circuits (Olah et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2021a).
We find the existence of a single direction scientifically interesting as further evidence for the linear
representation hypothesis (Mikolov et al., 2013; Elhage et al., 2022)–the word2vec hypothesis, that
models tend to extract properties of the input and internally represent them as directions in activation
space. Understanding the structure of internal representations is crucial to begin to decode them,
and linear representations are particularly amenable to detailed reverse-engineering (Nanda et al.,
2023b).
We show evidence of a phenomenon we have labeled the “summarization motif”, where rather
than sentiment being directly moved from valenced tokens to the final token, it is first aggregated on
intermediate summarization tokens without inherent valence such as commas, periods and particular
nouns. This can be seen as a naturally emerging analogue to the explicit classification token in
BERT-like models (Devlin et al., 2018), and in that context the phenomenon was observed by Clark
et al. (2019). We show that the sentiment stored on summarization tokens is causally relevant for
the final prediction. We find this an intriguing example of an “information bottleneck”, where the
data generation process is funnelled through a small subset of tokens used as information stores.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    have complete confidence in          the Walt Disney World              currently in remission with   et son bon à rien de mari
    You brought joy to                   the Brazilian Amazon has           a speedy recovery to          ils étaient parfaitement normaux
    despite the misery it                presidential nominee Mitt Romney   radiation and cancer (        gris et triste et rien dans
    deemed a hate group                  overturn Bashar Assad.             you a migraine.               la plus sinistre pour aller


            (a) Nouns                      (b) Proper Nouns                       (c) Medical                      (d) French

Figure 1: Visualizing the “sentiment activation” (projection of the residual stream onto the sentiment
axis) where blue is positive and red is negative. Examples (1a-1c) show the k-means sentiment
direction for the first layer of GPT2-small on samples from OpenWebText. Example 1d shows
the k-means sentiment direction for the 7th layer of pythia-1.4b on the opening of Harry Potter in
French.


Understanding the existence and location of information bottlenecks is a key first step to deciphering
world models. This finding additionally suggests the models’ ability to create summaries at various
levels of abstraction, in this case a sentence or clause rather than a token.
Our contributions are as follows. In Section 3, we demonstrate methods for finding a linear rep-
resentation of sentiment using a toy dataset and show that this direction correlates with sentiment
information in the wild and matters causally in a crowdsourced dataset. In Section 4, we show
through activation patching (Vig et al., 2020) and ablations (techniques defined in Section 2.3) that
the learned sentiment direction captures summarization behavior that is causally important to cir-
cuits performing sentiment tasks.

2       M ETHODS
2.1       DATASETS AND M ODELS

ToyMovieReview                    is a templatic dataset of continuation prompts we generated with the form
                  I thought this movie was ADJECTIVE, I VERBed it. Conclusion: This movie is
where ADJECTIVE and VERB are either two positive words (e.g., incredible and enjoyed) or two
negative words (e.g., horrible and hated) that are sampled from a fixed pool of 85 adjectives (split
55/30 for train/test) and 8 verbs. The expected completion for a positive review is one of a set of
positive descriptors we selected from among the most common completions (e.g. great) and the
expected completion for a negative review is a similar set of negative descriptors (e.g., terrible).

ToyMoodStory is a similar toy dataset which is multi-subject and character-driven with random
names, e.g. Carl hates parties, and avoids them whenever possible. Jack loves parties, and joins them
whenever possible. One day, they were invited to a grand gala. Jack feels very [excited/nervous]

Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) Socher et al. (2013) consists of 10,662 one sentence movie
reviews with human annotated sentiment labels for every constituent phrase from every review.

Internet Movie Database (IMDB) Maas et al. (2011) consists of 25,000 movie reviews taken
from the IMDB website with human-annotated sentiment labels for each review.

OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) is the pretraining dataset for GPT-2 which we use as a
source of random text for correlational evaluations.

GPT-2 and Pythia (Radford et al., 2019; Biderman et al., 2023) are families of decoder-only
transformer models with sizes varying from 85M to 2.8b parameters. We use GPT2-small for movie
review continuation, pythia-1.4b for classification and pythia-2.8b for multi-subject tasks.

2.2       F INDING D IRECTIONS

We use five methods to find a sentiment direction in each layer of a language model using our
ToyMovieReview dataset. In each of the following, let P be the set of positive inputs and N be the


                                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


set of negative inputs. For some input x ∈ P ∪ N, let aL      L
                                                       x and vx be the vector in the residual stream
at layer L above the adjective and verb respectively. We reserve {vxL } as a hold-out set for testing.
Let the correct next token for P be p and for N be n.
                                                   1                  L    1           L
                                                              P                 P
Mean Difference (MD) The direction is computed as |P|            p∈P ap − |N|     n∈N an .


k-means (KM) We fit 2-means to {aL
                                 x : x ∈ P ∪ N}, obtaining cluster centroids {ci : i ∈ [0, 1]}
and take the direction c1 − c0 .
                                                        w
Linear Probing The direction is the normed weights ||w||    of a logistic regression (LR) classifier
     L           1
Pw (ax ) = 1+exp(−w·aL ) trained to distinguish between x ∈ P and x ∈ N.
                        x



Distributed Alignment Search (DAS) The direction is a learned parameter θ where the training
objective is the average logit difference
                  X                                     X
                      [logitθ (x; p) − logitθ (x; n)] +   [logitθ (x; n) − logitθ (x; p)]
                 x∈P                                   x∈N

after activation patching (a technique outlined in Section 2.3) using direction θ .

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) The direction is the first component of {aL
                                                                             x : x ∈ P ∪ N}.


2.3   C AUSAL I NTERVENTIONS

Activation patching In activation patching (Geiger et al., 2020; Vig et al., 2020), we create two
symmetrical datasets, where each prompt xorig and its counterpart prompt xflipped are of the same
length and format but where key words are changed in order to flip the sentiment; e.g., “This movie
was great” could be paired with “This movie was terrible”. We first conduct a forward pass using
xorig and capture these activations for the entire model. We then conduct forward passes using
xflipped , iteratively patching in activations from the original forward pass for each model component.
We can thus determine the relative importance of various parts of the model with respect to the task
currently being performed.
Geiger et al. (2023b) introduce a variant of activation patching that we call “directional activation
patching”. The idea is that rather than modifying the standard basis directions of a component, we
instead only modify the component along a single direction in the vector space, replacing it during
a forward pass with the value from a different input.
Another variant is path patching (Wang et al., 2022) in which only the activations related to the
residual stream paths between two sets of endpoints (senders and receivers) are patched, but the
remainder of the network upstream of the receivers is frozen.
We use two evaluation metrics. The logit difference (difference in logits for correct and incorrect
answers) metric introduced in Wang et al. (2022), as well as a “logit flip” metric (Geiger et al., 2022),
which quantifies the proportion of cases where we induce an inversion in the predicted sentiment.

Ablations We eliminate the contribution of a particular component to a model’s output, usually by
replacing the component’s output with zeros (zero ablation) or the mean over some dataset (mean
ablation), in order to demonstrate its magnitude of importance. We also perform directional ablation,
in which a component’s activations are ablated only along a specific (e.g. sentiment) direction.

3     F INDING AND E VALUATING A ‘S ENTIMENT D IRECTION ’
The first question we investigate is whether there exists a direction in the residual stream in a trans-
former model that represents the sentiment of the input text, as a special case of the linear represen-
tation hypothesis (Mikolov et al., 2013). We show that the methods discussed above (2.2) all arrive
at a similar sentiment direction. We can visualise the feature being represented by this direction
by projecting the residual stream at a given token/layer onto it, using some text from the training
distribution. We will call this the “sentiment activation”.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                    Proportion of Sentiment by Activation (kmeans, pythia-2.8b)


                                                                                                                          Cum. Label proportion
                                                                                                                                                   1                                                     Neutral
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Negative
                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Positive
                                                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                       direction       accuracy
                   DAS              KM           LR            MD           PCA         Random                                                    0.4                                                                       k-means             86.4%
   DAS           100.0%          82.4%         86.1%         86.1%         69.7%             0.2%                                                                                                                               PCA             82.2%
                                                                                                                                                  0.2
   KM             82.4%         100.0%         95.1%         95.7%         80.0%             1.7%                                                                                                                          Mean Diff            85.0%
                                                                                                                                                   0
    LR            86.1%          95.1%        100.0%         99.9%         78.0%             0.6%                                                                                                                               LR              90.5%
                                                                                                                                                        −0.5        −0.4          −0.3        −0.2
   MD             86.1%          95.7%         99.9%        100.0%         79.5%             0.6%                                                              Sentiment Activation                                             DAS             80.8%
   PCA            69.7%          80.0%         78.0%         79.5%         100.0%            0.7%
 Random           0.2%              1.7%        0.6%          0.6%          0.7%         100.0%                  (b) Area plot of sentiment labels for OpenWebText samples by sen-
                                                                                                                 timent activation, i.e. the projection of the first residual stream
(a) Cosine similarity of directions learned                                                                      layer of pythia-2.8b at that token onto the sentiment direction (left).
by different methods in pythia-2.8b’s first                                                                      Accuracy using sentiment activations to classify tokens as positive
layer. Each sentiment direction was de-                                                                          or negative (right). The threshold taken is the top/bottom 0.1% of
rived from adjective representations in the                                                                      activations over OpenWebText. Classification was performed by
ToyMovieReview dataset (Section 2.1).                                                                            GPT-4.
                       simple_logit_diff treebank_logit_diff simple_logit_flip treebank_logit_flip                                                Out-of-distribution directional patching performance by method and layer
                                                                                                                              model=gpt2-small                          model=pythia-160m         model=pythia-410m        model=pythia-1.4b
        das                109.8%              47.0%              100.0%             53.5%
       das2d               110.4%              42.8%              95.5%              49.0%                           50                                                                                                                          method

                                                                                                     logit_diﬀ (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   das
       das3d               110.2%              35.9%              95.5%              39.4%                           40
      kmeans                67.2%              22.1%              72.7%              14.8%                                                                                                                                                         kmeans
                                                                                                                     30
 logistic_regression        71.1%              30.8%              86.4%              16.8%                                                                                                                                                         logistic_regression
                                                                                                                     20
     mean_diff              73.9%              27.5%              81.8%              17.4%
                                                                                                                     10
        pca                 62.7%              17.8%              72.7%              12.3%
                                                                                                                     0
      random                0.4%                0.1%               0.0%               0.6%
                                                                                                                      0                            5           10   0         5          10   0     5   10   15   20   0    5   10    15   20
                                                                                                                                                   layer                      layer                     layer                   layer
(c) Directional patching results for dif-
ferent methods in pythia-1.4b (2.8b not (d) Patching results for directions trained on toy datasets and evalu-
shown due to compute time). We report ated on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank test partition. We tend to
the best result found across layers. The find the best generalisation when training and evaluating at a layer
columns show two evaluation datasets, near the middle of the model. We scaffold the prompt using the
ToyMovieReview and Treebank, and two suffix Overall the movie was very and compute the logit differ-
evaluation metrics, mean logit difference ence between good and bad. The patching metric (y-axis) is then
and % of logit differences flipped.       the % mean change in logit difference.

                                        Figure 2: A correlational and causal analysis of sentiment directions.


3.1            C OMPARING THE D IRECTIONS

We fit directions using the residual stream over the adjective token in the ToyMovieReview dataset
(Section 2.1) and the methods outlined in Section 2.2, finding extremely high cosine similarity
(Figure 2a). This suggests that these are all noisy approximations of the same singular direction.
Indeed, we generally found that the following results were very similar regardless of exactly how
we specified the sentiment direction.

3.2            C ORRELATIONAL E VALUATION

Visualizing The Sentiment Direction Here we show a visualisation in the style of Neuroscope
(Nanda, 2023a) where the sentiment activation (the projection of the residual stream onto the senti-
ment axis) is represented by color, with red being negative and blue being positive. It is important to
note that the direction being examined here was trained on just 30 positive and 30 negative English
adjectives in an unsupervised way (using k-means with k = 2). Notwithstanding, the extreme val-
ues along this direction appear readily interpretable in the wild in diverse text domains such as the
opening paragraphs of Harry Potter in French (Figure 1).

Quantifying classification accuracy To rigorously validate this visual check, we binned the sen-
timent activations of OpenWebText tokens from the first residual stream layer of GPT2-small into
20 equal-width buckets and sampled 20 tokens from each. Then we asked GPT-4 to classify into
Positive/Neutral/Negative. 1 In Figure 2b, we show an area plot of the classifications by activation
bin. We contrast the results for different methods in Table 2b. In the area plot we can see that the
left side area is dominated by the “Negative” label, whereas the right side area is dominated by the
    1
      Specifically, we gave the GPT-4 API prompts of the following form: “Your job is to classify the senti-
ment of a given token (i.e. word or word fragment) into Positive/Somewhat positive/Neutral/Somewhat nega-
tive/Negative. Token: ‘{token}’. Context: ‘{context}’. Sentiment: ” where the context length was 20 tokens
centred around the sampled token.


                                                                                                                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       I
                                                               thought
                                                                   this
                                                                 movie
                                                                   was
                                                         ADJ incredible
                                                                       ,
                                                                       I
                                                         VRB enjoyed
                                                                      it
                                                                       .
                                                           Conclusion       Direct Sentiment Readers
                                                                       :         10.1 | 10.4 | 11.9

                                                                  This
                                 Sentiment Summarizers   SUM movie             Summary Readers
                                        7.1 | 7.5                                   8.5 | 9.10



                                                                                Mixed Readers
                                                                                        9.2


                                                         END           is


Figure 3: Primary components of GPT-2 sentiment circuit for the ToyMovieReview dataset. Here
we can see both direct use of sentiment-laden words in predicting sentiment at END as well as an
example of the summarization motif at the SUM position (the final ‘movie’ token). Heads 7.1 and
7.5 write to this position and this information is causally relevant to the contribution of the summary
readers at END.


“Positive” label and the central area is dominated by the “Neutral” label. Hence the tails of the
activations seem highly interpretable as representing a bipolar sentiment feature. The large space
in the middle of the distribution simply occupied by neutral words (rather than a more continuous
degradation of positive/negative) indicates superposition of features (Elhage et al., 2022).

3.3      C AUSAL E VALUATION

Sentiment directions are causal representations. We evaluate the sentiment direction using di-
rectional patching (Section 2.3) in Figure 2c. These evaluations are performed on prompts with
out-of-sample adjectives and the direction was not trained on any verbs. Unsupervised methods
such as k-means are still able to shift the logit differences and DAS is able to completely flip the
prediction.

Directions Generalize Most at Intermediate Layers If the sentiment direction was simply a
trivial feature of the token embedding, then one might expect that directional patching would be
most effective in the first or final layer. However, we see in Figure 2d that in fact it is in intermediate
layers of the model where we see the strongest out-of-distribution performance on SST. This sug-
gests the speculative hypothesis that the model uses the residual stream to form abstract concepts in
intermediate layers and this is where the latent knowledge of sentiment is most prominent.

Validation on SST We validate our sentiment directions derived from toy datasets (Section 3.3) on
SST. We collapsed the labels down to a binary “Positive”/“Negative”, just used the unique phrases
rather than any information about their source sentences, restricted to the ‘test’ partition and took
a subset where pythia-1.4b can achieve 100% zero shot classification accuracy, removing 17% of
examples. Then we paired up phrases of an equal number of tokens2 to make up 460 clean/corrupted
pairs. We used the scaffolding “Review Text: TEXT, Review Sentiment:” and evaluated the logit
difference between “Positive” and “Negative” as our patching metric. Using the same DAS direction
from Section 3 trained on just a few examples and flipping the corresponding sentiment activation
between clean/corrupted in a single layer, we can flip the output 53.5% of the time (Figure 2c).

Validation at the document level In order to verify the applicability of our findings to larger
document-sized prompts, we performed directional ablation (as described in 2.3) on the IMDB
dataset, most of which consists of multiple sentences. Each item of this dataset was appended with
“Review Sentiment:” in order to prompt a classification completion, and we selected 1000 exam-
ples each from the positive and negative items that the model was capable of classifying correctly.
   2
       We did this to maximise the chances of sentiment tokens occurring at similar positions


                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We used the sentiment directions found with DAS to ablate sentiment at every token at every layer
(using Pythia-2.8b). As a result, sentiment classification accuracy dropped from 100% to 57%.

4       T HE S UMMARIZATION M OTIF FOR S ENTIMENT
4.1     C IRCUIT A NALYSES

In this sub-section, we present an overview of circuit3 findings that give qualitative hints of the
summarization motif, and restrict quantitative analysis of the summarization motif to 4.2. Through
an iterative process of path patching (see Section 2.3) and analyzing attention patterns, we have
identified key components of the circuit responsible for the ToyMovieReview task in GPT2-small
(Figure 3) as well as the circuit for the ToyMoodStories task in Pythia-2.8b. Below, we provide a
brief overview of the circuits we identified, reserving the full details for A.3.

Initial observations of summarization in GPT-2 circuit for ToyMovieReview Mechanistically,
this is a binary classification task, and a naive hypothesis is that attention heads attend directly from
the final token (which we label ‘END’) to the valenced tokens (the adjective token, ADJ, and the verb
token VRB) and map positive sentiment to positive outputs and vice versa. This does happen but it is
not the only mechanism. Attention head output is causally important at intermediate token positions
(in particular, the final ‘movie’ token, SUM), which are then read from when producing output
at END. We consider this an instance of summarization, in which the model aggregates causally-
important information relating to an entity at a particular token for later usage, rather than simply
attending back to the original tokens that were the source of the information.
To summarize our findings, we find that the model implements a simple, interpretable procedure to
perform the task (using a circuit made up of 9 attention heads). We used the path patching technique
mentioned above to find and validate this circuit and the procedure it implements, as detailed in
Appendix A.3:

1. Identify sentiment-laden words in the prompt, at ADJ and VRB.
2. Write out sentiment information to SUM (the final “movie” token).
3. Read from ADJ, VRB and SUM and write to END.4

The results of activation patching the residual stream can be seen in the Appendix, Fig. A.8. For
a subset of the heads, the output of the attention is only important at the movie token, which we
designate as the SUM position. We label these heads “sentiment summarizers.” Specific attention
heads (“direct effect heads”) attend to and rely on information written to this token position as well
as to ADJ and VRB.
To further validate this circuit and the involvement of the sentiment direction, we patched the entirety
of the circuit at the ADJ and VRB positions along the sentiment direction only, achieving a 58.3%
rate of logit flips and a logit difference drop of 54.8% (in terms of whether a positive or negative next
token was predicted). Patching the circuit at those positions along all directions resulted in flipping
97% of logits and a logit difference drop of 75%, showing that the sentiment direction is responsible
for the majority of the function of the circuit.

The ToyMoodStory task in Pythia-2.8b We next examined the circuit that processes the Toy-
MoodStory dataset (Section 2.1) in Pythia-2.8b, the smallest model that could perform this more
complex task that requires more summarization. We reserve a detailed description for the Appendix
(4.1), but note here that we observed increasing reliance on summarization, specifically:
 • “Comma-reading heads”: A set of attention heads attended primarily to the comma following
   the preference phrase for the queried subject (e.g. John hates parties,), and secondarily to other
    3
      We use the term “circuit” as defined by Wang et al. (2022), in the sense of a computational subgraph that
is responsible for a significant proportion of the behavior of a neural network on some predefined task.
    4
      We note that our patching experiments indicate that there is no causal dependence on the output of other
model components at the ADJ and VRB positions–only at the SUM position.
    5
      That is, the attention pattern weighted by the norm of the value vector at each position as per Kobayashi
et al. (2020). We favor this over the raw attention pattern as it filters for significant information being moved.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Average Value-Weighted Attention for Attention Heads L12H2 and L12H17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Attention Score


             Destination Tokens
                                      . (32)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                  John (33)
                                  feels (34)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1


                                               <|endoftext|> (0)
                                                                   John (1)


                                                                                                        , (4)


                                                                                                                                                                               . (10)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                , (14)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . (20)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             , (23)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a (31)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 . (32)
                                                                              loves (2)
                                                                                          parties (3)


                                                                                                                and (5)
                                                                                                                          joins (6)
                                                                                                                                      them (7)
                                                                                                                                                 whenever (8)
                                                                                                                                                                possible (9)


                                                                                                                                                                                        Anne (11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    hates (12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 parties (13)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and (15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    avoids (16)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  them (17)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              whenever (18)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              possible (19)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       One (21)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  day (22)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      they (24)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  were (25)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              invited (26)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to (27)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a (28)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grand (29)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gal (30)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          John (33)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      feels (34)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   very (35)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source Tokens



Figure 4: Value-weighted5 averaged attention to commas and comma phrases in Pythia-2.8b from
the top two attention heads writing to the repeated name and “feels” tokens–two key components
of the summarization sub-circuit in the ToyMoodStories task. Note that they attend heavily to the
relevant comma from both destination positions.


      words in the phrase, as seen in Figure 4. We observed this phenomenon both with regular
      attention and value-weighted attention, and found via path patching that these heads relied
      primarily on the comma token for their function, as seen in Figure A.10.
 • “Name-writing heads”: Heads attending to preference phrases (e.g., the entirety of “John loves
   parties,” including the final comma) tended to write to the repeated name token near the end of
   the sentence (John) as well as to the feels token–another type of summarization behavior.
 • “Name-reading heads”: Later heads attended to the repeated name and feels tokens, affecting
   the output logits at END.

4.2     E XPLORING AND VALIDATING SUMMARIZATION BEHAVIOR IN PUNCTUATION

Our circuit analyses reveal suggestive evidence that summarization behavior at intermediate tokens
like commas, periods and certain nouns plays an important part in sentiment processing, despite
these tokens having no inherent valence. We focus on summarization at commas and periods and
explore this further in a series of ablation and patching experiments. We find that in many cases this
summarization results in a partial information bottleneck, in which the summarization points become
as important (or sometimes more important) than the phrases that precede them for sentiment tasks.
Although we continue to focus on results from Pythia-2.8b, we include results from other models
that substantiate our findings in Appendix A.4.2.

Summarization information is comparably important as original semantic information In
order to determine the extent of the information bottleneck presented by commas in sentiment pro-
cessing, we tested the model’s performance on ToyMoodStory (Section 2.1). We froze the model’s
attention patterns to ensure the model used the information from the patched commas in exactly the
same way as it would have used the original information. Without this step, the model could simply
avoid attending to the commas. We then performed activation patching on either the pre-comma
phrases (e.g., patching “John hates parties,” with “John loves parties,”) while freezing the commas
and periods so they retain their original, unflipped values; or on the two commas and two periods
alone. The results show a similar drop in the logit difference for both cases, as indicated in Table 1a.
Results for other models can be seen in A.4.2.

                                                                                                                                                       Table 1: Patching in ToyMoodStory
         Intervention                                                                            Change in
                                                                                               logit difference
      Patching full phrase                                                                           -75%                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Count of irrelevant tokens                                                                                                              Ratio of LD change
     values (incl. commas)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 after preference phrase                                                                                                              for periods vs. phrases
  Patching pre-comma values                                                                                          -38%                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 tokens                                                                                                                               0.29
 (freezing commas & periods)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 tokens                                                                                                                               0.63
  Patching comma and period                                                                                          -37%                                                                                                                                                                                                         18 tokens                                                                                                                               0.92
          values only                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22 tokens                                                                                                                               1.15
(a) Change in logit difference from intervention                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b) Ratio between logit difference change for periods
on attention head value vectors in Pythia 2.8b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vs. pre-period phrases after patching values


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Importance of summarization increases with distance We also observed that reliance on sum-
marization tends to increase with greater distances between the preference phrases and the final part
of the prompt that would reference them. To test this, we injected irrelevant text6 after each of the
preference phrases in ToyMoodStory texts (after ”John loves parties.” etc.) and measured the ratio
between logit difference change for the periods at the end of these phrases vs. pre-period phrases,
with higher values indicating more reliance on period summaries (Table 1b). We found that the
periods can be up to 15% more important than the actual phrases as this distance grows. Although
these results are only a first step in assessing the importance of summarization importance relative
to prompt length, our findings suggest that this motif may only increase in relative importance as
models grow in context length, and thus merits further study.

4.3   VALIDATING SUMMARIZATION BEHAVIOR IN R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS

In order to study more rigorously how summarization behaves with natural text, we examined this
phenomenon in SST (Section 2.1). We appended the suffix “Review Sentiment:” to each of the
prompts and evaluate Pythia-2.8b on zero-shot classification according to whether positive or neg-
ative have higher probability and are in the top 10 tokens predicted. We then take the subset of
examples that Pythia-2.8b classifies correctly that have at least one comma, which means we start
with a baseline of 100% accuracy. We performed ablation and activation patching experiments (Sec-
tion 2.3) on comma positions. If comma representations do not summarize sentiment information,
then our experiments should not damage the model’s abilities. However, our results reveal a clear
summarization motif for SST.

Ablation baselines We performed two baseline experiments in order to obtain a control for our
later experiments. First to measure the total effect of the sentiment directions, we performed direc-
tional ablation (as described in 2.3) using the sentiment directions found with DAS to every token at
every layer, resulting in a 71% reduction in the logit difference and a 38% drop in accuracy (to 62%
). Secondly, we performed directional ablation on all tokens with a small set of random directions,
resulting in a < 1% change to the same metrics.

Directional ablation at all comma positions We then performed directional ablation–using the
DAS sentiment direction (2.2) – to every comma in each prompt, regardless of position, resulting in
an 18% drop in the logit difference and an 18% drop in zero-shot classification accuracy–indicating
that nearly 50% of the model’s sentiment-direction-mediated ability to perform the task accurately
was mediated via sentiment information at the commas. We find this particularly significant because
we did not take any special effort to ensure that commas were placed at the end of sentiment phrases.

Mean-ablation at all comma positions Separately from the above, we performed mean ablation
at all comma positions as in 2.3, replacing each comma activation vector with the mean comma
activation from the entire dataset in a layerwise fashion. Note that this changes the entire activation
on the comma token, not just the activation in the sentiment direction. This resulted in a 17% drop
in logit difference and an accuracy drop of 19% .

5     R ELATED W ORK
Sentiment Analysis Understanding the emotional valence in text data is one of the first NLP
tasks to be revolutionized by deep learning (Socher et al., 2013) and remains a popular task for
benchmarking NLP models (Rosenthal et al., 2017; Nakov et al., 2016; Potts et al., 2021; Abraham
et al., 2022). For a review of the literature, see (Pang & Lee, 2008; Liu, 2012; Grimes, 2014).

Understanding Internal Representations This research was inspired by the field of Mechanistic
Interpretability, an agenda which aims to reverse-engineer the learned algorithms inside models
(Olah et al., 2020; Elhage et al., 2021b; Nanda et al., 2023a). Exploring representations (Section
3) and world-modelling behavior inside transformers has garnered significant recent interest. This
    6
      E.g. “John loves parties. He has a red hat and wears it everywhere, especially when he is riding his bicycle
through the city streets. Mark hates parties. He has a purple hat but only wears it on Sundays, when he takes
his weekly walk around the lake. One day, they were invited to a grand gala. John feels very”


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


was studied in the context of synthetic game-playing models by Li et al. (2023) and evidence of
linearity was demonstrated by Nanda (2023b) in the same context. Other work studying examples
of world-modelling inside neural networks includes Li et al. (2021); Patel & Pavlick (2022); Abdou
et al. (2021). Another framing of a very similar line of inquiry is the search for latent knowledge
(Christiano et al., 2021; Burns et al., 2022). Prior to the transformer, representations of sentiment
specifically were studied by Radford et al. (2017), notably, their finding of a sentiment neuron also
implies a linear representation of sentiment.


Causal Interventions in Language Models We approach our experiments from a causal media-
tion analysis perspective. Our approach to identifying computational subgraphs that utilize feature
representations as inspired by the ‘circuits analysis’ framework (Stefan Heimersheim, 2023; Varma
et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023), especially the tools of mean ablation and activation patching (Vig
et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2021; 2023a; Meng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022; Conmy et al., 2023;
Chan et al., 2023; Cohen et al., 2023). We use Distributed Alignment Search (Geiger et al., 2023b)
in order to apply these ideas to specific subspaces.


6   C ONCLUSION

The two central novel findings of this research are the existence of a linear representation of senti-
ment and the use of summarization to store sentiment information. We have seen that the sentiment
direction is causal and central to the circuitry of sentiment processing. Remarkably, this direction
is so stark in the residual stream space that it can be found even with the most basic methods and
on a tiny toy dataset, yet generalise to diverse natural language datasets from the real-world. Sum-
marization is a motif present in larger models with longer context lengths and greater proficiency
in zero-shot classification. These summaries present a tantalising glimpse into the world-modelling
behavior of transformers.


Limitations Many of our casual abstractions do not explain 100% of sentiment task performance.
There is likely circuitry we’ve missed, possibly as a result of distributed representations or superpo-
sition (Elhage et al., 2022) across components and layers. This may also be a result of self-repair
behavior (Wang et al., 2022; McGrath et al., 2023). Patching experiments conducted on more di-
verse sentence structures could also help to better isolate the circuitry for sentiment from more
task-specific machinery.
The use of small datasets versus many hyperparameters and metrics poses a constant risk of gaming
our own measures. Our results on the larger and more diverse SST dataset, and the consistent results
across a range of models help us to be more confident in our results.
Distributed Alignment Search (DAS) outperformed on most of our metrics but presents possible
dangers of overfitting to a particular dataset and taking the activations out of distribution (Lange
et al., 2023). We include simpler tools such as Logistic Regression as a sanity check on our findings.
Ideally, we would love to see a set of best practices to avoid such illusions.


Implications and future work The summarization motif emerged naturally during our investiga-
tion of sentiment, but we would be very interested to study it in a broader range of contexts and
understand what other factors of a particular model or task may influence the use of summarization.
When studying the circuitry of sentiment, we focused almost exclusively on attention heads rather
than MLPs. However, early results suggest that further investigation of the role of MLPs and indi-
vidual neurons is likely to yield interesting results (A.5).
Finally, we see the long-term goal of this line of research as being able to help detect dangerous
computation in language models such as deception. Even if the existence of a single “deception
direction” in activation space seems a bit naive to postulate, hopefully in the future many of the
tools developed here will help to detect representations of deception or of knowledge that the model
is concealing, helping to prevent possible harms from LLMs.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To facilitate reproducibility of the results presented in this paper, we have provided detailed descrip-
tions of the datasets, models, training procedures, algorithms, and analysis techniques used. We use
publicly available models including GPT-2 and Pythia, with details on the specific sizes provided in
Section 2.1. The methods for finding sentiment directions are described in full in Section 2.2. Our
causal analysis techniques of activation patching, ablation, and directional patching are presented in
Section 2.3. Circuit analysis details are extensively covered for two examples in Appendix A.3. The
code for data generation, model training, and analyses will be linked in the camera-ready version of
this paper.

R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders
 Søgaard. Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study
 in color, 2021.
Eldar David Abraham, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Amir Feder, Yair Gat, Atticus Geiger, Christo-
  pher Potts, Roi Reichart, and Zhengxuan Wu.       CEBaB: Estimating the causal ef-
  fects of real-world concepts on nlp model behavior.     In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 17582–17596. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/701ec28790b29a5bc33832b7bdc4c3b6-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language
  models across training and scaling, 2023.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Con-
  erly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex
  Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter,
  Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language
  models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
   Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4, 2023.
Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision, 2022.
Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny Ni-
  tishinskaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas. Causal scrubbing: a
  method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses [redwood research]. Alignment Forum,
  2023. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/JvZhhzycHu2Yd57RN/
  causal-scrubbing-a-method-for-rigorously-testing. Accessed: 17th Sep
  2023.
Paul Christiano, Ajeya Cotra, and Mark Xu. Eliciting latent knowledge: How to tell if your eyes
  deceive you. Google Docs, December 2021. Accessed: 17th Sep 2023.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning. What does bert look
  at? an analysis of bert’s attention, 2019.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson, and Mor Geva. Evaluating the ripple effects of
  knowledge editing in language models, 2023.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià
  Garriga-Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability, 2023.
J. Cui, Z. Wang, SB. Ho, et al. Survey on sentiment analysis: evolution of research methods and
   topics. Artif Intell Rev, 56:8469–8510, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s10462-022-10386-z. URL https:
   //doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10386-z.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021a. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021b. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2022/toy_model/index.html.
Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference
  models partially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of
  the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
  pp. 163–173, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts.   Causal abstractions
  of neural networks.     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 34, pp. 9574–9586, 2021. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  4f5c422f4d49a5a807eda27434231040-Abstract.html.
Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Hanson Lu, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Thomas Icard, Noah Good-
  man, and Christopher Potts. Inducing causal structure for interpretable neural networks. In Ka-
  malika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7324–7338. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/geiger22a.html.
Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. Causal abstraction for faithful model interpre-
  tation. Ms., Stanford University, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04709.
Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah D. Goodman. Finding
  alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations, 2023b.
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. Openwebtext corpus, 2019. URL http://Skylion007.
  github.io/OpenWebTextCorpus.
Seth Grimes. Text analytics 2014: User perspectives on solutions and providers. Technical report,
  Alta Plana, July 2014. URL http://altaplana.com/TextAnalytics2014.pdf.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: In-
 terpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model, 2023.
Goro Kobayashi, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Sho Yokoi, and Kentaro Inui. Attention is not only a weight:
  Analyzing transformers with vector norms, 2020.
Georg Lange, Alex Makelov, and Neel Nanda.             An interpretability illu-
  sion for activation patching of arbitrary subspaces.     LessWrong,      2023.
  URL               https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/RFtkRXHebkwxygDe2/
  an-interpretability-illusion-for-activation-patching-of.
Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models, 2021.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K. Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task,
  2023.
Bing Liu. Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
  nologies, 5(1):1–167, May 2012. doi: 10.2200/s00416ed1v01y201204hlt016. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.2200/S00416ED1V01Y201204HLT016.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150,
  Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL http:
  //www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015.
Thomas McGrath, Matthew Rahtz, Janos Kramar, Vladimir Mikulik, and Shane Legg. The hydra
  effect: Emergent self-repair in language model computations, 2023.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2023.
Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
  word representations. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 746–
  751, Atlanta, Georgia, June 2013. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N13-1090.
Preslav Nakov, Alan Ritter, Sara Rosenthal, Fabrizio Sebastiani, and Veselin Stoyanov. SemEval-
  2016 task 4: Sentiment analysis in Twitter. In Proceedings of the 10th International Work-
  shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2016), pp. 1–18, San Diego, California, June 2016.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/S16-1001. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/S16-1001.
Neel Nanda. Neuroscope: A website for mechanistic interpretability of language models, 2023a.
  URL https://neuroscope.io.
Neel Nanda. Actually, othello-gpt has a linear emergent world model, Mar 2023b. URL <https:
  //neelnanda.io/mechanistic-interpretability/othello>.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023a.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models, 2023b.
nostalgebraist. interpreting gpt: the logit lens, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/
  posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bob Pang and Lillian Lee. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in In-
  formation Retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135, 2008. doi: 10.1561/1500000001. URL http://www.cs.
  cornell.edu/home/llee/opinion-mining-sentiment-analysis-survey.
  html.
Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. Mapping language models to grounded conceptual spaces. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=gJcEM8sxHK.
Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Probabilistic and causal inference: the works of Judea
  Pearl, pp. 373–392. Association for Computing Machinery, 2022.
Christopher Potts, Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, and Douwe Kiela. DynaSent: A dynamic
  benchmark for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2388–2404, Online, August 2021. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.186. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.186.
Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
  sentiment, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.
Sara Rosenthal, Noura Farra, and Preslav Nakov. SemEval-2017 task 4: Sentiment analysis in Twit-
  ter. In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017),
  pp. 502–518, Vancouver, Canada, August 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/S17-2088. URL https://aclanthology.org/S17-2088.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Jett Janiak Stefan Heimersheim. A circuit for python docstrings in a 4-layer attention-only,
   2023. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/u6KXXmKFbXfWzoAXn/
   a-circuit-for-python-docstrings-in-a-4-layer-attention-only. Ac-
   cessed: 2023-09-22.
Jonathan Tow. Stablelm 3b. URL [https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/
  stablelm-base-alpha-3b](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/
  stablelm-base-alpha-3b).
Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDi-
  armid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization, 2023.
Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
  grokking through circuit efficiency, 2023.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason
  Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp:
  The case of gender bias, 2020.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small, 2022.


                                                13
