Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M INING PATENTS WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
E LUCIDATES THE C HEMICAL F UNCTION L ANDSCAPE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The fundamental goal of small molecule discovery is to generate chemicals with
         target functionality. While this often proceeds through structure-based methods,
         we set out to investigate the practicality of orthogonal methods that leverage the
         extensive corpus of chemical literature. We hypothesize that a sufficiently large
         text-derived chemical function dataset would mirror the actual landscape of chem-
         ical functionality. Such a landscape would implicitly capture complex physi-
         cal and biological interactions given that chemical function arises from both a
         molecule’s structure and its interacting partners. To evaluate this hypothesis, we
         built a Chemical Function (CheF) dataset of patent-derived functional labels. This
         dataset, comprising 631K molecule-function pairs, was created using an LLM-
         and embedding-based method to obtain functional labels for approximately 100K
         molecules from their corresponding 188K unique patents. We carry out a series of
         analyses demonstrating that the CheF dataset contains a semantically coherent tex-
         tual representation of the functional landscape congruent with chemical structural
         relationships, thus approximating the actual chemical function landscape. We then
         demonstrate that this text-based functional landscape can be leveraged to identify
         drugs with target functionality using a model able to predict functional profiles
         from structure alone. We believe that functional label-guided molecular discovery
         may serve as an orthogonal approach to traditional structure-based methods in the
         pursuit of designing novel functional molecules.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The overarching goal of drug discovery is to generate chemicals with specific functionality through
the design of chemical structure (Li & Kang, 2020). Functionality, often in the context of drug
discovery, refers to the specific effects a chemical exhibits on biological systems (i.e., vasodilator,
analgesic, protease inhibitor), but it is applicable to materials as well (i.e., electroluminescent, poly-
mer). Computational methods often approach molecular discovery through structural and empirical
methods such as protein-ligand docking, receptor binding affinity prediction, and pharmacophore
design (Corso et al., 2022; Trott & Olson, 2010; Wu et al., 2018; Yang, 2010). These methods are
powerful for designing molecules that bind to specific protein targets, but at present they are unable
to explicitly design for specific organism-wide effects. This is largely because biological complexity
increases with scale, and many whole-body effects are only weakly associated with specific protein
inhibition or biomolecular treatment (Drachman, 2014).
Humans have long been documenting chemicals and their effects, and it is reasonable to assume
functional relationships are embedded in language itself. Text-based functional analysis has been
paramount for our understanding of the genome through Gene Ontology terms (Consortium, 2004).
Despite its potential, text-based functional analysis for chemicals has been largely underexplored.
This is in part due to the lack of high-quality chemical function datasets but is more fundamentally
due to the high multi-functionality of molecules, which is less problematic for genes and proteins.
High-quality chemical function datasets have been challenging to generate due to the sparsity and
irregularity of functional information in chemical descriptions, patents, and literature. Recent ef-
forts at creating such datasets tend to involve consolidation of existing curated descriptive datasets
(Wishart et al., 2023; Degtyarenko et al., 2007). Similarly, keyword-based function extraction par-
tially solves the function extraction problem by confining its scope to singular predetermined func-
tionality, but it fails at broadly extracting all relevant functions for a given molecule (Subramanian


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2023). Given their profound success in text summarization, Large Language Models (LLMs)
may be ideal candidates to broadly extract functional information of molecules from patents and lit-
erature, a task that remains unsolved (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). This
is especially promising for making use of the chemical patent literature, an abundant and highly spe-
cific source of implicit chemical knowledge that has been largely inaccessible due to excessive legal
terminology (Senger, 2017; Ashenden et al., 2017). This may allow for the creation of a large-scale
dataset that effectively captures the text-based chemical function landscape.
We hypothesize that a sufficiently large chemical function dataset would contain a text-based chemi-
cal function landscape congruent with chemical structure space, effectively approximating the actual
chemical function landscape. Such a landscape would implicitly capture complex physical and bi-
ological interactions given that chemical function arises from both a molecule’s structure and its
interacting partners (Martin et al., 2002). This hypothesis is further based on the observation that
function is reported frequently enough in patents and scientific articles for most functional relation-
ships to be contained in the corpus of chemical literature (Papadatos et al., 2016). To evaluate this
hypothesis, we set out to create a Chemical Function (CheF) dataset of patent-derived functional
labels. This dataset, comprising 631K molecule-function pairs, was created using an LLM- and
embedding-based method to obtain functional labels for approximately 100K molecules from their
corresponding 188K unique patents. The CheF dataset was found to be of high quality, demonstrat-
ing the effectiveness of LLMs for extracting functional information from chemical patents despite
not being explicitly trained to do so. Using this dataset, we carry out a series of experiments allud-
ing to the notion that the CheF dataset contains a text-based functional landscape that simulates the
actual chemical function landscape due to its congruence with chemical structure space. We then
demonstrate that this text-based functional landscape can be harnessed to identify drugs with tar-
get functionality using a model able to predict functional profiles from structure alone. We believe
that functional label-guided molecular discovery may serve as an orthogonal approach to traditional
structure-based methods in the pursuit of designing novel functional molecules.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Labeled chemical datasets. Chemicals are complex interacting entities, and there are many la-
bels that can be associated with a given chemical. One class is specific protein binding, commonly
used to train chemical representation models (Mysinger et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2018). Datasets
linking chemicals to their functionality have emerged in recent years (Edwards et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2023; Degtyarenko et al., 2007; Wishart et al., 2023). These datasets were largely compiled
from existing databases of well-studied chemicals, limiting their generalizability (Li et al., 2016;
Fu et al., 2015). The CheF dataset developed here aims to improve upon these existing datasets
by automatically sourcing molecular function from patents to create a high-quality molecular func-
tion dataset, ultimately capable of scaling to the entire SureChEMBL database of 32M+ patent-
associated molecules (Papadatos et al., 2016). To our knowledge, the full scale-up would create not
just the largest chemical function dataset, but rather the largest labeled chemical dataset of any kind.
Its high coverage of chemical space means that the CheF dataset, in its current and future iterations,
may serve as a benchmark for the global evaluation of chemical representation models.
Patent-based molecular data mining and prediction. Building chemical datasets often involves
extracting chemical identities, reaction schemes, quantitative drug properties, and chemical-disease
relationships (Senger et al., 2015; Papadatos et al., 2016; He et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Magariños
et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2021; Li et al., 2016). We recently used an LLM to extract patent-derived
information to help evaluate functional relevance of results from a machine learning-based chemical
similarity search (Anonymous et al., 2023). We expand upon previous works through the large-scale
LLM-based extraction of broad chemical functionality from a corpus of patent literature. This is a
task that LLMs were not explicitly trained to do, and we provide validation results for this approach.
Recent work also focused on molecular generation from chemical subspaces derived from patents
containing specific functional keywords, for example, all molecules relating to tyrosine kinase in-
hibitor activity (Subramanian et al., 2023). This allows for a model that can generate potential tyro-
sine kinase inhibitors but would need to be retrained to predict molecules of a different functional
label. In our work, we focus on label classification rather than molecular generation. Further, we
integrate multiple functional labels for any given molecule, allowing us to broadly infer molecular


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


functionality given structure. Generative models could be trained on the described dataset, allowing
for label-guided molecular generation without re-training for each label.
Chemical-to-textual translation. Recent work investigated the translation of molecules to descrip-
tive definitions and vice versa (Edwards et al., 2021; 2022; Su et al., 2022). The translation between
language and chemical representations is promising as it utilizes chemical relationships implicit in
text descriptions. However, decoder-based molecule-text translation models appear to us unlikely to
be utilized for novel drug discovery tasks as experimentalists desire strongly deterministic results,
reported prediction confidences, and alternative prediction hypotheses. To satisfy these constraints,
we opted for a discriminative structure-to-function model.
Many existing chemical-to-text translation models have been trained on datasets containing struc-
tural nomenclature and irrelevant words mixed with desirable functional information (Edwards et al.,
2021; Degtyarenko et al., 2007). Inclusion of structural nomenclature causes inflated prediction
metrics for functional annotation or molecular generation tasks, as structure-to-name and name-to-
structure is simpler than structure-to-function and function-to-structure. The irrelevant words may
cause artifacts during the decoding process depending on the prompt, skewing results in ways ir-
relevant to the task. In our work, we ensured our model utilized only chemical structure, and not
structural nomenclature, when predicting molecular function to avoid data leakage.

3   R ESULTS
Patents are an abundant source of highly specific chemical knowledge. It is plausible that a large
dataset of patent-derived molecular function would capture most known functional relationships and
could approximate the chemical function landscape. High-fidelity approximation of the chemical
function landscape would implicitly capture complex physical and biological interactions given that
chemical function arises from both a molecule’s structure and its interacting partners. This would
allow for the prediction of functional labels for chemicals which is, to our knowledge, a novel task.


                                          (a) Label creation


                                          (b) Label cleaning

Figure 1: Chemical function dataset creation. (a) LLM extracts molecular functional information
present in patents into brief labels. Example shown in Figure S2. (b) Chemical functional labels
were cleaned with algorithmic-, embedding-, and LLM-based methods.

Chemical function dataset creation. We set out to create a large-scale database of chemicals and
their patent-derived molecular functionality. To do so, a random 100K molecules and their associ-
ated patents were chosen from the SureChEMBL database to create a Chemical Function (CheF)
dataset (Fig. S1) (Papadatos et al., 2016). To ensure that patents were highly relevant to their
respective molecule, only molecules with fewer than 10 patents were included in the random selec-
tion, reducing the number of available molecules by 12%. This was done to exclude over-patented
molecules like penicillin with over 40,000 patents, most of which are irrelevant to its functionality.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For each molecule-associated patent in the CheF dataset, the patent title, abstract, and description
were scraped from Google Scholar and cleaned. ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo) was used to generate
1–3 functional labels describing the patented molecule given its unstructured patent data (Fig. 1a).
The LLM-assisted function extraction method’s success was validated manually across 1,738 labels
generated from a random 200 CheF molecules. Of these labels, 99.6% had correct syntax and 99.8%
were relevant to their respective patent (Table S1). 77.9% of the labels directly described the labeled
molecule’s function. However, this increased to 98.2% when considering the function of the primary
patented molecule, of which the labeled molecule is an intermediate (Table S1).
The LLM-assisted method resulted in 104,607 functional labels for the 100K molecules. These were
too many labels to yield any predictive power, so measures were taken to consolidate these labels into
a concise vocabulary. The labels were cleaned, reducing the number of labels to 39,854, and further
consolidated by embedding each label with a language model (OpenAI’s textembedding-ada-002)
to group grammatically dissimilar yet semantically similar labels together. The embeddings were
clustered with DBSCAN using a cutoff that minimized the number of clusters without cluster quality
deterioration (e.g., avoiding the grouping of antiviral, antibacterial, and antifungal) (Fig. S4). Each
cluster was summarized with ChatGPT to obtain a single representative cluster label.
The embedding-based clustering and summarization process was validated across the 500 largest
clusters. Of these, 99.2% contained semantically common elements and 97.6% of the cluster sum-
marizations were accurate and representative of their constituent labels (Table S2). These labels
were mapped back to the CheF dataset, resulting in 19,616 labels (Fig. 1b). To ensure adequate
predictive power, labels appearing in less than 50 molecules were dropped. The final CheF dataset
consisted of 99,454 molecules and their 1,543 descriptive functional labels (Fig. 1, Table S3).
Functional labels map to natural clusters in chemical structure space. Molecular function nomi-
nally arises directly from structure, and thus any successful dataset of functional labels should cluster
in structural space. This hypothesis was based in part on the observation that chemical function is
often retained despite minor structural modifications (Maggiora et al., 2014; Patterson et al., 1996).
And due to molecules and their derivatives frequently being patented together, structurally similar
molecules should be annotated with similar patent-derived functions. This rationale generally holds,
but exceptions include stereoisomers with different functions (e.g. as for thalidomide) and distinct
structures sharing the same function (e.g. as for beta-lactam antibiotics and tetracyclines).
To evaluate this hypothesis, we embedded the CheF dataset in structure space by converting the
molecules to molecular fingerprints (binary vectors representing a molecule’s substructures), visu-
alized with t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) (Fig. 2). Then, to determine if
the CheF functional labels clustered in this structural space, the maximum fingerprint Tanimoto
similarity was computed between the fingerprint vectors of each molecule containing a given la-
bel; this approach provides a measure of structural similarity between molecules that have the same
functional label (Fig. 2) (Bajusz et al., 2015). This value was compared to the maximum similar-
ity computed from a random equal-sized set of molecules to determine significance. Remarkably,
1,192 of the 1,543 labels were found to cluster significantly in structural space (independent t-tests
per label, false-discovery rate of 5%). To give an idea of the meaning of this correlation, inherent
clustering was visualized for the labels ‘hcv’ (hepatitis C virus), ‘electroluminescence’, ‘serotonin’,
and ‘5-ht’ (5-hydroxytryptamine, the chemical name for serotonin) (Fig. 2). For the label ‘electro-
luminescence’ there was one large cluster containing almost only highly conjugated molecules (Fig.
2c). For ‘hcv’, there were multiple distinct communities representing antivirals targeting different
mechanisms of HCV replication. Clusters were observed for NS5A inhibitors, NS3 macrocyclic and
peptidomimetic protease inhibitors, and nucleoside NS5B polymerase inhibitors (Fig. 2a, S5). The
observed clustering of functional labels in structure space provided evidence that the CheF dataset
labels had accurately captured structure-function relationships, validating our initial hypothesis.
Label co-occurrences reveal the text-based chemical function landscape. Patents contain joint
contextual information on the application, structure, and mechanism of a given compound. We
attempted to determine the extent to which the CheF dataset implicitly captured this joint semantic
context by assessing the graph of co-occurring functional labels (Fig. 3). Each node in the graph
represents a CheF functional label, and their relative positioning indicates the frequency of co-
occurrence between labels, with labels that co-occur more frequently placed closer together. To
prevent the visual overrepresentation of extremely common labels (i.e., inhibitor, cancer, kinase),
each node’s size was scaled based on its connectivity instead of the frequency of co-occurrence.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a)                     (b)                     (c)                      (d)


               (e)                     (f)                     (g)                      (h)

Figure 2: Text-based functional labels cluster in structural space. Molecules in the CheF dataset
were mapped by their molecular fingerprints and colored based on whether the selected label was
present in their set of functional descriptors. The max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity was computed
between the fingerprint vectors of each molecule containing a given label and was compared against
the max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity from a random equal-sized set of molecules to determine
significance to a random control. Many of the labels strongly cluster in structural space, demon-
strating that CheF accurately captures structure-function relationships. (a) ’hcv’ molecules. (b)
’hcv’ degree of clustering. (c) ’electroluminescence’ molecules. (d) ’electroluminescence’ degree
of clustering. (e) ’serotonin’ molecules. (f) ’serotonin’ degree of clustering. (g) ’5-ht’ molecules.
(h) ’5-ht’ degree of clustering. See Fig. S5 for more labels.



Modularity-based community detection isolates tightly interconnected groups within a graph, dis-
tinguishing them from the rest of the graph. This method was applied to the label co-occurrence
graph, with the resulting clusters summarized with GPT-4 into representative labels for unbiased se-
mantic categorization (Table S4, S5, S6). The authors curated the summarized labels for validity and
found them representative of the constituent labels; these were then further consolidated for succinct
representation of the semantic categorization (Table S4). This revealed a semantic structure in the
co-occurrence graph, where distinct communities such as ‘Electronic, Photochemical, & Stability’
and ‘Antiviral & Cancer’ could be observed (Fig. 3, Tables S4, S5, S6). Within communities, the
fine-grained semantic structure also appeared to be coherent. For example, in the local neighborhood
around ‘hcv’ the labels ‘antiviral’, ‘ns’ (nonstructural), ‘hbv’ (hepatitis B virus), ‘hepatitis’, ‘repli-
cation’, and ‘protease’ were found, all of which are known to be semantically relevant to hepatitis
C virus (Fig. 3). The graph of patent-derived molecular functions is a visual representation of the
text-based chemical function landscape, and represents a potentially valuable resource for linguistic
evaluation of chemical function and ultimately drug discovery.
Coherence of the text-based chemical function landscape in chemical structure space. To assess
how well text-based functional relationships align with structural relationships, the overlap between
the molecules of a given label and those of its 10 most commonly co-occurring labels was calcu-
lated (Fig. 4). This was achieved by computing the maximum fingerprint Tanimoto similarity from
each molecule containing a given label to each molecule containing any of the 10 most commonly
co-occurring labels (with <1,000 total abundance). This value was compared to the maximum
similarity computed from each molecule containing a given label to a random equal-sized set of
molecules to determine significance. This comparison indicated that molecules containing the 10
most commonly co-occurring labels were closer to the given label’s molecules in structure space
than a random set for 1,540 of the 1,543 labels (independent t-tests per label, false-discovery rate


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Label co-occurrences reveal the text-based chemical function landscape. Node sizes
correspond to number of connections, and edge sizes correspond to co-occurrence frequency in the
CheF dataset. Modularity-based community detection was used to obtain 19 distinct communities.
The communities broadly coincided with the semantic meaning of the contained labels, the largest
10 of which were summarized to representative categorical labels (Tables S4, S5, S6).


of 5%), meaning that text-based functional relationships align with structural relationships (Fig. 4).
With the discovery of semantically structured communities, above, this suggests that users can move
between labels to identify new compounds and vice versa to assess a compound’s function.
Functional label-guided drug discovery. To employ the text-based chemical function landscape
for drug discovery, multi-label classification models were trained on CheF to predict functional
labels from molecular fingerprints (Table S7). The best performing model was a logistic regression
model on molecular fingerprints with positive predictive power for 1,532/1,543 labels and >0.90
ROC-AUC for 458/1,543 labels (Fig. 5a).
This model can thus be used to comprehensively annotate chemical function, even when existing
annotations are fragmented or incomplete. As an example, for a known hepatitis C antiviral the
model strongly predicted ‘antiviral’, ‘hcv’, ‘ns’ (nonstructural) (94%, 93%, 70% respectively) while
predicting ‘protease’ and ‘polymerase’ with low confidence (0.02%, 0.00% respectively) (Fig. 5b).
The low-confidence ‘protease’ and ‘polymerase’ predictions suggested that the likely target of this
drug was the nonstructural NS5A protein, rather than the NS2/3 proteases or NS5B polymerase, a
hypothesis that has been validated outside of patents in the scientific literature (Ascher et al., 2014).
The ability to comprehensively predict functional profiles allows for the discovery of new drugs.
For example, the label ‘serotonin’ was used to query the test set predictions, and a ranked list of
the 10 molecules most highly predicted for ‘serotonin’ were obtained (Fig. 5c). All ten of these
were patented in relation to serotonin: 8 were serotonin receptor ligands (5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT6)
and 2 were serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Similarly, the synonymous label ‘5-ht’ was used as the
query and the top 10 molecules were again obtained (Fig. 5d). Of these, seven were patented in
relation to serotonin (5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT6), four of which were also found in the aforementioned
‘serotonin’ search. The remaining three molecules were patented without reference to the serotonin
receptor, but were instead patented for depressant, anti-anxiety, and memory dysfunction relieving
effects, all of which have associations with serotonin and its receptor. The identification of known
serotonin receptor ligands, together with the overlapping results across synonymous labels, provides
an internal validation of the model. Additionally, these search results suggest experiments in which
the “mispredicted” molecules may bind to serotonin receptors or otherwise be synergistic with the
function of serotonin, thereby demonstrating the practical utility of moving with facility between
chemicals and their functions.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a)                      (b)                      (c)                      (d)


               (e)                      (f)                      (g)                      (h)

Figure 4: Coherence of the text-based chemical function landscape in structure space. To assess
the alignment of text-based functional relationships with structural relationships, the max fingerprint
Tanimoto similarity from each molecule containing a given label to each molecule containing any
of its 10 most frequently co-occurring labels (<1,000 total abundance) was compared against the
max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity to a random subset of molecules of the same size. (a) ‘hcv’
neighboring labels’ molecules. (b) Degree of coincidence between ‘hcv’ and neighboring labels. (c)
‘electroluminescence’ neighboring labels’ molecules. (d) Degree of coincidence between ‘electro-
luminescence’ and neighboring labels. (e) ‘serotonin’ neighboring labels’ molecules. (f) Degree of
coincidence between ‘serotonin’ and neighboring labels. (g) ‘5-ht’ neighboring labels’ molecules.
(h) Degree of coincidence between ‘5-ht’ and neighboring labels. See Fig. S5 for more labels.


To examine the best model’s capability in drug repurposing, functional labels were predicted for
3,242 Stage-4 FDA approved drugs (Fig. S7) (Ochoa et al., 2021). Of the 16 drugs most highly
predicted for ‘hcv’, 15 were approved Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) antivirals. Many of the mispredic-
tions in the top 50 were directly relevant to HCV treatment including 8 antivirals and 8 polymerase
inhibitors. The remaining mispredictions included 3 ACE inhibitors and 2 BTK inhibitors, both of
which are peripherally associated with HCV through liver fibrosis mitigation and HCV reactivation,
respectively (Corey et al., 2009; Mustafayev & Torres, 2022). Beyond showing its power, this ex-
ample suggests that functional label-guided drug discovery may serve as a useful paradigm for rapid
antiviral repurposing to mitigate future pandemics.


4   D ISCUSSION

While in silico drug discovery often proceeds through structural and empirical methods such as
protein-ligand docking, receptor binding affinity prediction, and pharmacophore design, we set out
to investigate the practicality of orthogonal methods that leverage the extensive corpus of chemical
literature. To do so, we developed an LLM- and embedding-based method to create a Chemical
Function (CheF) dataset of 100K molecules and their 631K patent-derived functional labels. Over
78% of the functional labels corresponded to distinct clusters in chemical structure space, indicating
congruence between chemical structures and individual text-derived functional labels. Moreover,
there was a semantically coherent text-based chemical function landscape intrinsic to the dataset that
was found to correspond with broad fields of functionality. Finally, it was found that the relationships
in the text-based chemical function landscape mapped with high fidelity to chemical structure space
(99.8% of labels), indicating approximation to the actual chemical function landscape.
To leverage the chemical function landscape for drug discovery, several models were trained and
benchmarked on the CheF dataset to predict functional labels from molecular fingerprints (Table.
S7). The top-performing model was utilized for practical applications such as unveiling an undis-


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          (b)


                       (a)                                     (c)                        (d)

Figure 5: Functional label-guided drug discovery. (a) Test set results from best-performing model
that predicts functional labels from molecular fingerprints. Labels sorted by ROC-AUC, showing
every 20 labels for clarity. Black line indicates ROC-AUC random threshold. Average test ROC-
AUC and PR-AUC were 0.84 and 0.20, respectively. (b) Model-based comprehensive annotation of
chemical function. Shown is a test set molecule patented for hepatitis C antiviral treatment. The
highly predicted ‘hcv’, ‘ns’, and ‘inhibitor’ with the low-predicted ‘protease’ and ‘polymerase’ can
be used to infer that the drug acts on NS5A to inhibit HCV replication, revealing a mechanism
undisclosed in the patent. (c-d) Functional label-based drug candidate identification, showcasing
the top 10 test set molecules for ’serotonin’ or ‘5-ht’; true positives in green, false positives in red.
The false positives offer potential for drug discovery and repurposing, especially when considering
these have patents for related neurological uses (i.e., anti-anxiety and memory dysfunction).


closed drug mechanism, identifying novel drug candidates, and mining FDA-approved drugs for
repurposing and combination therapy uses. Since the CheF dataset is scalable to the entire 32M+
molecule database, we anticipate that many of these predictions will only get better into the future.
The CheF dataset inherently exhibits a bias towards patented molecules. This implies sparse repre-
sentation of chemicals with high utility but low patentability, and allows for false functional relation-
ships to arise from prophetic claims. Additionally, by restricting the dataset to chemicals with <10
patents, it neglects important well-studied molecules like Penicillin. The inclusion of over-patented
chemicals could be accomplished by using only the most abundant k terms for a given molecule,
using a fine-tuned LLM to only summarize patents relevant to molecular function (ignoring irrele-
vant patents on applications like medical devices), or employing other data sources like PubChem
or PubMed to fill in these gaps. Increasing label quality and ignoring extraneous claims might be
achieved through an LLM fine-tuned on high-quality examples. Further quality increases may result
from integration of well-documented chemical-gene and chemical-disease relationships into CheF.
The analysis herein suggests that a sufficiently large chemical function dataset contains a text-based
function landscape that approximates the actual chemical function landscape. Further, we demon-
strate one of the first examples of functional label-guided drug discovery, made possible utilizing


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


state-of-the-art advances in machine learning. Models in this paradigm have the potential to auto-
matically annotate chemical function, examine non-obvious features of drugs such as side effects,
and down-select candidates for high-throughput screening. Moving between textual and physical
spaces represents a promising paradigm for drug discovery in the age of machine learning.



5   M ETHODS

Database creation. The SureChEMBL database was shuffled and converted to chiral RDKit-
canonicalized SMILES strings, removing malformed strings (Weininger, 1988; Papadatos et al.,
2016; Landrum et al., 2013). SMILES strings were converted to InChI keys and used to obtain
PubChem CIDs (Kim et al., 2023). To minimize costs and prevent label dilution, only molecules
with fewer than 10 patents were included. This reduced the dataset from 32M to 28.2M molecules,
a 12% decrease. A random 100K molecules were selected as the dataset. For each associated patent,
the title, abstract, and description were scraped from Google Scholar and cleaned.
The patent title, abstract, and first 3500 characters of the description were summarized into brief
functional labels using ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo) from July 15th, 2023, chosen for low cost and high
speed. Cost per molecule was $0.005 using gpt-3.5-turbo. Responses from ChatGPT were converted
into sets of labels and linked to their associated molecules. Summarizations were cleaned, split into
individual words, converted to lowercase, and converted to singular if plural. The cleaned dataset
resulted in 29,854 unique labels for 99,454 molecules. Fetching patent information and summarizing
with ChatGPT, this method’s bottleneck, took 6 seconds per molecule with 16 CPUs in parallel.
This could be sped up to 3.9 seconds by summarizing per-patent rather than per-molecule to avoid
redundant summarizations, and even further to 2.6 seconds by using only US and WO patents.
To consolidate labels by semantic meaning, the vocabulary was embedded with OpenAI’s
textembedding-ada-002 and clustered to group labels by embedding similarity. DBSCAN clustering
was performed on the embeddings with a sweeping epsilon (Ester et al., 1996). The authors chose
the epsilon for optimal clustering, set to be at the minimum number of clusters without quality degra-
dation (e.g., avoiding the merging of antiviral, antibacterial, and antifungal). The optimal epsilon
was 0.34 for the dataset herein, consolidating down from 29,854 to 20,030 labels. Representative
labels for each cluster were created using gpt-3.5-turbo. The labels from a very large cluster of only
IUPAC structural terms were removed to reduce non-generalizable labels. Labels appearing in <50
molecules were dropped to ensure sufficient predictive power. This resulted in a 99,454-molecule
dataset with 1,543 unique functional labels, deemed the Chemical Function (CheF) dataset.
Text-based functional landscape graph. Per-molecule label co-occurrence was counted across
CheF. Counts were used as edge weights between label nodes to create a graph, visualized in Gephi
using force atlas, nooverlap, and label adjust methods (default parameters) (Bastian et al., 2009).
Modularity-based community detection with 0.5 resolution resulted in 19 communities.
Coincidence of labels and their neighbors in structure space. The 100K molecular fingerprints
were t-SNE projected using sckit-learn, setting the perplexity parameter to 500. Molecules were col-
ored if they contained a given label, see chefdb.app. The max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity from
each molecule containing a given label to each molecule containing any of the 10 most commonly
co-occurring labels was computed. The null co-occurrence was calculated by computing the max
similarity from each molecule containing a given label to a random equal-sized set. Significance for
each label was computed with an independent 2-sided t-test. The computed P values were then sub-
jected to a false-discovery-rate (FDR) correction and the labels with P < 0.05 after FDR correction
were considered significantly clustered (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). Limiting max co-occurring
label abundance to 1K molecules was necessary to avoid polluting the analysis, as hyper-abundant
labels would force the Tanimoto similarity to 1.0.
Model training. Several multi-label classification models were trained to predict the CheF from
molecular representations. These models included logistic regression (C=0.001, max iter=1000),
random forest classifier (n estimators=100, max depth=10), and a feedforward neural network
(BCEWithLogitsLoss, layer sizes (512, 256), 5 epochs, 0.2 dropout, batch size 32, learning rate
0.001; 5-fold CV to determine params). A random 10% test set was held out from all model train-
ing. Macro average and individual label ROC-AUC and PR-AUC were calculated.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS STATEMENT

Consideration of ML chemistry dual use often focuses on the identification of toxic chemicals and
drugs of abuse. As patents typically describe the beneficial applications of molecules, it is unlikely
that a model trained on CheF labels will be able to identify novel toxic compounds. Functional
labels for the chemical weapons VX and mustard gas were predicted from our model, found to
contain no obvious indications of malicious properties. On the contrary, drugs of abuse were more
easily identifiable, as the development of neurological compounds remains a lucrative objective.
5-MeO-DMT, LSD, fentanyl, and morphine all had functional labels of their primary mechanism
predicted with moderate confidence. However, benign molecules also predicted these same labels,
indicating that it may be quite challenging to intentionally discover novel drugs of abuse using the
methods contained herein.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

The CheF dataset has been made publicly available under the MIT license at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8350193. An interactive visualization of the dataset can be
found at chefdb.app.

R EFERENCES
David B Ascher, Jerome Wielens, Tracy L Nero, Larissa Doughty, Craig J Morton, and Michael W
  Parker. Potent hepatitis c inhibitors bind directly to ns5a and reduce its affinity for rna. Scientific
  reports, 4(1):4765, 2014.
Stephanie K Ashenden, Thierry Kogej, Ola Engkvist, and Andreas Bender. Innovation in small-
  molecule-druggable chemical space: Where are the initial modulators of new targets published?
  Journal of chemical information and modeling, 57(11):2741–2753, 2017.
Dávid Bajusz, Anita Rácz, and Károly Héberger. Why is tanimoto index an appropriate choice for
  fingerprint-based similarity calculations? Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1):1–13, 2015.
Mathieu Bastian, Sebastien Heymann, and Mathieu Jacomy. Gephi: an open source software for
 exploring and manipulating networks. In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on
 web and social media, volume 3, pp. 361–362, 2009.
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
  approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological),
  57(1):289–300, 1995.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Gene Ontology Consortium. The gene ontology (go) database and informatics resource. Nucleic
  acids research, 32(suppl 1):D258–D261, 2004.
Kathleen E Corey, Nirali Shah, Joseph Misdraji, Barham K Abu Dayyeh, Hui Zheng, Atul K Bhan,
  and Raymond T Chung. The effect of angiotensin-blocking agents on liver fibrosis in patients
  with hepatitis c. Liver International, 29(5):748–753, 2009.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Dif-
  fusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01776, 2022.
Kirill Degtyarenko, Paula De Matos, Marcus Ennis, Janna Hastings, Martin Zbinden, Alan Mc-
  Naught, Rafael Alcántara, Michael Darsow, Mickaël Guedj, and Michael Ashburner. Chebi: a
  database and ontology for chemical entities of biological interest. Nucleic acids research, 36
  (suppl 1):D344–D350, 2007.
David A Drachman. The amyloid hypothesis, time to move on: Amyloid is the downstream result,
  not cause, of alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 10(3):372–380, 2014.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Carl Edwards, ChengXiang Zhai, and Heng Ji. Text2mol: Cross-modal molecule retrieval with
  natural language queries. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 595–607, 2021.

Carl Edwards, Tuan Lai, Kevin Ros, Garrett Honke, Kyunghyun Cho, and Heng Ji. Translation
  between molecules and natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11817, 2022.

Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for
 discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, volume 96, pp. 226–231, 1996.

Gang Fu, Colin Batchelor, Michel Dumontier, Janna Hastings, Egon Willighagen, and Evan Bolton.
  Pubchemrdf: towards the semantic annotation of pubchem compound and substance databases.
  Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1):1–15, 2015.

Jiayuan He, Dat Quoc Nguyen, Saber A Akhondi, Christian Druckenbrodt, Camilo Thorne, Ralph
   Hoessel, Zubair Afzal, Zenan Zhai, Biaoyan Fang, Hiyori Yoshikawa, et al. Chemu 2020: natu-
   ral language processing methods are effective for information extraction from chemical patents.
   Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics, 6:654438, 2021.

Kexin Huang, Payal Chandak, Qianwen Wang, Shreyas Havaldar, Akhil Vaid, Jure Leskovec, Girish
  Nadkarni, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Nils Gehlenborg, and Marinka Zitnik. Zero-shot prediction of
  therapeutic use with geometric deep learning and clinician centered design. medRxiv, pp. 2023–
  03, 2023.

Sunghwan Kim, Jie Chen, Tiejun Cheng, Asta Gindulyte, Jia He, Siqian He, Qingliang Li, Ben-
  jamin A Shoemaker, Paul A Thiessen, Bo Yu, et al. Pubchem 2023 update. Nucleic acids research,
  51(D1):D1373–D1380, 2023.

Greg Landrum et al. Rdkit: A software suite for cheminformatics, computational chemistry, and
  predictive modeling. Greg Landrum, 8:31, 2013.

Jiao Li, Yueping Sun, Robin J Johnson, Daniela Sciaky, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Robert Leaman, Al-
   lan Peter Davis, Carolyn J Mattingly, Thomas C Wiegers, and Zhiyong Lu. Biocreative v cdr task
   corpus: a resource for chemical disease relation extraction. Database, 2016, 2016.

Qingxin Li and CongBao Kang. Mechanisms of action for small molecules revealed by structural
  biology in drug discovery. International journal of molecular sciences, 21(15):5262, 2020.

Maria P Magariños, Anna Gaulton, Eloy Félix, Tevfik Kiziloren, Ricardo Arcila, Tudor I Oprea, and
 Andrew R Leach. Illuminating the druggable genome through patent bioactivity data. PeerJ, 11:
 e15153, 2023.

Gerald Maggiora, Martin Vogt, Dagmar Stumpfe, and Jurgen Bajorath. Molecular similarity in
  medicinal chemistry: miniperspective. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 57(8):3186–3204, 2014.

Yvonne C Martin, James L Kofron, and Linda M Traphagen. Do structurally similar molecules have
  similar biological activity? Journal of medicinal chemistry, 45(19):4350–4358, 2002.

Khalis Mustafayev and Harrys Torres. Hepatitis b virus and hepatitis c virus reactivation in cancer
  patients receiving novel anticancer therapies. Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 28(10):1321–
  1327, 2022.

Michael M Mysinger, Michael Carchia, John J Irwin, and Brian K Shoichet. Directory of useful de-
 coys, enhanced (dud-e): better ligands and decoys for better benchmarking. Journal of medicinal
 chemistry, 55(14):6582–6594, 2012.

David Ochoa, Andrew Hercules, Miguel Carmona, Daniel Suveges, Asier Gonzalez-Uriarte, Cinzia
  Malangone, Alfredo Miranda, Luca Fumis, Denise Carvalho-Silva, Michaela Spitzer, et al. Open
  targets platform: supporting systematic drug–target identification and prioritisation. Nucleic acids
  research, 49(D1):D1302–D1310, 2021.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


George Papadatos, Mark Davies, Nathan Dedman, Jon Chambers, Anna Gaulton, James Siddle,
  Richard Koks, Sean A Irvine, Joe Pettersson, Nicko Goncharoff, et al. Surechembl: a large-scale,
  chemically annotated patent document database. Nucleic acids research, 44(D1):D1220–D1228,
  2016.
David E Patterson, Richard D Cramer, Allan M Ferguson, Robert D Clark, and Laurence E Wein-
  berger. Neighborhood behavior: a useful concept for validation of “molecular diversity” descrip-
  tors. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 39(16):3049–3059, 1996.
Stefan Senger. Assessment of the significance of patent-derived information for the early identifica-
  tion of compound–target interaction hypotheses. Journal of Cheminformatics, 9(1):1–8, 2017.
Stefan Senger, Luca Bartek, George Papadatos, and Anna Gaulton. Managing expectations: as-
  sessment of chemistry databases generated by automated extraction of chemical structures from
  patents. Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1):1–12, 2015.
Bing Su, Dazhao Du, Zhao Yang, Yujie Zhou, Jiangmeng Li, Anyi Rao, Hao Sun, Zhiwu Lu, and Ji-
  Rong Wen. A molecular multimodal foundation model associating molecule graphs with natural
  language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05481, 2022.
Akshay Subramanian, Kevin P Greenman, Alexis Gervaix, Tzuhsiung Yang, and Rafael Gómez-
  Bombarelli. Automated patent extraction powers generative modeling in focused chemical spaces.
  Digital Discovery, 2023.
Chenkai Sun, Weijiang Li, Jinfeng Xiao, Nikolaus Nova Parulian, ChengXiang Zhai, and Heng Ji.
  Fine-grained chemical entity typing with multimodal knowledge representation. In 2021 IEEE In-
  ternational Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 1984–1991. IEEE, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
  a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
  chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.
David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to method-
  ology and encoding rules. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36,
  1988.
David S Wishart, Sagan Girod, Harrison Peters, Eponine Oler, Juan Jovel, Zachary Budinski, Ralph
  Milford, Vicki W Lui, Zinat Sayeeda, Robert Mah, et al. Chemfont: the chemical functional
  ontology resource. Nucleic Acids Research, 51(D1):D1220–D1229, 2023.
Zhenqin Wu, Bharath Ramsundar, Evan N Feinberg, Joseph Gomes, Caleb Geniesse, Aneesh S
  Pappu, Karl Leswing, and Vijay Pande. Moleculenet: a benchmark for molecular machine learn-
  ing. Chemical science, 9(2):513–530, 2018.
Sheng-Yong Yang. Pharmacophore modeling and applications in drug discovery: challenges and
  recent advances. Drug discovery today, 15(11-12):444–450, 2010.
Zenan Zhai, Christian Druckenbrodt, Camilo Thorne, Saber A Akhondi, Dat Quoc Nguyen, Trevor
  Cohn, and Karin Verspoor. Chemtables: a dataset for semantic classification on tables in chemical
  patents. Journal of Cheminformatics, 13(1):1–20, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P ROMPTS
Patent summarization. The system prompt used was “You are an organic chemist summarizing
chemical patents”, and the user prompt was “Return a short set of three 1-3 word descriptors that
best describe the chemical or pharmacological function(s) of the molecule described by the given
patent title, abstract, and partial description (giving more weight to title & abstract). Be specific
and concise, but not necessarily comprehensive (choose a small number of great descriptor). Follow
the syntax ’{descriptor 1} / {descriptor 2} / {etc}’, writing ’NA’ if nothing is provided. DO NOT
BREAK THIS SYNTAX. The following is the patent:”, followed by the patent title, abstract, and
partial description.
Word embedding cluster summarization. Each cluster’s labels were fed into GPT-3.5-turbo
with the system prompt “You are a PhD pharmaceutical chemist” and the user prompt: “Given
a set of molecular descriptors, return a single descriptor representing the centroid of the terms.
Do not speculate. Only use the information provided. Be concise, not explaining answers. Ex-
ample 1 Set of Descriptors: 11(beta)-hsd1, 11-hsd-2, 17β-hsd3 Example 1 Average Descriptor:
hsd Example 2 Set of Descriptors: anti-retroviral, anti-retrovirus, anti-viral, anti-virus, antiretrovi-
ral, antiretrovirus, antiviral, antivirus Example 2 Average Descriptor: antiviral Set of Descriptors:
  INSERT DESCRIPTORS HERE Average Descriptor:”.
Graph label cluster summarization. Each cluster’s labels were fed into GPT-4 with the system
prompt “You are a PhD pharmaceutical chemist” and the user prompt: “Pretend you are a phar-
maceutical chemist. I will provide you with several terms, and your job is to summarize the terms
into appropriate categories. Be succinct, focusing on the broadest categories while still being rep-
resentative. Don’t show your work. Example terms: Antiviral HCV Kinase Cancer Polymerase
Protease Example summarization: Antiviral & Cancer Terms: INSERT DESCRIPTORS HERE
Summarization:”””.

B    S UPPLEMENTAL DATA


                          (a)                                              (b)

Figure S1: Molecular weight and structural similarity distribution of the CheF dataset. (a)
Molecular weight of each molecule in the dataset. Minimum: 100.12 Da; Maximum: 5749.60 Da;
Mean: 440.79 Da; Std: 203.96 Da. (b) Maximum bulk fingerprint Tanimoto coefficient (Tc) for
each molecule in the dataset. Bulk Tc measures how similar a given molecule’s structure is to all of
the other molecules in the dataset. Max Bulk Tc returns the structural similarity of a molecule to the
most structurally similar molecule in the dataset. High Max Bulk Tc indicates redundant structures,
mid-low Max Bulk Tc indicates diverse structures. Minimum: 0.076; Maximum: 1.00; Mean: 0.68;
Std: 0.15.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S2: Example of LLM-based chemical function extraction. Patent IDs are used to retrieve
the patent title, abstract, and description from Google Scholar. ChatGPT is then prompted to extract
out the chemical function of the molecule being described by the patent.

Table S1: ChatGPT patent summarization validation. Manual validation was performed on 200
molecules randomly chosen from the CheF dataset. These 200 molecules had 596 valid associated
patents, and 1,738 ChatGPT summarized labels. These labels were manually validated to determine
the ratio of correct syntax, relevance to patent, and relevance to the Molecule of Interest (MOI).

                             Validation Task                                  Fraction Correct
                                   Syntax                                           0.996
                          Label relevant to patent                                  0.998
    Label refers to MOI, target of MOI, or downstream effects of MOI                0.779
    Label refers to MOI, target of MOI, downstream effects of MOI, or
                                                                                    0.982
                molecules of which MOI is an intermediate

Table S2: Validation of ChatGPT-aided label consolidation. The first 500 of the 3,178 clus-
ters of greater than one label (sorted in descending cluster size order) were evaluated for whether
or not the clusters contained semantically common elements. The ChatGPT consolidated cluster
labels were then analyzed for accuracy and representativeness. Common failure modes for clus-
tering primarily included the grouping of grammatically similar, but not semantically similar labels
(e.g., ahas-inhibiting, ikk-inhibiting). Failure modes for ChatGPT commonly included averaging the
terms to the wrong shared common element (e.g., anti-fungal and anti-mycotic being consolidated
to the label “anti”).

                             Validation Task                                  Fraction Correct
             Cluster contains semantically common elements                          0.992
         ChatGPT cluster summarization accurate & representative                    0.976

Table S3: Comparison of Chemical-Text Datasets. Comparison of CheF to existing chemical-text
datasets ChEBI and ChemFOnt (Degtyarenko et al., 2007; Wishart et al., 2023) by current size (#
molecules), maximum automated scaleup size (# molecules), text-type, whether or not structure and
function are separate in the text, and the data source used for dataset construction. Both ChEBI
and ChemFOnt were built from existing datasets with additional manual curation and annotation,
limiting potential automated scaleup size. In contrast, the method used to build CheF scales readily,
allowing for a potential dataset size of 32M molecules.

   Dataset       Curr. Size    Scaleup Size     Text-Type     S/F Separate       Data Source
    ChEBI          103K           103K+         Long text          No          DB Agg. / Manual
  ChemFOnt         342K            1M+            Labels           Yes         DB Agg. / Manual
  CheF (ours)      100K           32M+            Labels           Yes         LLM-Sum. Patents


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S3: Most frequent patent summarizations. The most frequent patent summarizations do
not immediately exhibit any dataset-independent biases. The bias towards broad treatment terms,
such as cancer, antiviral, and analgesic, likely emerged because these are desirable target functions
and are thus overrepresented in patents.


                     (a)                                                (b)

Figure S4: DBSCAN clustering on Ada-002 text embeddings reduces the number of labels. (a)
The optimal DBSCAN epsilon value was defined as the cutoff resulting in the smallest number of
clusters without overtly false categories appearing (e.g., merging antiviral, antibacterial, & antifun-
gal). The optimal epsilon was found to be 0.340 for the dataset considered herein (marked by black
star), resulting in a consolidation from 29,854 labels to 20,030 clusters. The labels in each cluster
were then consolidated with ChatGPT, creating a set of 20,030 labels. (b) t-SNE of the Ada-002
text embeddings, colored by the top 10 largest clusters. The largest cluster, found to be all IUPAC
structural terms, was removed from the dataset to reduce excessive non-generalizable labels.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a)                    (b)                        (c)                       (d)


            (e)                    (f)                       (g)                        (h)


            (i)                    (j)                       (k)                        (l)


            (m)                    (n)                       (o)                        (p)

Figure S5: Additional CheF labels and their clusters in structure space. Molecules in the CheF
dataset were projected based on molecular fingerprints and colored if the selected label was con-
tained by the molecule’s set of descriptors. To measure degree of clustering for a single label, the
max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity from each molecule containing the selected label, to the other
molecules containing that label, compared against the max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity for a
random subset of molecules of the same size was obtained, whereas to measure the coincidence
between the primary and co-occurring labels, the max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity from each
molecule containing the primary label to each molecule containing any of the 10 nearest neighbor la-
bels was compared against the max fingerprint Tanimoto similarity to a random subset of molecules
of the same size. (a) Molecules containing label ‘crystal’. (b) Degree of clustering for ‘crystal’. (c)
Molecules containing neighboring labels to ‘crystal’. (d) Degree of coincidence between ‘crystal’
and its neighboring labels. (e) Molecules containing label ‘protease’. (f) Degree of clustering for
‘protease’. (g) Molecules containing neighboring labels to ‘protease’. (h) Degree of coincidence
between ‘protease’ and its neighboring labels. (i) Molecules containing label ‘opioid’. (j) Degree
of clustering for ‘opioid’. (k) Molecules containing neighboring labels to ‘opioid’. (l) Degree of
coincidence between ‘opioid’ and its neighboring labels. (m) Molecules containing label ‘beta-
lactamase’. (n) Degree of clustering for ‘beta-lactamase’. (o) Molecules containing neighboring
labels to ‘beta-lactamase’. (p) Degree of coincidence between ‘beta-lactamase’ and its neighboring
labels.

                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S6: K-means clustering on molecules containing ‘hcv’ elucidates Hepatitis C Virus
(HCV) antiviral modalities. The top 20 most frequently occurring labels were obtained for each
of 8 clusters to determine their modalities (if applicable). Cluster 4 was the only cluster to contain
‘nucleoside’ (n=65) and ‘nucleotide’ (n=12) in the top 20 labels, indicating this cluster primarily
contained HCV antiviral nucleoside derivatives likely inhibiting the NS5B polymerase. Cluster 2
contained ‘protease’ (n=85), ‘peptide’ (n=35), and ‘serine’ (n=15), indicating that this cluster pri-
marily contained peptidomimetic protease inhibitors acting on the NS3 serine protease. Cluster
5 contained ‘protease’ (n=108), ‘macrocyclic’ (n=42), and serine (n=8), indicating that this clus-
ter contained macrocyclic compounds acting likely as NS3 serine protease inhibitors. Cluster 6
contained no specific mechanistic terms, alluding to the possible mechanism of these molecules in-
hibiting the NS5A protein.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table S4: GPT-4 graph community summarizations. All labels from the ten most abundant
clusters were fed into GPT-4 for categorical summarization. These outputs were verified to be
representative of the labels, and were further consolidated by the authors into concise categories.

             GPT4 Cluster summary                                  Label in graph
   Chemical Processes & Reactions, Materials
     & Substances, Photographic & Printing
                                                           Material, Industrial, Synthesis, &
     Processes, Cosmetic & Dermatological
                                                                     Dermatology
    Applications, Industrial Manufacturing &
         Production, Sensory Properties
      Antiviral, Cancer, Cellular Processes,
    Enzymes, Immunology, Oncology, Protein                        Antiviral & Cancer
   Interactions, Therapy & Drug Development
    Pain Management, Hormonal Regulation,
    Gastrointestinal Conditions, Neurological
    Conditions, Reproductive Health, Obesity          Neurological, Hormonal, Gastrointestinal, &
    Management, Addiction Treatment, Sleep                       Reproductive Health
          Disorders, Immune Response,
            Cardiovascular Conditions
       Chemical Compounds & Materials,
      Electronic & Optoelectronic Devices,
     Energy & Efficiency, Light & Emission              Electronic, Photochemical, & Stability
   Properties, Stability & Durability, Quantum
               & Thermodynamics
   Neurodegenerative Diseases, Inflammatory
      & Autoimmune Diseases, Respiratory
                                                           Neurodegenerative, Autoimmune,
   Diseases, Immune Response & Regulation,
                                                             Inflammation, & Respiratory
   Enzymes & Mediators, Drug Development
                  & Therapeutics
     Antibacterial, Antifungal, Antiparasitic,
   Antimalarial, Antimicrobial, Antiprotozoal,
      Antitubercular, Insecticide, Herbicide,
                                                            Anti-Organism & Agricultural
         Fungicide, Pesticide, Acaricide,
       Nematicidal, Agricultural & Health
                    Protection
   Drug Development & Delivery, Diagnostic
   & Monitoring, Gene & Protein Regulation,                Pharmaceutical Research, Genetic
    Epigenetics & Transcription, Immunology                    Regulation, Immunology
                    & Vaccines
      Neurological & Psychiatric Disorders,
         Cognitive & Memory Function,
   Neuropharmacology & Neurotransmission,                      Neurological & Urologic
   Mood & Mental Health, Urologic & Sexual
                       Health
   Lipid Metabolism & Cardiovascular Health,
     Diabetes Management, Organ Health &                  Cardiovascular & Lipid Metabolism
                    Protection
     Cardiovascular & Renal Disorders, Ion
     Channels & Transporters, Anesthetics &
                                                         Cardiovascular, Renal, & Ion Channel
    Muscle Relaxants, Neurological Disorders
                 & Eye Conditions


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table S5: Arbitrary 20 CheF labels from each summarized co-occurrence neighborhood.
Modularity-based community detection was performed on the CheF co-occurrence graph to obtain
19 distinct communities. The communities appeared to broadly coincide with the semantic meaning
of the contained labels, and the largest 10 communities were summarized to a common label. Shown
are a random 20 labels from the first five summarized communities.

                                         Neurological,
                                                                                   Neuro-
    Material,                             Hormonal,
                                                             Electronic,        degenerative,
   Industrial,         Antiviral &       Gastrointesti-
                                                           Photochemical,      Autoimmune,
  Synthesis, &          Cancer              nal, &
                                                             & Stability       Inflammation,
  Dermatology                            Reproductive
                                                                               & Respiratory
                                            Health
      absorb                aid            analgesic          carbazole             activate
       acid              antiviral         condition          compound             adhesion
      binder                 c              ligand             expand             alzheimer
       care               cancer           modulate              life              amyloid
                                                                                      anti-
     cosmetic              cell            modulator             light
                                                                                inflammatory
   destabilize              g12               p2x7             material          autoimmune
       form                 hbv                pain            activated               cox
    functional              hcv           prophylaxis           amine               disease
       ionic             hepatitis          prostate          anisotropy            elastase
     method                 hiv             receptor           aromatic               il-17
  modification            inhibit             relief             blue           inflammation
      optical           inhibition         selective          capability        inflammatory
  photochromic           inhibitor             tgr5          characteristic       interferon
      plastic            integrase             tract            charge                lung
                                                                                     neuro-
     polymer              kinase           treatment          condensed
                                                                                 degenerative
                                                                                     neuro-
     preserve              kras             various             crystal
                                                                                inflammation
    production            mapk                5-ht              cyclic                sting
    protective         nucleoside              7                device              airway
                      phosphatidyl-
    sensitivity                            addiction           dielectric          allergic
                         inositol
       skin          phosphorylation       adrenergic            diode             allergy


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table S6: Arbitrary 20 CheF labels from each summarized co-occurrence neighborhood.
Modularity-based community detection was performed on the CheF co-occurrence graph to obtain
19 distinct communities. The communities appeared to broadly coincide with the semantic meaning
of the contained labels, and the largest 10 communities were summarized to a common label. Shown
are a random 20 labels from the second five summarized communities.

                     Pharmaceutical
                        Research,                             Cardiovascular      Cardiovascular,
 Anti-Organism                            Neurological &
                         Genetic                                 & Lipid           Renal, & Ion
 & Agricultural                             Urologic
                       Regulation,                             Metabolism            Channel
                      Immunology
       amide               assay          anticonvulsant          carbonic          cardiovascular
      control              bind               cerebral            ischemia              channel
     derivative       bromodomain            disorder               level                  ion
     infection          diagnostic           function                liver               stroke
     protection            drug            mitochondrial         prevention                ace
     acaricide           potential             neural              reducer             anesthetic
       acetic              psma           neuroprotective         reducing               angina
      animal             regulator              pde              reduction           angiotensin
                                                                                          anti-
        anti               sirtuin         schizophrenia           regulate
                                                                                     hypertensive
   anti-malarial          targeting           sedative            releasing             blocker
  anti-microbial               6               system              retinoid             calcium
   antiparasitic             alter            urologic                vap               cardiac
        aryl               analog                 4               vascular            cardiotonic
      azetidin                atp                 5                    a              circulation
     azetidine             atrophy         anti-psychotic           aldose            c-transport
     bacterial         bioavailability     antidepressant         alleviate           contraction
    bactericide          biological          antitussive        antilipidemic           diuretic
  beta-lactamase         biomarker           anxiolytic             blood                failure
      bicyclic         combinatorial            brain            cholesterol              heart
       bridge            cytotoxic             central         cholesterolemia       hypertensive


Table S7: Fingerprint models benchmarked on CheF. To assess a baseline benchmark on the CheF
dataset of ∼100K molecules, several molecular fingerprint-based models were trained on 90% of the
training data and evaluated on the 10% test set holdout. Macro average ROC-AUC and PR-AUC
was calculated across all 1,543 labels. Logistic regression (LR), random forest classifier (RFC), and
a 2-layer feedforward neural network (FFN) were trained. Parameters for LR and RFC were chosen
to be common default values, whereas the FFN layer number and size were chosen through a 5-fold
cross validation.

                                 Model      ROC-AUC         PR-AUC
                                FP + LR       0.84            0.20
                               FP + RFC       0.80            0.13
                               FP + FFN       0.81            0.12


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S7: Top 50 FDA-approved drugs predicted to contain the label ‘hcv’. The Stage-4 ap-
proved drugs list from OpenTargets was passed through the CheF label prediction model. Results
were sorted by ‘hcv’ probability. Relevant and high abundance labels displayed for clarity. Green
cells represent approved-use labels from on the OpenTargets page, and red cells represent no ap-
proved usage relevant to the given term.


                                               21
