Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L IGHTWEIGHT, P RE - TRAINED T RANSFORMERS FOR
R EMOTE S ENSING T IMESERIES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Machine learning models for parsing remote sensing data have a wide range of
         societally relevant applications, but labels used to train these models can be dif-
         ficult or impossible to acquire. This challenge has spurred research into self-
         supervised learning for remote sensing data aiming to unlock the use of machine
         learning in geographies or application domains where labelled datasets are small.
         Current self-supervised learning approaches for remote sensing data draw signif-
         icant inspiration from techniques applied to natural images. However, remote
         sensing data has important differences from natural images – for example, the
         temporal dimension is critical for many tasks and data is collected from many
         complementary sensors. We show we can create significantly smaller perfor-
         mant models by designing architectures and self-supervised training techniques
         specifically for remote sensing data. We introduce the Pretrained Remote Sensing
         Transformer (Presto), a transformer-based model pre-trained on remote sensing
         pixel-timeseries data. Presto excels at a wide variety of globally distributed re-
         mote sensing tasks and performs competitively with much larger models while
         requiring far less compute. Presto can be used for transfer learning or as a feature
         extractor for simple models, enabling efficient deployment at scale.



1   I NTRODUCTION & R ELATED W ORK

Recent advances in machine learning capabilities combined with vast remote sensing datasets have
provided many societally beneficial outcomes ranging from tracking progress on sustainable devel-
opment goals (Ferreira et al., 2020) to improved weather forecasting (English et al., 2013; Voosen,
2020) to disaster management (Kansakar & Hossain, 2016). However, the remote sensing data
modality has several characteristics that are important to consider when designing machine learning
algorithms in this domain:
• Highly multi-modal data: According to The Union of Concerned Scientists (2023), there were
  1,142 Earth-observing satellites orbiting Earth in January 2023. These satellites carry a wide range
  of sensors, including synthetic aperture radar (Torres et al., 2012) and multispectral optical sensors
  (Drusch et al., 2012). In addition, there are many derived data products which are created by the
  manipulation of these raw data sources (such as digital elevation maps (Rabus et al., 2003)). Rao
  et al. (2020) found that combining a variety of direct observations and derived products yielded
  the strongest fuel moisture prediction performance.
• A highly informative temporal dimension: The Earth’s highly dynamic nature (Yifang et al.,
  2015) and the relatively coarse resolution of freely available satellite data means that in remote
  sensing, the temporal dimension is critical for many downstream tasks (Rußwurm et al., 2023).
  A common approach by remote sensing practitioners is therefore to train single pixel-timeseries
  models (Rußwurm et al., 2023; Sainte Fare Garnot et al., 2020; Pelletier et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
  2020; Hengl et al., 2017) (as opposed to models which instead emphasize the spatial dimension,
  which is the case in natural imagery).
• Unique metadata: All remote sensing data is associated with (i) the location data describing the
  place being imaged, and (ii) the timestamp at which the image was captured. This information can
  be useful for machine learning algorithms. For example, You et al. (2017) found that supplement-
  ing a yield-estimation model with time and location data significantly improved performance.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Datasets for remote sensing often have very few labels (Helber et al., 2019), which may be unreliable
(Bressan et al., 2022; Yifang et al., 2015) or absent, especially for under-resourced geographies
(Kerner et al., 2020; Nakalembe et al., 2021), leading to poor global generalization (Yifang et al.,
2015). This limited availability of labels combined with plentiful unlabeled data has spurred the
investigation of self-supervised learning algorithms for remote sensing data (Reed et al., 2022; Cong
et al., 2022; Jean et al., 2019; Manas et al., 2021; Ayush et al., 2021).
Previous approaches investigating self-supervised learning for remote sensing primarily treat remote
sensing data as analogous to natural imagery, and therefore attempt to co-opt methods and architec-
tures originally designed for natural imagery (i.e., ground-level photography) – for example, by
using a ResNet (He et al., 2016) backbone (Jean et al., 2019; Manas et al., 2021; Ayush et al., 2021),
or by adapting masked autoencoding for image classification (He et al., 2022) to satellite imagery
(Reed et al., 2022; Cong et al., 2022). These models fail to leverage all the attributes of remote
sensing data (for example, models which can only ingest data from a single RGB sensor, or which
do not consider the temporal dimension of the data).
Transformers have been investigated for remote sensing timeseries, either as unmodified architec-
tures (Rußwurm & Körner, 2020) or as architectures designed for specific tasks (Sainte Fare Garnot
et al., 2020; Tarasiou et al., 2023). While several pre-training methods have been proposed for trans-
formers with remote sensing timeseries (Yuan & Lin, 2020; Yuan et al., 2022; 2023), these have not
aimed at multi-task, global applicability, having been pre-trained and evaluated on highly local areas
(e.g., central California) and evaluated only for a single task (e.g., crop type classification).
To take advantage of the unique characteristics, global scope, and broad applicability of remote
sensing data, we introduce the Pretrained Remote Sensing Transformer (Presto), a lightweight
transformer-based model designed to ingest pixel-timeseries inputs from a variety of Earth observa-
tion sensors and data products. We tailor the self-supervised learning process to learn from multiple
data sources and from the temporal dimension of the data so that Presto learns powerful represen-
tations of remote sensing data. These representations can be efficiently adapted to a wide range
of globally distributed sensing tasks. Presto is also robust to missing input sensors or timesteps,
excelling even in image-based tasks where the temporal dimension is completely absent.
When deployed, models built for remote sensing data are typically used to make contiguous geospa-
tial predictions over millions (or billions) of samples to form a predicted map. The computational
performance of models is therefore one of the primary considerations at deployment time: Van Tricht
(2021), Hengl et al. (2017) and Robinson et al. (2019) all prioritized efficiency over accuracy when
deploying remote sensing models at scale. This has limited the adoption of large models with ViT or
ResNet backbones for large scale mapping. In comparison, Presto is highly accurate despite having
1000× fewer trainable parameters than ViT- or ResNet-based models (and requiring orders of mag-
nitudes fewer FLOPs at inference time), making it especially well-suited to real-world deployment.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are:
• We introduce Presto, a lightweight transformer-based model designed for Earth observation data
  from a potentially diverse set of sources or sensors. We pre-train Presto with a novel MAE-based
  self-supervised methodology designed to leverage the structure in multi-sensor pixel-timeseries.
• We show that Presto is competitive with state-of-the-art models across a variety of geographies,
  dataset sizes, and task types while often requiring significantly less compute. Although Presto only
  ingests pixel timeseries, it is also performant on tasks where the spatial component is important.
• We show that Presto is competitive even on tasks where a subset of pre-training channels or
  timesteps are available (including tasks with only a single time step and/or a single sensory modal-
  ity), showing that leveraging multi-sensor timeseries during the pre-training process confers a
  significant advantage in the model’s learned representations.

2   M ETHOD
We aim to learn a model, f , which can learn useful representations in a self-supervised manner given
unlabelled remote sensing pixel-timeseries data, x. This model can then be applied to a wide variety
of downstream remote sensing tasks. Importantly, while we leverage the structure of multi-sensor
pixel-timeseries data for self-supervised pre-training, the model can then be fine-tuned on data with
a different number of timesteps or sensors than the pre-training input format.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Presto learns from structurally-masked remote sensing pixel-timeseries. Specifically,
we construct a multi-sensor remote sensing pixel-timeseries, and randomly select one of the four
masking strategies described in Section 2.3. The encoder-decoder model is then trained to recon-
struct the original timeseries. At fine-tuning time, we discard the decoder and only use the encoder’s
output. The downstream task may have incomplete inputs (missing timesteps or sensors) since the
encoder is specifically trained on such inputs. Presto receives both static-in-time and dynamic-in-
time inputs and the location metadata of each pixel timeseries. In this figure, a cube represents a
pixel. The 2D arrangement is for clarity and does not represent concatenation of the pixels.


Our approach is based on the masked autoencoding framework (He et al., 2022), in which the net-
work architecture includes both an encoder (f ) and a decoder (g). During pre-training, part of the
input is masked out and the encoder embeds the remaining (non-masked) part of the input. The
decoder aims to reconstruct the masked-out part of the input, given the encoder’s output. At fine-
tuning time, we discard g and only use f (either as a feature extractor or a fine-tuneable model) for
downstream tasks. In the sections below, we discuss how Presto adapts this general framework for
multi-sensor remote sensing timeseries data. An overview of the Presto pre-training methodology is
shown in Figure 1, and full pre-training details are in Section A.1.

2.1   P RE - TRAINING DATA

Remote sensing models can be deployed in a wide range of geographies, with few labelled datapoints
available at fine-tuning time (Kerner et al., 2020; Böhm et al., 2022). We therefore aim to collect a
globally representative pre-training dataset. We followed the sampling strategy of Dynamic World
(Brown et al., 2022) to construct a dataset of 21.5M pixel samples, each having 10m per pixel
resolution. Appendix A.1.1 describes the pre-training dataset construction process in detail. Presto
is trained on pixel-timeseries of 12-month contiguous intervals, sampled from a 2-year period from
the beginning of 2020 until the end of 2021, with each month represented by one timestep (similar
to the approach adopted in Tseng et al. (2021)). Derived data products which result from analysis of
lower level data (e.g., (Parkinson et al., 2006)) can significantly improve model performance (Rao
et al., 2020; Hengl et al., 2017). We therefore pre-train Presto on a diverse range of directly-sensed
and derived Earth observation products, exported using Google Earth Engine (Gorelick et al., 2017).
A pre-training batch contains a number of pixel-timeseries, each of which consists of a concatenation
of dynamic-in-time datapoints with each timestep representing a month (yielding T = 12 timesteps
in total). To every pixel-timeseries we append a number of static-in-time features. We leverage the
following data products when pretraining Presto:
• Sentinel-1 Synthetic Aperture Radar observations (S1): The VV (emit and receive at vertical
  polarization) and VH (emit at vertical and receive at horizontal polarization) bands: 2 real-valued
  dynamic values per monthly timestep.
• Sentinel-2 Multispectral images (S2): We removed the 60m resolution bands, yielding bands
  with 10m and 20m resolution with channels in the visible, near-infrared and short-wave infrared
  range: 10 real-valued dynamic values per timestep.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Presto learns to reconstruct channels that are completely masked in a spatially cohe-
sive manner. In this experiment, we mask the Sentinel-2 RGB channels (all other channels are left
unmasked); Presto is able to reconstruct these channels even when they are absent from the input.
The reconstructions are spatially consistent even though Presto only receives single pixel inputs.


• ERA5 Climate Reanalysis Meteorological data (ERA5): Monthly total precipitation and tem-
  perature at 2 metres above the ground: 2 real-valued dynamic values per timestep.
• NDVI (Rouse et al., 1974): Computed from the red (B4) and near-infrared (B8) Sentinel-2 bands:
  1 real-valued dynamic value per timestep.
• Dynamic World Land Cover classes (DW, Brown et al., 2022): Land cover classes produced for
  every non-cloudy Sentinel-2 image: 1 dynamic categorical value from the set of possible classes
  V per timestep. We took the mode of classes for all timesteps within a month.
• Topography data (TG), from the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission’s Digital Elevation Model:
  The elevation and slope of each pixel, real-valued and static in time.
• Coordinates (Loc): 3D static in time Cartesian coordinates computed from the latitude and longi-
  tude of the pixel’s geographical location: sLoc = [cos(lat)×cos(lon), cos(lat)×sin(lon), sin(lat)].
Hence, one pre-training sample x, comprising a pixel-timeseries t ∈ [RT ×15 ; V T ×1 ] and static
variables s ∈ R1×5 , is summarized as follows. From now on, we use “pixel-timeseries” to refer to
both the dynamic and the static variables.
                        h                                                             i
                 x = tS1        S2   ERA5
                           i ; ti ; ti    ; tNDVI
                                             i    ; tDW
                                                     i  | i = 1, ..., 12 ; sTG ; sLoc         (1)


2.2   E NCODING AND TOKENIZATION

The pixel-timeseries x is transformed into a number of tokens (each represented by an embedding e)
to be processed by the Presto transformer. Per timestep 0 ≤ i < T , the input variables are split into
channel groups C according to their type of sensor or source: e.g., the S1 bands form one channel
group (we describe these groups in more detail in Appendix A.1.2). Each real-valued channel group
represents a different sensor, native spatial resolution or (in the case of Sentinel-2 channel-groups)
region of the electromagnetic spectrum. We therefore projected them to a common latent space of
dimension de by separate learned linear projections h: e.g., eS1         S1 S1
                                                                  i = h (ti ). The Dynamic World
classes are categorical, so they are embedded by indexing into an embedding matrix.
Unlike natural images, in which the data and its label are self-contained, remote sensing labels
are inherently associated to a place and time on Earth (i.e., a latitude/longitude and timestamp).
In addition, while each natural image contains the same RGB channels, Presto’s pixel-timeseries
represent channels from different remote sensing data products. We therefore want to communicate
to the model: (i) the location of the datapoint (already present in the input as static variable through
coordinates sLoc ), and a variable’s (ii) timestamp and (iii) channel group. We do this by adding
encodings to the previously described embeddings e. The complete encoding is a concatenation of
the positional, month and learned channel encodings and has dimension de .
• Positional We use the sinusoidal positional encoding psin originally used by transformer models
  (Vaswani et al., 2017), where variables from the same timestep get the same encoding.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Table 1: Structured masking strate-
 Channel                               Contiguous      F1          gies yield the best downstream per-
             Random      Timesteps
 Groups                                Timesteps      Score        formance. We measured PrestoR ’s F1
      ✓                                                0.646       score on the CropHarvest validation
                ✓                                      0.653       task. Combining structured strategies
                             ✓                         0.664       outperformed the “Random” masking
                                            ✓          0.649       employed by He et al. (2022).
      ✓         ✓            ✓              ✓         0.665



• Month We add an encoding pmonth that represents the month being captured by each token. This
  is done because we expect timesteps from similar months to have similar features even if they are
  from different years. We assign an integer to each month ranging from 0 to 11, yielding:

             pmonth,2i = sin ((2π × month)/12)             pmonth,2i+1 = cos ((2π × month)/12)              (2)

  For static-in-time variables, the positional and month encodings are set to zero.
• Channel Group Finally, each token is associated with a set of input channels. In multi-spectral
  SatMAE (Cong et al., 2022), a fixed encoding is used to communicate input-band information,
  which is possible because only input data from one sensor (Sentinel-2) is used, with different
  channels representing different wavelengths. However, since Presto uses a number of different
  remote sensing products, we apply a learnable encoding pchannel for each channel group from the
  set of possible channel groups C = {S1, S2 RGB, ..., ERA5, TG, Loc}.

The transformer input E ∈ R(T ·|Cdynamic |+|Cstatic |)×de (for encoder dimension de ) is a concatenation of:
• Dynamic variables: eci = hc (tci ) + [pcchannel ; psin(i) ; pmonth(i) ], for timesteps i and channel groups c
• Topological data: eTG = hTG (sTG ) + [pTG  channel ; 0; 0]
• Coordinates: eLoc = hLoc (sLoc )

2.3   P RE - TRAINING VIA S TRUCTURED M ASKING

A goal of Presto is to perform well even with incomplete inputs (i.e., when there are fewer or
missing timesteps, when channels are missing, or both). When masking out part of the input x, we
therefore tailor the masking strategies to encourage the model to learn representations that perform
well specifically when given a subset of bands or timesteps for downstream tasks. For a T × D input
of T timesteps and D total input channels, we use the following masking techniques (illustrated
in Figure 1), where Presto considers a token to be a 1 × d input (a single timestep of d grouped
channels). The coordinates are never masked (but the static topological tokens can be).
1. Random: (t × d) masked values, with t < T and d < D
2. Channel-groups: (T × d) masked values, with d < D
3. Contiguous timesteps: (t × D) masked values, with t < T
4. Timesteps: (t × D) masked values, with t < T
For each instance, we randomly sample from the above strategies to construct a mask. Table 1
shows results from ablating the masking strategies, measured against a validation task (classifying
CropHarvest datapoints - excluding the evaluation data described in Section 3.1 - according to their
FAO indiciative crop classifications). Unlike other masked-autoencoder methods (Cong et al., 2022;
He et al., 2022), we find that combining structured masking strategies outperforms random masking.
In addition, we find that Presto can reconstruct entirely missing channel groups in Figure 2.
Since the masked-autoencoder model is trained on both categorical and continuous timeseries inputs,
the model’s loss must also be calculated using both categorical and continuous reconstructions. This
is achieved using the following loss function, which balances the loss for every batch so that each
reconstructed value receives the same weighting in the final loss: Ltotal = LMSE + λ NNcont
                                                                                         cat
                                                                                             LCE . LMSE
is the mean squared error reconstruction loss used for the continuous values, LCE is the cross entropy
loss used for the categorical values, Ncont is the number of masked continuous values and Ncat is the
number of masked categorical values (in the batch). λ is a hyperparameter, which we set to 2.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: We evaluate Presto on a wide variety of downstream tasks. There is diversity in terms
of input-data composition (numbers of timesteps and channels), geographic area and training size.

      Dataset           Task                           Region     Timesteps    Channels    Training size
                                                        Kenya                                       1,345
      CropHarvest       Segmentation                    Brazil           12         19                203
                                                         Togo                                       1,319
                                                                                 2 (S1)
      TreeSat           Multi-Label Classification    Germany             1                        45,337
                                                                                11 (S2)
                                                                               3 (RGB)
      EuroSat           Classification                 Europe             1                        21,600
                                                                               11 (MS)
      Fuel Moisture     Regression                          USA           3         19              1,578
      Algae Blooms      Regression                          USA          12         19                777


Table 3: Adapting Presto to downstream tasks is computationally efficient. We show F1 scores
on the CropHarvest tasks. TIML and MOSAIKS-1D do not receive Dynamic World as input, so we
evaluated Presto with and without it for fair comparison. In both cases, Presto outperforms these
models while requiring the adaptation of far fewer parameters.

                                  Number of parameters
                Model             Total      Finetuned       Kenya    Brazil     Togo     Mean
                Random Forest                                 0.559   0.000     0.756     0.441
                MOSAIKS-1DR       418K               8193     0.790   0.746     0.679     0.738
                TIML               91K                91K     0.838   0.835     0.732     0.802
                PrestoR                                       0.816   0.891    0.798       0.835
                                  401K               129
                   no DW                                     0.861     0.888    0.760     0.836



3     E VALUATION

We aim to demonstrate the utility of Presto for a diversity of tasks, geographic task-locations, in-
put data modalities and downstream dataset sizes. This diversity is demonstrated in Table 2. For
downstream evaluation, we take the encoder-decoder model learned during pre-training and discard
the decoder. As in (He et al., 2022), we pass a global-pool of all the encoder’s output tokens to a
downstream classifier. We evaluate the performance of three different models (PrestoR , PrestoRF ,
PrestoF T , defined below) built on top of Presto’s encoder:
• Feature extraction. Rolf et al. (2021) demonstrated the utility of neural networks as feature-
  extractors on top of which computationally efficient classifiers could be trained. PrestoR and
  PrestoRF consist respectively of linear or logistic regressions and random forests trained on
  Presto’s embeddings. Since only the regression/random forest is trained, not the Presto encoder,
  this a computationally efficient method for adapting Presto to a wide range of tasks.
• Fine-tuning. PrestoF T consists of the Presto encoder, followed by a linear transform of the pooled
  tokens to the desired outputs. This entire model (the encoder and the linear transformation) is fine-
  tuned on the evaluation tasks using fixed hyperparameters. We used a subset of the training data
  for validation and early stopping.
We compare Presto to a number of self-supervised pre-training baselines, as well as state-of-the-art
task specific baselines (Section A.3). We adapt MOSAIKS (Rolf et al., 2021) for timeseries data by
convolving over the temporal dimension instead of the spatial dimension. We use the output features
with random forests (MOSAIKS-1DRF ) and with regressions (MOSAIKS-1DR ).

3.1    T IMESERIES TASKS

• Crop type Segmentation: The CropHarvest (Tseng et al., 2021) evaluation datasets consist of
  classifying pixels as (i) maize in Kenya, (ii) coffee in Brazil and (iii) cropland in Togo. We


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Table 4: Results on the TreeSatAI
                          Weighted             Micro         dataset. We compare Presto to the
    Model      Data       F1     mAP          F1     mAP     dataset’s benchmark models. The MLPs
    MLP                 10.09    29.42     12.82    33.09    contain 3 layers (with 563K-723K pa-
    LightGBM   S1       11.86    32.79     14.07    35.11    rameters respectively) and are tuned for
    PrestoRF           19.79    35.76     22.92    38.69     this task, whereas we freeze the Presto
    MLP                51.97    64.19     54.59    65.83     encoder’s 401k parameters and train a
    LightGBM   S2       48.17    61.99     52.52    61.66    random forest on its outputs with de-
    PrestoRF            46.26    60.88     50.41    63.24    fault scikit-learn hyperparameters.



  compare Presto to the baselines provided by CropHarvest and to Task-Informed Meta-Learning
  (TIML, Tseng et al., 2022), a method that achieved state-of-the-art results on these datasets.
• Fuel Moisture: The live fuel moisture dataset (Rao et al., 2020) measures live fuel moisture
  content in the Western U.S. Rao et al. (2020) baseline used 5-fold cross validation to evaluate
  model performance; for future comparability, we use a geographically partitioned test set.
• Algae Blooms: The algae blooms dataset (alg, 2023) measures the severity of cyanobacterial
  algal blooms in different parts of the U.S. (we use the subset in the Midwestern U.S.). The dataset
  was originally released as part of a competition, so the test data is not available. In addition,
  competitors could download a range of Earth observation datasets to train their models, making
  direct comparisons to competition results difficult. We benchmark against a regression and a
  random forest (since the winning solution used a tree-based method), and use a geographically
  partitioned test set.

3.2    I MAGE - BASED TASKS

Presto is designed to ingest pixel-timeseries (and not single timestep images, as is the case for image-
based tasks). However, many remote sensing benchmarks consist of static-in-time imagery, which
represents an out-of-domain evaluation relative to Presto’s pretraining. When a single prediction is
required for an entire image, we use the following approach to obtain per-image predictions from
Presto’s pixel outputs (illustrated in Figure 6):
1. We encode the pixels in an image individually, yielding N output tokens.
2. We then measure the mean and standard deviation of these N output pixels per dimension and
   concatenate the result, yielding a 2de vector (where, de is Presto’s output token size, or 128).
3. We then pass this mean and standard deviation vector to a downstream classifier.
We evaluate Presto using three image-based datasets:
• TreeSatAI: The TreeSatAI dataset consists of detecting the presence of one or more tree species
  (out of 20 possible species) in forestry images in Germany (Ahlswede et al., 2023). We use the
  train and test splits provided by Ahlswede et al. (2023), and compare Presto to the deep learning
  and tree-based baselines provided alongside the dataset. As done for the baselines, we measure
  the effectiveness of models using only Sentinel-2 (S2) or only Sentinel-1 (S1) data.
• EuroSAT: The EuroSAT dataset consists of classifying Sentinel-2 multispectral images in Europe
  as belonging to one of 10 landcover classes (Helber et al., 2019). We use the train and test splits
  provided by Neumann et al. (2019). We compare Presto to SatMAE, ConvMAE and ScaleMAE
  by using the kNN-classifier approach at a variety of input resolutions, as is done by Reed et al.
  (2022). We also compare finetuned Presto against Seasonal Contrast (Manas et al., 2021) and
  GASSL (Ayush et al., 2021). Since most models ingest RGB imagery, we evaluate Presto both
  when it receives all Sentinel-2 bands as input (MS) and when it only receives the RGB bands.

4     R ESULTS
Overall, Presto excels at a variety of tasks in a range of geographies (spanning 4 continents and 38
countries). Presto is performant both when the whole model is fine-tuned (Table 5) or and when
it is used as a feature extractor for simple models (Tables 3, 4 and 3). We highlight that wherever
it is possible to do so, we benchmark Presto against the state-of-the-art model for that task – even
as a feature extractor, Presto outperforms this state-of-the-art model in many cases (Tables 3 and


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Finetuned   Finetuning
Model           Backbone
                               params (M)    accuracy
GASSL           ResNet-18           11.69       0.895
SeCo            ResNet-18           11.69       0.931
SatMAE (RGB)    ViT-Large          303.10       0.955
SatMAE (MS)     ViT-Large          305.96       0.990
Presto (RGB)    Presto               0.40       0.826
Presto (MS)     Presto               0.40       0.944

                         (a)
                                                                           (b)

Figure 3: Presto is competitive with methods designed for single-timestep satellite images, while
being much more computationally efficient. We show (a) EuroSAT finetuning accuracy for a
variety of architectures and pre-training regimes, and (b) accuracy of the embeddings when passed
through a KNN@5 classifier at a variety of input resolutions (following (Reed et al., 2022)) as a
function of FLOPs required to encode an image (note the log scale on the x-axes). In (b), all image-
based models resize images to 224 × 224, so the FLOPs required to encode an image do not change
with image resolution. Presto achieves competitive results with image-based models while requiring
up to four orders of magnitude less FLOPs to encode an image.

                                                 Figure 4: Presto is robust to incomplete inputs. We
                                                 measure the AUC ROC score of Presto with Linear
                                                 probing (PrestoR ) on the CropHarvest dataset when
                                                 no Dynamic World input is passed, and with a sub-
                                                 set of input months (the x-axis). PrestoR recovers
                                                 the performance of MOSAIKS-1D and TIML with 12
                                                 months of input given only a subset of input months.


4). In addition, while previous self-supervised learning approaches primarily consider downstream
land-cover mapping tasks we demonstrate Presto’s performance across a wide range of tasks ranging
from tree species classification to algae bloom estimation.

Applying Presto to downstream tasks is computationally efficient While other methods require
a cluster of GPUs at fine-tuning time (Cong et al., 2022), we fine-tune Presto on a single GPU or
CPU (Presto can be fine-tuned on the Fuel Moisture task on a 2017 MacBook Pro in less than 6
minutes). When Presto is used as a feature extractor, only simple models need to be trained (which
require few parameters to be learned, as we show in Table 3). Even when fully fine-tuned, Presto’s
small size means that relatively few parameters need to be finetuned (Figure 3(a)). This makes Presto
accessible to practitioners, especially those lacking significant computational resources.

Presto is performant even with missing data Presto is pre-trained on a variety of diverse remote
sensing products (see Section 2.1). However, these data products may not be available for a down-
stream task; for example, only a single timestep or single sensor may be available (Helber et al.,
2019; Ahlswede et al., 2023). We therefore evaluate Presto when it receives:
• A subset of timesteps: We evaluate Presto when it receives only a subset of timesteps compared
  to the 12 timesteps used for pre-training. Specifically, Presto receives 3 input timesteps for the
  fuel moisture task (Table 5) and only a single input timestep for the EuroSat and TreeSatAI tasks
  (Tables 4 and 3). In all cases, Presto remains performant. We also evaluate Presto when a subset
  of input months are passed for the CropHarvest dataset (Figure 4) – Presto rapidly recovers the
  performance of TIML and MOSAIKS-1D (which used all input months).
• A subset of input bands: We evaluate Presto when it only receives a subset of the training input
  bands. For the EuroSat task (Table 3), Presto receives either the full Sentinel-2 input, or only the
  RGB bands (which represents only a single token, since only one timestep is available for this
  task). Similarly, we evaluate Presto when it receives either Sentinel-2 or Sentinel-1 data for the


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: RMSE results on the regression tasks. While the literature baselines are not directly com-
parable, since they use different input datasets or private test data (or both), Rao et al. (2020) report
an RMSE of 25 on the fuel moisture dataset with a physics-assisted neural network and the algae
bloom competition winner reported an RMSE of 0.761, indicating our results are within the scope of
utility. Best results are highlighted blue, with second best results in bold. Results are an average of
three runs with standard error reported. Models have a high variance in performance across tasks –
we therefore calculate the mean difference in RMSE from the linear regression baseline across both
tasks. Presto performs most consistently, both when used as a feature-extractor and when fine-tuned.

                                          Fuel Moisture   Algae Blooms     Mean difference
              Linear Regression                  28.20           0.850                 0%
              Random Forest              23.84 ± 0.42      1.249 ± 0.02             15.7%
              MOSAIKS-1DRF                28.75 ± 0.15     0.972 ± 0.01             8.15%
              PrestoF T (random init.)    26.07 ± 0.52     0.955 ± 0.05             2.40%
              PrestoF T                  25.28 ± 0.30     0.815 ± 0.03           −7.24%
              PrestoRF                    25.98 ± 0.66     0.884 ± 0.01          −1.94%



    TreeSatAI task (Table 4). In both cases, Presto is competitive with methods designed to ingest
    single-timestep, single-sensor data. Finally, also on the CropHarvest dataset (Table 3), Presto
    remains performant (compared to a full input) without being passed the Dynamic World input,
    with a negligible difference in mean F1 score.

Presto is competitive even in out-of-domain settings against larger models Because Presto is
pre-trained on pixel-timeseries with no spatial context, we consider the image-based tasks (Section
3.2) as out-of-domain. However, image-based datasets are commonly used as remote sensing bench-
marks, motivating us to measure Presto’s performance in this regime. We find that Presto performs
comparably to models specifically designed and trained to ingest image datasets (Table 4 and Figure
3). With a KNN classifier, Presto performs comparably to significantly larger ViT based models on
the EuroSAT dataset (Figure 3). Specifically, Presto achieves comparable average accuracy (across
the different resolutions) to larger ViT based models when given RGB data, and significantly out-
performs these models when given multispectral (MS) data. In addition, Presto requires orders of
magnitude less compute to encode the images in both cases and for any resolution. When finetuned,
Presto with multi-spectral data performs competitively with remote sensing models designed for
images, despite having significantly less parameters to finetune.


5     D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

Limitations Presto is designed to ingest 10m/px resolution imagery, and is pre-trained on products
at this scale. This decision is motivated by the free, global availability over time of products at
this scale (such as Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2). This means that Presto does not process very high
resolution imagery natively. In addition, Presto is a pixel-timeseries model. While we demonstrate
Presto’s ability on single-timestep image datasets, if it is desirable to process entire images to make
a prediction then image-based models which do this natively may be better suited. We highlight the
plateauing of Presto’s performance on the EuroSat dataset as the input resolution increases (Table
3), due to classes in the dataset where the relevant pixels for the class are a minority of the pixels in
the image; in such scene classification challenges, image-based models (which can distinguish the
shape of the relevant pixels) may be better suited. We discuss this further in Section A.7.

Conclusion We present Presto: a lightweight, pre-trained timeseries transformer for remote sens-
ing. By leveraging structure unique to remote sensing data (specifically, (i) an important temporal
dimension, (ii) associated metadata and (iii) a diversity of sensors), we are able to train an extremely
lightweight model which achieves state-of-the-art results in a wide variety of globally distributed
evaluation tasks. Computational efficiency is of paramount importance in remote sensing settings
(often dictating which models ultimately get selected for deployment). We demonstrate that strong
performance can be achieved while meeting this constraint, and that self-supervised learning can
provide significant benefits even for small models.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS STATEMENT

Presto is designed to be accessible to a wide range of practitioners; we achieve this by only training
Presto on publicly available data and by keeping the model size small enough so it can be lever-
aged in compute-constrained environments. In addition to increasing Presto’s accessibility, its small
compute footprint also lowers its carbon footprint (Strubell et al., 2019).
As described by Tuia et al. (2023), a natural concern when applying machine learning algorithms to
remote sensing data is its use to collect information about individuals who are unaware that data is
being collected, and therefore cannot consent to this practice. We therefore encourage deployment
of Presto in collaboration with local communities and stakeholders (Krafft; Kshirsagar et al., 2021;
Nakalembe & Kerner, 2023).

R EPRODUCIBILITY

All code and data used to train and evaluate Presto will be made available upon publication, and
the code is currently available anonymously at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
presto-C4AB. In addition, we discuss specific implementation details in Appendices A.1 and
A.4. We have strived to make the Presto codebase accessible to other practitioners; to this end,
we include a demo Jupyter notebook demonstrating how Presto can be applied to a new down-
stream task, which is available anonymously at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
presto-C4AB/downstream_task_demo.ipynb.


R EFERENCES
Tick      tick    bloom:           Harmful        algal     bloom      detection            challenge.
  https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/143/tick-tick-bloom/page/649/, 2023.              Accessed:
  2023-03-10.

Steve Ahlswede, Christian Schulz, Christiano Gava, Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Michael
  Förster, Florencia Arias, Jörn Hees, Begüm Demir, and Birgit Kleinschmit. Treesatai benchmark
  archive: A multi-sensor, multi-label dataset for tree species classification in remote sensing. Earth
  System Science Data, 2023.

Kumar Ayush, Burak Uzkent, Chenlin Meng, Kumar Tanmay, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and
  Stefano Ermon. Geography-aware self-supervised learning. In CVPR, 2021.

Vanessa Böhm, Wei Ji Leong, Ragini Bal Mahesh, Ioannis Prapas, Edoardo Nemni, Freddie
  Kalaitzis, Siddha Ganju, and Raul Ramos-Pollan. Sar-based landslide classification pretraining
  leads to better segmentation. In Artificial Intelligence for Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster
  Response Workshop at NeurIPS, 2022.

Patrik Olã Bressan, José Marcato Junior, José Augusto Correa Martins, Maximilian Jaderson
  de Melo, Diogo Nunes Gonçalves, Daniel Matte Freitas, Ana Paula Marques Ramos, Michelle
  Taı́s Garcia Furuya, Lucas Prado Osco, Jonathan de Andrade Silva, et al. Semantic segmenta-
  tion with labeling uncertainty and class imbalance applied to vegetation mapping. International
  Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 2022.

Christopher F. Brown, Steven P. Brumby, Brookie Guzder-Williams, Tanya Birch, Samantha Brooks
  Hyde, Joseph Mazzariello, Wanda Czerwinski, Valerie J. Pasquarella, Robert Haertel, Simon
  Ilyushchenko, Kurt Schwehr, Mikaela Weisse, Fred Stolle, Craig Hanson, Oliver Guinan, Rebecca
  Moore, and Alexander M. Tait. Dynamic world, near real-time global 10 m land use land cover
  mapping. Scientific Data, Jun 2022.

Yezhen Cong, Samar Khanna, Chenlin Meng, Patrick Liu, Erik Rozi, Yutong He, Marshall Burke,
  David B. Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. SatMAE: Pre-training transformers for temporal and
  multi-spectral satellite imagery. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), NeurIPS, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  WBhqzpF6KYH.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stefania Di Tommaso, Sherrie Wang, Vivek Vajipey, Noel Gorelick, Rob Strey, and David B Lobell.
  Annual field-scale maps of tall and short crops at the global scale using gedi and sentinel-2. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.09681, 2022.
Matthias Drusch, Umberto Del Bello, Sébastien Carlier, Olivier Colin, Veronica Fernandez, Ferran
 Gascon, Bianca Hoersch, Claudia Isola, Paolo Laberinti, Philippe Martimort, et al. Sentinel-2:
 Esa’s optical high-resolution mission for gmes operational services. Remote sensing of Environ-
 ment, 2012.
Stephen English, Tony McNally, Niels Bormann, Kirsti Salonen, Marco Matricardi, Andras
  Moranyi, Michael Rennie, Marta Janisková, Sabatino Di Michele, Alan Geer, et al. Impact of
  satellite data, 2013.
Bruno Ferreira, Muriel Iten, and Rui G Silva. Monitoring sustainable development by means of
  earth observation data and machine learning: A review. Environmental Sciences Europe, 2020.
Peng Gao, Teli Ma, Hongsheng Li, Ziyi Lin, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. Convmae: Masked convolu-
  tion meets masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03892, 2022.
Noel Gorelick, Matt Hancher, Mike Dixon, Simon Ilyushchenko, David Thau, and Rebecca Moore.
  Google earth engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analysis for everyone. Remote sensing of Envi-
  ronment, 2017.
Matthew C Hansen, Peter V Potapov, Rebecca Moore, Matt Hancher, Svetlana A Turubanova,
 Alexandra Tyukavina, David Thau, Stephen V Stehman, Scott J Goetz, Thomas R Loveland,
 et al. High-resolution global maps of 21st-century forest cover change. Science, 2013.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.
Tomislav Hengl, Jorge Mendes de Jesus, Gerard BM Heuvelink, Maria Ruiperez Gonzalez, Milan
  Kilibarda, Aleksandar Blagotić, Wei Shangguan, Marvin N Wright, Xiaoyuan Geng, Bernhard
  Bauer-Marschallinger, et al. Soilgrids250m: Global gridded soil information based on machine
  learning. PLoS one, 2017.
Neal Jean, Sherrie Wang, Anshul Samar, George Azzari, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon.
  Tile2vec: Unsupervised representation learning for spatially distributed data. In AAAI, 2019.
Pratistha Kansakar and Faisal Hossain. A review of applications of satellite earth observation data
  for global societal benefit and stewardship of planet earth. Space Policy, 2016.
Hannah Kerner, Gabriel Tseng, Inbal Becker-Reshef, Catherine Nakalembe, Brian Barker, Blake
  Munshell, Madhava Paliyam, and Mehdi Hosseini. Rapid response crop maps in data sparse
  regions. In ACM SIGKDD Conference on Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Workshops,
  2020.
Annelise Krafft. ASU researcher combats food insecurity with AI. https://news.asu.edu/
  20230303-solutions-asu-researcher-combats-food-insecurity-ai. Ac-
  cessed: 2023-09-21.
Meghana Kshirsagar, Caleb Robinson, Siyu Yang, Shahrzad Gholami, Ivan Klyuzhin, Sumit
 Mukherjee, Md Nasir, Anthony Ortiz, Felipe Oviedo, Darren Tanner, et al. Becoming good at
 ai for good. In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2021.
Oscar Manas, Alexandre Lacoste, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, David Vazquez, and Pau Rodriguez. Seasonal
  contrast: Unsupervised pre-training from uncurated remote sensing data. In CVPR, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Catherine Nakalembe and Hannah Kerner. Considerations for ai-eo for agriculture in sub-saharan
  africa. Environmental Research Letters, 2023.

Catherine Nakalembe, Christina Justice, Hannah Kerner, Christopher Justice, and Inbal Becker-
  Reshef. Sowing seeds of food security in africa. Eos (Washington. DC), 102, 2021.

Maxim Neumann, Andre Susano Pinto, Xiaohua Zhai, and Neil Houlsby. In-domain representation
 learning for remote sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.06721, 2019.

CL Parkinson, A Ward, and MD King. Earth science reference handbook. National Aeronautics
  and Space Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.

Charlotte Pelletier, Geoffrey I Webb, and François Petitjean. Temporal convolutional neural network
  for the classification of satellite image time series. Remote Sensing, 2019.

Bernhard Rabus, Michael Eineder, Achim Roth, and Richard Bamler. The shuttle radar topography
  mission—a new class of digital elevation models acquired by spaceborne radar. ISPRS journal of
  photogrammetry and remote sensing, 2003.

Krishna Rao, A Park Williams, Jacqueline Fortin Flefil, and Alexandra G Konings. Sar-enhanced
  mapping of live fuel moisture content. Remote Sensing of Environment, 2020.

Colorado J Reed, Ritwik Gupta, Shufan Li, Sarah Brockman, Christopher Funk, Brian Clipp, Sal-
  vatore Candido, Matt Uyttendaele, and Trevor Darrell. Scale-mae: A scale-aware masked au-
  toencoder for multiscale geospatial representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14532,
  2022.

Caleb Robinson, Le Hou, Kolya Malkin, Rachel Soobitsky, Jacob Czawlytko, Bistra Dilkina, and
  Nebojsa Jojic. Large scale high-resolution land cover mapping with multi-resolution data. In
  CVPR, 2019.

Esther Rolf, Jonathan Proctor, Tamma Carleton, Ian Bolliger, Vaishaal Shankar, Miyabi Ishihara,
  Benjamin Recht, and Solomon Hsiang. A generalizable and accessible approach to machine
  learning with global satellite imagery. Nature communications, 2021.

John Wilson Rouse, Rüdiger H Haas, John A Schell, Donald W Deering, et al. Monitoring vegetation
  systems in the great plains with erts. NASA Spec. Publ, 351(1):309, 1974.

Marc Rußwurm and Marco Körner. Self-attention for raw optical satellite time series classification.
 ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing, 2020.

Marc Rußwurm, Nicolas Courty, Rémi Emonet, Sébastien Lefèvre, Devis Tuia, and Romain
 Tavenard. End-to-end learned early classification of time series for in-season crop type map-
 ping. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2023. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092427162200332X.

Vivien Sainte Fare Garnot, Loic Landrieu, Sebastien Giordano, and Nesrine Chehata. Satellite image
  time series classification with pixel-set encoders and temporal self-attention. CVPR, 2020.

Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for deep
  learning in nlp. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.

Michail Tarasiou, Erik Chavez, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. ViTs for SITS: Vision Transformers for
 Satellite Image Time Series. In CVPR, 2023.

The Union of Concerned Scientists. UCS satellite database. https://www.ucsusa.org/
  resources/satellite-database, 2023. Accessed: 2023-07-28.

Ramon Torres, Paul Snoeij, Dirk Geudtner, David Bibby, Malcolm Davidson, Evert Attema, Pierre
  Potin, Björn Rommen, Nicolas Floury, Mike Brown, et al. Gmes sentinel-1 mission. Remote
  sensing of environment, 2012.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gabriel Tseng, Ivan Zvonkov, Catherine Lilian Nakalembe, and Hannah Kerner. Cropharvest: A
  global dataset for crop-type classification. In NeurIPS, Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JtjzUXPEaCu.

Gabriel Tseng, Hannah Kerner, and David Rolnick. TIML: Task-informed meta-learning for crop
  type mapping. In AI for Agriculture and Food Systems at AAAI, 2022.

Devis Tuia, Konrad Schindler, Begüm Demir, Gustau Camps-Valls, Xiao Xiang Zhu, Mrinalini
  Kochupillai, Sašo Džeroski, Jan N van Rijn, Holger H Hoos, Fabio Del Frate, et al. Artificial
  intelligence to advance earth observation: a perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08413, 2023.

Kristof Van Tricht. Mapping crops at global scale! what works and what doesn’t? https://
  blog.vito.be/remotesensing/worldcereal-benchmarking, 2021. Accessed:
  2023-07-31.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.

Paul Voosen. Europe builds ‘digital twin’of earth to hone climate forecasts, 2020.

Sherrie Wang, Stefania Di Tommaso, Jillian M Deines, and David B Lobell. Mapping twenty years
  of corn and soybean across the us midwest using the landsat archive. Scientific Data, 2020.

Ban Yifang, Peng Gong, and Chandra Gini. Global land cover mapping using earth observation
  satellite data: Recent progresses and challenges. ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote
  sensing, 2015.

Jiaxuan You, Xiaocheng Li, Melvin Low, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Deep gaussian process
   for crop yield prediction based on remote sensing data. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
   Artificial Intelligence, 2017.

Yuan Yuan and Lei Lin. Self-supervised pretraining of transformers for satellite image time se-
  ries classification. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote
  Sensing, 14:474–487, 2020.

Yuan Yuan, Lei Lin, Qingshan Liu, Renlong Hang, and Zeng-Guang Zhou. Sits-former: A pre-
  trained spatio-spectral-temporal representation model for sentinel-2 time series classification. In-
  ternational Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 106:102651, 2022.

Yuan Yuan, Lei Lin, Zeng-Guang Zhou, Houjun Jiang, and Qingshan Liu. Bridging optical and sar
  satellite image time series via contrastive feature extraction for crop classification. ISPRS Journal
  of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 195:222–232, 2023.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   P RE - TRAINING DETAILS

We outline training hyperparameters below:
• Training length: We train the model for 20 epochs, with a batch size of 4096 (resulting in 5950
  batches per epoch). On a single NVIDIA V100 GPU, this takes 43 41 hours.
• Optimizer and learning rate: We train the model with an AdamW optimizer. We use a cosine
  annealing schedule for our learning rate, with a maximum learning rate of 0.001 at the 2nd epoch.
  We apply a weight decay of 0.05, and βs of (0.9, 0.95).
• Masking: We use a masking ratio of 0.75, randomly selecting (for each instance) a masking
  strategy from the ones described in Section 2.3. If the masking strategy cannot mask the right
  number of tokens, we randomly mask additional tokens to achieve the correct masking ratio.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Figure 5: The distribution of the pre-training dataset described in Section 2.1.


A.1.1    P RETRAINING DATA
Remote sensing models can be deployed in a wide range of geographies, with few labelled datapoints
available at fine-tuning time (Kerner et al., 2020; Böhm et al., 2022). We therefore aim to collect
a globally representative pre-training dataset. We achieve this by following the sampling strategy
used by Dynamic World (Brown et al., 2022). We divide the Earth into three regions: the Western
Hemisphere and two regions in the Eastern Hemisphere. These regions are further divided into
ecoregions, and stratified samples are gathered from each region using land cover classes as sampling
strata. Figure 5 shows the resulting geographical distribution. Each sample represents a 510 × 510
pixel tile with a spatial resolution of 10 meter per pixel. To obtain pixel-timeseries we grid-sample
2,500 pixels from each sample, yielding a total of 21,535,000 pixel samples (each with 24 one-month
timesteps).

A.1.2    C HANNEL G ROUPS
As described in Section 2.2, we transform the pixel timeseries x into a number of tokens, where
each token is a linear transformation of a subset of the input channels. We group together channels
which (i) come from the same sensor or product, (ii) have equivalent native spatial resolutions and
(iii) represent similar parts of the electromagnetic spectrum (for Sentinel-2 channel groups). We
group the input data into the following channel groups:
• Sentinel-1: The VV and VH bands from the Sentinel-1 sensor
• Sentinel-2 RGB: The B2, B3 and B4 bands from the Sentinel-2 sensor
• Sentinel-2 Red Edge: The B5, B6 and B7 bands from the Sentinel-2 sensor
• Sentinel-2 Near Infra Red (10m): The B8 band from the Sentinel-2 sensor
• Sentinel-2 Near Infra Red (20m): The B8A band from the Sentinel-2 sensor
• Sentinel-2 Short Wave Infra Red: The B11 and B12 bands from the Sentinel-2 sensor
• NDVI: The normalized difference vegetation index, calculated from the Sentinel-2 B4 and B8
  bands.
• ERA5 Climatology: Precipitation and temperature at 2m from the ERA5 Climate Reanalysis
  product
• Topography: The elevation and slope of a pixel, calculated by the SRTM’s DEM
• Location: The cartesian coordinates of a pixel, computed from the pixel’s latitude and longitude

A.2     FLOP CALCULATIONS

We use the thop library (https://github.com/Lyken17/pytorch-OpCounter) to cal-
culate the FLOPs required to encode a EuroSAT image (as plotted in Table 3(b)). For the SatMAE,
ScaleMAE and ConvMAE models, all images were resized to 224 × 224, so the FLOPs required
to encode an image is independent of resolution. For Presto, we computed the FLOPs required to
encode a single pixel and multiplied this by the number of pixels in an image at each resolution (e.g.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: FLOPs required to encode a single EuroSat image (or pixel, for Presto), as measured by the
thop library. When plotting results in Table 3, we multiply the FLOPs for Presto by the number
of pixels encoded for an image. At its highest resolution, EuroSAT images are 64 × 64, so Presto
FLOPs for a full resolution image can be obtained by multiplying the per-pixel FLOPs by 4,096. We
include this value in brackets for completeness.

               Model                               Backbone               MegaFlops
               SatMAE (RGB) (Cong et al., 2022)    ViT-Large               59,685.69
               SatMAE (MS) (Cong et al., 2022)     ViT-Large              535,515.25
               ScaleMAE (Reed et al., 2022)        ViT-Large               59,685.69
               ConvMAE (Gao et al., 2022)          ConvMAE-Large           23,315.58
               SeCo (Manas et al., 2021)           ResNet-18                   149.37
               GASSL (Ayush et al., 2021)          ResNet-18                   149.37
               Presto RGB pixel (image)            Presto             0.79 (3,235.84)
               Presto MS pixel (image)             Presto             2.37 (9,707.52)



the “64” resolution has 64 × 64 pixels, so we multiply the FLOPs required to encode a single pixel
by 64 × 64 = 4096). The FLOPs calculated by the thop library are recorded in Table 6.


A.3   BASELINES

In addition to the task-specific baselines described above, we benchmark Presto against:
• Random Forests: Random forests are powerful baselines in remote sensing as they they remain
  competitive with state-of-the-art methods (Pelletier et al., 2019; Kerner et al., 2020). Tree-based
  methods, especially random forests, are commonly deployed in large-scale machine learning for
  remote sensing applications (Hansen et al., 2013; Van Tricht, 2021; Di Tommaso et al., 2022).
• MOSAIKS-1D: We adapt MOSAIKS (Rolf et al., 2021) for timeseries data. MOSAIKS-1D uses
  patches from the pre-training dataset and convolves over the temporal dimension instead of the
  spatial dimension. We benchmark MOSAIKS-1D on all timeseries evaluation tasks. Because this
  does not work for categorical inputs, we exclude Dynamic World. As with Presto, we use the
  output features with random forests (MOSAIKS-1DRF ) and with regressions (MOSAIKS-1DR ).
• Fully Supervised Presto: To disentangle the effects of the model architecture from the pre-
  training regimen, we fine-tune a Presto architecture starting from randomly initialized weights.


A.4   D OWNSTREAM R ESULTS

We include complete results for the evaluation tasks. These include error bars, as well as additional
results reported for the CropHarvest (Table 9), EuroSAT (Tables 10 and 11) and TreeSatAI datasets
(Table 12).
We run all downstream classifiers with 3 seeds (0, 42, 84), with the exception of the KNN classifiers
and the linear regression (which are deterministic). In the tables in the main paper (Tables 3, 4 and
5) we report the average of these runs; the standard error is reported in Tables 9,12 and 5.
• Presto as a feature extractor: When used as a feature extractor, a random forest, regression of
  K-nearest-neighbours classifier is trained on Presto’s output embeddings. In this case, we use
  scikit-learn models with the default hyperparameters. The CropHarvest tasks, the class labels are
  extremely balanced; we therefore set class weight equal to balanced for those tasks, for
  both Presto and MOSAIKS-1D.
• Fine-tuning Presto: When fine-tuning Presto, we use the same hyperparameters across all tasks:
  an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 3e-4 and a batch size of 64. We use a geographically
  seperated validation set with early stopping, with a patience of 10.
As discussed in Section 3.2, we obtain per-image predictions using Presto by computing a mean and
standard deviation of Presto’s output pixels, and passing a concatenation of these two vectors to a
downstream classifier. This is illustrated in Figure 6.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Accuracy results for pre-trained and from-scratch Presto when finetuned on EuroSat, at
varying resolutions. We hypothesize that the drop in performance for the full resolution (64) RGB
input is due to the model construction; the model outputs for all pixels in the image (4,096 pixels
for the full resolution) are aggregated and passed to a linear layer for classification, yielding an
extremely noisy gradient signal.


                 Resolution               2       4       8      16       32       64
                 random init.         0.644   0.745    0.682   0.732    0.713   0.711
                                RGB
                 pretrained           0.804   0.801    0.838   0.863    0.866   0.826
                 random init.         0.759   0.869    0.857   0.883    0.927   0.914
                                MS
                 pretrained           0.879   0.906    0.934   0.937    0.943   0.944


Table 8: Effect of model size on validation performance. To understand the effect of model size
on performance, we pre-train two larger variants of Presto. As in Table 1, we measure PrestoR ’s
performance on the CropHarvest validation task. In this table, the number of parameters includes
both the number of encoder and decoder parameters. The FLOPS are computed for a “full” input
(12 timesteps, with no missing channels), when passed through both the encoder and decoder.


                      Encoder           Decoder
   Model            Depth Width       Depth Width       # params (M)     FLOPS (M)       F1 score
   Presto                2      128       2      128             0.81            88.94     0.665
   Presto Wide           2      256       2      128             2.02           220.81     0.687
   Presto Deep           4      128       2      128             1.21           132.42     0.669


A.5   D ISENTANGLING THE EFFECT OF PRE - TRAINING

To understand the effect of pre-training Presto, we finetune Presto and train it from scratch on Eu-
roSat (Table 7), the regression tasks (Table 5 in the main paper) and TreeSatAI (Table 12). We omit
the CropHarvest dataset because it was expressly designed as a few-shot-learning dataset. Its small
size makes the construction of validation sets with which to control the finetuning (e.g. with early
stopping) challenging.
Overall, we find a consistent and significant improvement from the use of pre-trained Presto com-
pared to a randomly initialized version of the model. For the EuroSat task, pre-training consistently
delivers an incresse in accuracy score > 0.1 (representing increases in accuracy of up to 25%). This
effect is consistent with what we observe on the TreeSatAI dataset (where pretraining consistently
increases mAP by around 10 points) and on the regression tasks (where pretraining reduces RMSE
by to 15% on the algae blooms task).

A.6   M ODEL SIZE EFFECTS

To measure how different model sizes affect Presto’s performance, in addition to the base model we
pre-train two larger variants of Presto - a deeper variant with 4 layers in the encoder instead of 2,
and one wider variant with an encoder-size of 256 instead of 128. We show these results in Table 8.
Performance improves as model size increases, suggesting that practitioners who are less sensitive
to the performance / compute trade off could obtain better results by training a larger Presto model.

A.7   P RESTO ’ S FAILURE MODES

Presto processes pixel-timeseries independently, without spatial context from other pixels or loca-
tions. This means that when we make image-based predictions (such as for scene classification),
Presto’s independent pixel representations must be aggregated into a single prediction. We opt for a
simple concatenation of the element-wise mean and standard deviation of the representations, from


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Additional results for the CropHarvest task. In addition to the F1 scores reported in the
main paper, we report AUC ROC scores, with standard error bars computed with three runs.

                 Model                             Kenya                 Brazil                Togo      Mean
                 Random Forest           0.559 ± 0.003          0.000 ± 0.000       0.756 ± 0.002        0.441
                 MOSAIKS-1DR             0.790 ± 0.027          0.746 ± 0.084       0.679 ± 0.024        0.738
   F1            TIML                    0.838 ± 0.000          0.835 ± 0.012       0.732 ± 0.002        0.802
                 PrestoR               0.816 ± 0.000           0.891 ± 0.000      0.798 ± 0.000          0.835
                    no DW            0.861 ± 0.000               0.888 ± 0.000      0.760 ± 0.000       0.836
                 Random Forest           0.578 ± 0.006          0.941 ± 0.004       0.892 ± 0.001        0.803
                 MOSAIKS-1DR             0.693 ± 0.036          0.890 ± 0.038       0.836 ± 0.005        0.806
   AUC ROC       TIML                    0.794 ± 0.003          0.988 ± 0.001       0.890 ± 0.000        0.890
                 PrestoR               0.834 ± 0.000           0.997 ± 0.000      0.921 ± 0.000          0.917
                    no DW            0.863 ± 0.000               0.989 ± 0.000      0.912 ± 0.000       0.921



Table 10: Additional results for the EuroSat task - results for the ScaleMAE, SatMAE and Con-
vMAE models are from Reed et al. (2022). We report KNN classifier results for different values of
k, and at varying input resolutions.

        Resolution                16                              32                      64
        k                   5      20       100            5       20     100        5      20         100
        SatMAE         0.729     0.727    0.695      0.871      0.876    0.854    0.934   0.931       0.913
        ScaleMAE       0.751     0.744    0.699      0.912      0.901    0.869    0.960   0.956       0.935
        ConvMAE        0.835     0.826    0.788      0.909      0.898    0.863    0.947   0.940       0.914
        Presto (RGB)   0.869     0.828    0.713      0.869      0.829    0.712    0.869   0.829       0.713
        Presto (MS)    0.916     0.892    0.844      0.920      0.892    0.846    0.921   0.893       0.846



Table 11: Additional results for the EuroSat task for Presto when run with reduced resolutions
(compared to those used by Reed et al. (2022) and reported in Table 10). We report KNN classifier
results for different values of k, and at varying input resolutions.

        Resolution                 2                               4                       8
        k                   5       20      100            5        20     100        5        20      100
        Presto (RGB)     0.843   0.811     0.699     0.860       0.820   0.706    0.869   0.826       0.710
        Presto (MS)      0.873   0.852     0.799     0.895       0.874   0.824    0.911   0.886       0.838


Figure 6: We obtain per-image predictions using Presto by computing a mean and standard deviation
of Presto’s per-pixel outputs, and passing this concatenated vector to a downstream classifier. We
illustrate what this process looks like for the EuroSat task.



                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: Additional results for the TreeSatAI (as in Ahlswede et al. (2023), we report precision
and recall in addition to F1 score and mAP). In addition, we report the results of finetuning Presto
(PrestoF T ) from the pre-trained weights and from a random initialization.

Model                      Data   Aggregation            F1           mAP         Precision         Recall
MLP                                                    10.09          29.42          33.29            7.13
LightGBM                                               11.86          32.79          37.96            8.06
PrestoF T (random init.)          Weighted      29.61 ± 0.13   26.83 ± 0.39   20.90 ± 0.21    65.26 ± 0.19
PrestoF T                                       31.95 ± 0.09   35.43 ± 0.12   19.90 ± 0.07    92.08 ± 0.29
PrestoRF                                        19.79 ± 0.00   35.76 ± 0.00   51.90 ± 0.02    14.16 ± 0.00
                           S1
MLP                                                    12.82          33.09          63.01            7.13
LightGBM                                               14.07          35.11          55.49            8.06
PrestoF T (random init.)          Micro         32.08 ± 0.50   28.79 ± 0.48   21.28 ± 0.44    65.26 ± 0.19
PrestoF T                                       28.10 ± 0.22   38.94 ± 0.10   16.59 ± 0.17    92.08 ± 0.29
PrestoRF                                        22.92 ± 0.00   38.69 ± 0.00   60.17 ± 0.00    14.16 ± 0.00
MLP                                                    51.97          64.19          74.59           42.23
LightGBM                                               48.17          61.99          74.27           40.04
PrestoF T (random init.)          Weighted      31.29 ± 0.17   39.82 ± 1.34   19.05 ± 0.16    87.74 ± 0.63
PrestoF T                                       37.49 ± 0.37   53.43 ± 0.77   24.40 ± 0.29    90.77 ± 0.29
PrestoRF                                        46.26 ± 0.00   60.88 ± 0.00   75.42 ± 0.00    37.08 ± 0.00
                           S2
MLP                                                    54.49          65.83          77.18           42.23
LightGBM                                               52.52          61.66          76.27           40.04
PrestoF T (random init.)          Micro         35.68 ± 0.16   39.14 ± 1.01   23.35 ± 0.19    87.74 ± 0.63
PrestoF T                                       33.19 ± 0.38   53.06 ± 1.21   20.30 ± 0.27    90.77 ± 0.29
PrestoRF                                        50.41 ± 0.00   63.24 ± 0.00   78.70 ± 0.00    37.08 ± 0.00


Figure 7: Accuracy of KNN@5 classifier with Presto RGB representations on the EuroSat dataset
vs. the input resolution, for different categories. Some categories have been left out for clarity.



which a classifier makes a prediction. Information gets lost in such a simple aggregation, which
impacts Presto’s performance on such tasks.
For example, Presto’s performance on the EuroSat dataset reaches a plateau when increasing the
input resolution. As Figure 7 shows, this is mainly caused by a failure to accurately predict specific
classes (for example, the Highway and River classes). Figure 8 shows example images for these
classes, as well as for the Forest and AnnualCrop classes, on which Presto achieves higher accura-
cies. While in the Forest and AnnualCrop images, most pixels of the image actually represent the
labelled class, in the Highway and River images only a relatively small part of the image actually
contains the label (a highway or river). We hypothesize that since many pixels in the Highway and
River images do not actually represent that class, the crude token-aggregation method we use to
represent images is insufficiently discriminative to accurately classify these images.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Forest            (b) Annual Crop            (c) Highway                (d) River

                 Figure 8: the RGB bands of example images from EuroSat classes.


Other pre-trained remote sensing models use much more powerful mechanisms for aggregating spa-
tial information. For example, ViT models convolve over patches and then apply an attention mech-
anism between spatial patches. If image-based predictions are needed and these predictions are
highly dependent on the occurrence of objects in subregions of the image, models which natively
process this important spatial information may be better suited.
We hypothesize that lossy aggregation of spatial information also penalizes Presto on the TreeSatAI
dataset; when passed S2 data, it performs worse than the MLP and LightGBM models, which receive
as input concatenated pixel inputs (Table 12).
We plan on exploring techniques to mitigate this difficulty with Presto in future work.


                                                 19
