Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EAL FM: A R EALISTIC M ECHANISM TO I NCENTIVIZE
DATA C ONTRIBUTION AND D EVICE PARTICIPATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Edge device participation in federating learning (FL) has been typically studied
         under the lens of device-server communication (e.g., device dropout) and assumes
         an undying desire from edge devices to participate in FL. As a result, current
         FL frameworks are flawed when implemented in real-world settings, with many
         encountering the free-rider problem. In a step to push FL towards realistic settings,
         we propose RealFM: the first truly federated mechanism which (1) realistically
         models device utility, (2) incentivizes data contribution and device participation,
         and (3) provably removes the free-rider phenomena. RealFM does not require
         data sharing and allows for a non-linear relationship between model accuracy and
         utility, which improves the utility gained by the server and participating devices
         compared to non-participating devices as well as devices participating in other FL
         mechanisms. On real-world data, RealFM improves device and server utility, as
         well as data contribution, by up to 300x and 7x respectively compared to baselines.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Federated Learning (FL) allows edge devices to collaboratively train a model under the orchestration
of a central server (Centralized FL) or in a peer-to-peer manner (Decentralized FL). However, real-
world implementation of FL frameworks remains stagnant due to a couple of key issues:
(C1) Lack of Incentives. Current FL frameworks generally lack incentives to increase device par-
ticipation. This leads to training with fewer devices and data contributions, which subsequently
reduces the model accuracy after federated training. Incentivizing devices to participate in training
and produce more data, especially from a central server’s perspective, improves model performance
(further detailed in Section 3) which leads to greater benefit for the devices and server.
(C2) Free-Rider Problem. Second, and more importantly, many FL frameworks run the risk of
encountering the free-rider problem: devices do not contribute gradient updates or data yet reap the
benefits of a well-trained collaborative model. Removing the free-rider effect in FL frameworks im-
proves performance of trained models (Wang et al., 2022; 2023) and reduces security risks (Fraboni
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2019; Wang, 2022) for devices. By simultaneously encouraging device partic-
ipation while alleviating the threat of free-riding in FL frameworks, we move a step closer towards
widespread adoption of FL in the real world.
In this paper, we propose RealFM: a federated mechanism M (i.e., game) which a server in a FL
setup implements to eliminate (C1) and (C2) when rational devices participate. The goal of RealFM
is to design a reward protocol, with model-accuracy ar and monetary R rewards, such that rational
devices choose to participate and contribute more data. By increasing device participation and data
contribution, a server trains a higher-performing model and subsequently attains greater utility.
Utility is the backbone of realistic FL settings. It describes the net benefit derived by devices and
a server from training a model with accuracy a. Higher model accuracy correlates to higher util-
ity. Every rational device i aims to maximize its utility ui . In realistic settings, device utility ui is
personal: each device relates accuracy to utility with a unique function ϕi and has unique training
costs ci . Utility is the guiding factor in whether rational devices participate in a federated mecha-
nism. Devices will only participate if the utility uri gained within the mechanism, via its rewards
(ari , Ri ), outstrips the maximum utility gained from local training uoi . We construct RealFM such
that (i) server achieves increased utility and (ii) devices are guaranteed to receive rewards, through
mechanism participation, which provide greater utility than local training uri ≥ uoi .


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Federated Mechanism Diagram. (A) Decision Phase for Device Participation. Each
device i, has a personalized utility uoi (m) when training independently on m local data points.
Under the participation scenario, a device i agrees to participate in the mechanism M and selects
an amount of local data mi it wishes to use for model updates in FL. The quantity of data points
used mi is sent to the server (no data is shared). Rational devices choose to participate if they expect
the utility gained by participating in M, uri , is larger than their max local utility uoi . We note that
RealFM is constructed such that the utility gained by participating is never less than local utility,
i.e., uoi (m) ≤ uri (m), ∀m, thereby incentivizing device participating. (B) Federated Training
Phase. Devices upload their updates and receive feedback from the server in an iterative manner.
(C) Accuracy & Monetary Reward Distribution Phase. Upon completion of federated training,
the server distributes both accuracy ar (mi ) and monetary R(mi ) rewards to device i. These rewards,
the crux of our proposed RealFM, serve to incentivize device participation and data contribution.
Summary of Contributions. We propose RealFM, a truly federated (no data sharing) mechanism.
RealFM improves upon the previous federated mechanisms by,
1. provably eliminating the free-rider effect by incentivizing devices to participate and contribute
   more data to the federated training process than they would on their own,
2. properly modeling device utility, by allowing a non-linear relationship between accuracy and
   utility, thereby improving both server and device utility,
3. producing state-of-the-art results towards improving utility (for both the server and devices), data
   contribution, and final model accuracy on real-world datasets.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Federated Mechanisms. Previous literature (Zhan et al., 2020a;b; 2021; Chen et al., 2020) have
proposed mechanisms to solve (C1) and incentivize devices to participate in FL training. However,
these works fail to address (C2), the free-rider problem, and have unrealistic device utilities. In
Chen et al. (2020), data sharing is allowed which is prohibitive in the FL setting, as one of the main
motivations of FL is to train models in a privacy-preserving manner. In Zhan et al. (2020b; 2021;
2020a), device utility incorporates a predetermined reward for participation in federated training,
with no specification on how this amount is set by the server. This is unrealistic, since rewards
should be dynamic and depend upon the success (resulting model accuracy) of the federated training.
Setting too low of a reward impedes device participation while too high of a reward reduces the
utility gained by the central server (and risks negative utility if performance lags total reward paid
out). Overall, being able to predict an optimal reward prior to training is unrealistic.
The recent work by Karimireddy et al. (2022) is the first to simultaneously solve (C1) and (C2).
They propose a mechanism which incentivize devices to both (i) participate in training and (ii)
produce more data than on their own (data maximization). By incentivizing devices to maximize
production of local data, the free-rider effect is eliminated. While this proposed mechanism is a
great step forward for realistic mechanisms, pressing issues remain. First, Karimireddy et al. (2022)
requires data sharing between devices and the central server. This is acceptable if portions of local
data is able to be shared (i.e. no privacy risks exist for certain subsets of local data), yet it runs
counter to the original draw of FL: a privacy-preserving training method which does not require
sharing personal data. Second, device utility is designed in Karimireddy et al. (2022) such that the
utility improves linearly with increasing accuracy. We find this unrealistic, as an increase in model
accuracy from 49% to 50% should not hold the same utility as an increase from 98% to 99%.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contract Theory and Federated Free Riding. Contract theory in FL aims to optimally determine
the balance between device rewards and registration fees (cost of participation). In contract mech-
anisms, devices can sign a contract from the server specifying a task, reward, and registration fee.
If agreed upon, the device signs and pays the registration fee. Each device receives the reward if it
completes the task and receives nothing if it fails. Contract mechanisms have the ability to punish
free riding in FL by creating negative incentive if a device does not perform a prescribed task (i.e.,
it will lose its registration fee). Kang et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2022); Lim et al. (2021); Wang et al.
(2021); Cong et al. (2020); Lim et al. (2020) propose such contract-based FL frameworks. While
effective at improving model generalization accuracy and utility (Liu et al., 2022; Lim et al., 2020),
these works focus on optimal design of rewards to devices. Our mechanism does not require regis-
tration fees, which further boosts device participation, and utilizes an accuracy shaping method to
provide rewards at the end of training in an optimal and more realistic approach. Furthermore, like
Karimireddy et al. (2022), our mechanism incentivizes increased contributions to federated training
which is novel compared with the existing contract theory literature and mechanisms.

3     P RELIMINARIES

Data reigns supreme when it comes to machine learning (ML) model performance; model accuracy
improves as the quantity of training data increases assuming consistency of data quality (Junqué de
Fortuny et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2012; Tramer & Boneh, 2020). Empirically, one finds that accuracy
of a model is both concave and non-decreasing with respect to the amount of data used to train it
(Sun et al., 2017). Training of a ML model generally adheres to the law of diminishing returns:
improving model performance by training on more data is increasingly fruitless once the amount of
training data is already large. Similar to Karimireddy et al. (2022), we model accuracy in terms of
m data points, difficulty of learning task k > 0, and optimal attainable accuracy aopt ∈ [0, 1),
                                                            p
                                                               2k(2 + log(m/k)) + 4
               a(m) := max(â(m), 0), â(m) := aopt −                  √              .          (1)
                                                                         m
While we find empirically that a(m) is both concave and non-decreasing with respect to the number
of data points m, it is difficult to find a suitable function, such as â(m) in Equation 1, whose range
is restricted to [0, 1). Therefore, we allow the accuracy function a(m) : Z+    0 → [0, aopt ) to take the
form shown in Equation 1. The rationale behind this formulation is rooted in a generalization bound
which can be found in Appendix B.1.
    Assumption 1. Accuracy functions a(m) : Z+                            +
                                              0 → [0, aopt ) and â(m) : Z → (−∞, aopt ) are
    both continuous and non-decreasing. a(m) has a root at 0: a(0) = 0 and â(m) is concave.

Assumption 1 ensures that we model accuracy as we find it empirically: continuous, non-decreasing,
and experiencing diminishing returns (concave) with respect to the number of data points m.
In the foundational federated algorithm FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), a server sends down a
current iteration t version of the parameters wt . Devices perform h local gradient updates (using
their own data) on wt before sending the result to a central server which aggregates all local updates
together into wt+1 . This process is repeated until an optimum or a near optimum is reached. Our
paper follows this same FL setting, with n devices collaboratively train the parameters w of a ML
model. Each device has its own local dataset Di (which can change in size) containing data inde-
pendently chosen from a common distribution D (known as the IID setting). Unlike FedAvg and
many FL methods, we do not require devices participate in training. Instead, devices collaborate
with a central server only when they deem it beneficial for their own utility (i.e., collaboration with
the central server results in a model with higher accuracy or monetary
                                                                P        rewards). In the FL setting,
we redefine m to become mi := |Di | for a device i and m := j |Dj | for all participating devices.

4     R EALISTIC D EVICE U TILITY

RealFM improves upon previous federated mechanisms, such as Karimireddy et al. (2022); Zhan
et al. (2021; 2020b), by modeling utility in a more realistic manner. Specifically, we design a utility
which: (D1) Realistically Relates Accuracy to Utility (D2) Allows Non-Deterministic Rewards.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To tackle (D1), we propose utilizing an accuracy payoff function ϕi (a) : [0, 1) → R≥0 , which
allows for a flexible definition of the benefit device i receives from having a model with accuracy a.
In Karimireddy et al. (2022), it is assumed that ϕi is linear, ϕi (a) = a, for all devices, which may not
hold in many instances. Non-linearity is necessary to precisely relate accuracy to utility, however,
as accuracy improvement from 49% to 50% should be rewarded much differently than 98% to 99%.
Therefore, we generalize ϕi to become a convex and increasing function (which includes the linear
case). The convex and increasing requirements stems from the idea that increasing accuracy leads
to increasing benefit for rational devices.
  Assumption 2. Each device i’s accuracy payoff function ϕi (a(m)) : [0, aopt ) → R≥0 is
  continuous, non-decreasing, and has a root at 0: ϕi (0) = 0. Furthermore, ϕi (a) is convex
  and strictly increasing with respect to a, while ϕi (a(m)) is concave and strictly increasing
  ∀m such that â(m) ≥ 0.

Many realistic choices for ϕi which satisfy Assumption 2 exist. One reasonable choice is ϕi (a) =
   1
(1−a)2 −1. This choice of ϕi more precisely models how utility should grow as accuracy approaches
100%, especially when compared to the linear relationship ϕi (a) = a.

4.1   D EFINING S ERVER U TILITY

The overarching goal for a central server C is to attain a high-performing ML model re-
sulting from federated training. As discussed in Section 3, ML model accuracy is assumed
to improve as the total amount of data contributions m increases. Therefore, server util-
ity uC is a function of model accuracy which in turn is a function of data contributions,
                             X
       uC (m) := pm · ϕC a       m .       (2)
                                                                                                              k = 1 (Power)
                                                                                                              k = 10 (Power)
                                                       Data Contribution (mi)



The parameter pm ∈ (0, 1] denotes the central
                                                                                106                           k = 100 (Power)
server’s profit margin (percentage of utility kept                                                            k = 1 (Linear)
                                                                                                              k = 10 (Linear)
by the central server). Server utility in Equation 2
                                                                                105                           k = 100 (Linear)
is maximized when model accuracy       Papproaches
100%, which in turn occurs when           m → ∞.
The more data contributed by all devices m to the                               104
server, the better a ML model performs. The bet-
ter a ML model performs, the greater server utility                             103
becomes. Thus, an optimal mechanism M from
the server’s standpoint would be one which incen-                               102
                                                                                      10 5   10 4      10 3              10 2
tivizes data contributions.                                                                  Marginal Cost
Through the use of the profit margin pm in Equa-
tion 2, we are able to tackle (D2) and allow for        Figure 2: Local Optimal Data Contribution
non-deterministic rewards. Only a pm fraction           for Varying Payoff Functions. We compare
of the total collected utility is kept by the server    how optimal data contribution varies when dif-
in Equation 2. The remaining (1 − pm ) util-            ferent payoff functions are used. As expected, a
ity can be distributed back to participating de-        more realistic power payoff function, ϕi (a) =
                                                            1
vices in any manner. In Section 5.1, we detail          (1−a)2 −1, results in a greater optimal data con-
how RealFM distributes the rewards proportion-          tribution compared to a linear payoff function,
ally to how much data each participating device         ϕi (a) = a. We defined â(m) as in Equation 1,
contributes.                                            with aopt = 0.95 and multiple values of k.

4.2   D EFINING L OCAL D EVICE U TILITY

While increasing the amount of training data improves the performance of a model, it can be ex-
pensive for devices to collect more data. Each device i has its own fixed marginal cost ci > 0,
which represents the cost for collecting and computing an extra data point. For example, the cost
incurred for collecting m data points would be ci m. Overall, a device must weigh the cost incurred
for collecting more data versus the benefits obtained from having a more accurate model. We model
this relationship through the use of a utility function ui for each device i. Mathematically, the utility
for each device i is defined as,
                                      ui (m) = ϕi (a(m)) − ci m.                                      (3)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The utility ui for each device i is a function of data contribution: devices determine how many data
points m to collect in order to balance the benefit of model accuracy ϕi (a(m)) versus the costs of
data collection −ci m.
  Theorem 1 (Optimal Local Data Collection). Consider device i with marginal cost ci , accu-
  racy function â(m) satisfying Assumption 1, and accuracy payoff ϕi satisfying Assumption 2.
  Device i collects an optimal amount of data moi ,

              o      0                                             if maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) ≤ 0,
            mi =                                                                               (4)
                     m∗ , such that ϕ′i (â(m∗ )) · â′ (m∗ ) = ci else.

Theorem 1 details how much data a device collects when training on its own and thereby not par-
ticipating in a federated training scheme. Figure 6 showcases utility peaks for both non-linear
and linear accuracy payoff functions. Figure 6c shows that utility peaks at a negative value when
marginal costs become too large. In this case, as shown in Theorem 1, devices do not contribute
data. We defer proof of Theorem 1 to Appendix B.

5     R EALISTIC F EDERATED M ECHANISMS
In the standard FL setting, devices are expected to participate in training, i.e., send gradients or
locally updated models to the central server. However, this is not a realistic assumption in practice.
Many devices choose to participate in federated training only when it provides benefit, or utility, to
them. In the eyes of rational devices, they deserve adequate reward for shouldering computational
burdens and providing valuable new gradient contributions.
To entice devices to participate in federated training, a central server must incentivize them. Our
paper covers two realistic rewards that a central server can provide: (i) model accuracy and (ii)
monetary. The interaction between the server and devices is formalized by a mechanism M. When
participating in the mechanism, a device i performs federated training for a global model w on mi
local data points in exchange for model accuracy ar (mi ) ∈ [0, aopt ) and monetary R(mi ) ∈ R≥0
rewards. This exchange is defined as the following,
                  M(m1 , · · · , mn ) = ((ar (m1 ), R(m1 )), · · · , (ar (mn ), R(mn ))) .           (5)

                        P Mechanism). A feasible mechanism M (1) returns a bounded accuracy
    Definition 1 (Feasible
    0 ≤ ar (mi ) ≤ a( m) and non-negative reward R(mi ) ≥ 0 to device i and (2) is bounded
    in its provided utility 0 ≤ uri (m) ≤ urmax .

    Definition 2 (Individual Rationality). Let all devices contribute m data points and have c
    marginal costs. Mechanism M provides utility uri via model-accuracy ar (mi ) and monetary
    R(mi ) rewards distributed to each device i. A mechanism satisfies individual rationality if for
    any device i ∈ [n] (with maximum local utility uoi ) and contribution m,
                           ϕi (ar (mi )) + R(mi ) ≥ ϕi (a(mi )) ≡ uri ≥ uoi .                      (6)

In order to incentivize devices to participate in a FL mechanism, it must (i) return a feasible utility
[MU (·)]i (fulfilling Definition 1) and (ii) provide utility that is greater than or equal to the utility
gained by not participating and training alone (fulfilling Definition 2).
    Theorem 2 (Existence of Pure Equilibrium). Consider a feasible mechanism M returning
    utility [MU (mi ; m−i )]i to device i ([MU (0; m−i )]i = 0). Participating device i’s utility is,
                              uri (mi ; m−i ) := [MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi .                       (7)
    If uri (mi , m−i ), is quasi-concave for mi ≥ mui := inf{mi | [MU (mi ; m−i )]i > 0} and
    continuous in m−i , then a pure Nash equilibrium with meq data contributions exists,
             uri (meq ) = [MU (meq )]i − ci meq    U       eq
                                             i ≥ [M (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi ∀mi ≥ 0.                 (8)

The proof of Theorem 2 is found in Appendix B. Our new proof amends and simplifies that of
Karimireddy et al. (2022), as we show uri only needs to be quasi-concave in mi .


                                                     5
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 1: RealFM: A Realistic Federated Mechanism
   Input: Data contributions m, marginal costs c, payoff functions ϕ, profit margin pm , h local
           steps, T total iterations, total local epochs E, initial model parameters w1 , loss ℓ,
           step-size η, accuracy-shaping function γi (m), and accuracy function a(m).
                                       r
              Pn with accuracy a (mi ) and monetary reward R(mi ).
   Output: Model
 1 si ← mi /       j=1 mj       // compute self-weight for federated averaging
 2 for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3     Server distributes wt to all devices
 4     for h local steps, each device i in parallel do
 5         wit+1 ← ClientUpdate(i, wt )
       wt+1 ← j sj wit+1
                    P
 6

                        ϕC (a( j mj ))
                              P
 7   r(m) ← (1 − pm )       P                                  // compute monetary reward
                              j mj
 8 for i = 1 to n do
 9     Compute moi and m∗i using ci , ϕi , and γi (mi )
10     Return (ar (mi ), R(mi )) to device i using mi , moi , m∗i , a(m), γi (mi ), ϕi , r(m) in Eq. 13
11 ClientUpdate(i, w):
12 B ← batch mi data points
13 for each epoch e = 1, . . . , E do
14     for batch b ∈ B do
15         w ← w − η∇ℓ(w; b)

     5.1   D EFINING M ECHANISM R EWARDS

     While the mechanism in Karimireddy et al. (2022) was the first federated mechanism proposed to
     maximize data collection, it required data sharing and lacked realistic assumptions on device utility.
     We design a realistic and truly federated mechanism which incentivizes device participation and
     data contribution by returning (i) monetary rewards to devices when desirable and (ii) improved
     accuracy, via accuracy-shaping, under non-linear and non-uniform accuracy payoff functions ϕi .
     Monetary Rewards. As mentioned above in Section 5, the federated mechanism M is posted by
     the central server. The profit margin pm of the server is fixed and known by all devices when M is
     issued. However, the accuracy payoff function for the central server ϕC is not known by the devices.
     Section 4.1 details how the server maintains a pm fraction of utility it receives, as shown in Equa-
     tion 2, while distributing the remaining (1 − pm ) utility amongst participating devices as a monetary
     reward. The reward is dispersed as a marginal monetary reward r(m) per contributed data point,
                                                            X    X
                                 r(m) := (1 − pm ) · ϕC a         m /          m.                       (9)
     The marginal monetary reward r(m) is dynamic and depends upon the total amount of data contri-
     butions from devices during federated training. Therefore, r(m) is unknown by devices when M is
     issued. However, the server computes and provides the monetary rewards once training is complete.
     Accuracy Shaping. Accuracy shaping, the heart of any great federated mechanism, is responsible
     for incentivizing devices to collect more data than their local optimal amount moi . The idea behind
     accuracy shaping is to incentivize device i to produce more data m∗i ≥ moi by providing it a boosted
     model accuracy whose utility outstrips the marginal cost of collecting more data −ci (m∗i − moi ).
     Our mechanism is related to Karimireddy et al. (2022) in that it also performs accuracy shaping,
     albeit in a more difficult setting. Accuracy shaping with non-linear accuracy payoffs ϕ is far more
     difficult than with linear ones (Karimireddy et al. (2022) assumes a linear ϕ). To overcome the issues
     with non-linear ϕ’s, we carefully construct an accuracy-shaping function γi (m) for each device i.
       Theorem 3 (Accuracy Shaping Guarantees). Consider a device i with marginal cost ci and
       accuracy payoff function ϕi satisfying Assumption 2. Denote device i’s optimal local data
       contribution as moi and its subsequent accuracy ā = a(moi ). Define the derivative of ϕi (a)
       with respect to a as ϕ′i (a). For any ϵ → 0+ and marginal server reward r(m) ≥ 0, device i



                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  has the following accuracy-shaping function γi (m) for m ≥ moi ,
                       ′        √
                       −ϕi (ā)+ ϕ′i (ā)2 +2ϕ′′i (ā)(ci −r(m)+ϵ)(m−moi )   if ϕ′′i (ā) > 0
                                                  ′′
                γi := (c −r(m)+ϵ)(m−mo )ϕi (ā)                                                  (10)
                       i        ′ ϕi (ā)
                                              i
                                                                              if ϕ′′i (ā) = 0

  Given the defined γi (m), the following inequality is satisfied for m ∈ [moi , m∗i ],
                 ϕi (a(moi ) + γi (m)) − ϕi (a(moi )) > (ci − r(m))(m − moi ).           (11)
  The new optimal contribution is m∗i := {m ≥ moi | a(m + j̸=i mj ) = a(moi ) + γi (m)}.
                                                                P
  Accuracy shaping improves device i’s data contribution m∗i ≥ moi for any contribution m−i .

Theorem 3, whose full proof is found in Appendix B, details the limits of accuracy shaping such that
any mechanism can remain feasible. To remain feasible,    Pthe central server cannot provide provide an
accuracy beyond the sum of the total contributions a( m). Devices which participate in M must
share ci , ϕi with the central server while the central server must provide pm when posting M.
  Remark 1. For a linear accuracy payoff, ϕi (a) = wa for w > 0, and thus ϕ′′i (a) = 0 ∀a,
                                (c −r(m)+ϵ)(m−mo  i)
  Equation 10 relays γi = i              w           . We recover the accuracy-shaping function of
  Equation (13) in Karimireddy et al. (2022) with their no-reward r(m) = 0 and w = 1 linear
  setting. Thus, our accuracy-shaping function generalizes the one in Karimireddy et al. (2022).

5.2   R EAL FM: A R EALISTIC F EDERATED M ECHANISM

Pseudo-code for our mechanism, RealFM, is detailed in Algorithm 1. We begin by first defining the
utility [MU (m)]i that our mechanism returns to each device i,

                                                                       if mi ≤ moi
                          
                          ϕi a(mi )
                U
             [M (m)]i = ϕi a(moi ) + γi (mi ) + r(m)(mi − moi ) if mi ∈ [moi , m∗i ]

                                                                                             (12)
                                                           ∗                     ∗
                                 P
                            ϕi a( m) + r(m)(mi − mi )                  if mi ≥ mi .
                          

Now we mathematically formulate how M distributes model-accuracy and monetary rewards to
each device participating in M given a collective data contribution m,
                            
                                a(m  ), 0                               if mi ≤ moi
                            
                                   i
                            
                            
                            
                            
                           
         ar (mi ), R(mi ) =                                             if mi ∈ [moi , m∗i ]

                                a moi + γi (mi ), r(m)(mi − moi )                            (13)
                            
                            
                            
                            
                             a( m), r(m)(mi − m∗i )                    if mi ≥ m∗i .
                                 P
                            

  Theorem 4 (Existence of Equilibrium with Increased Data Contribution). Our realistic fed-
  erated mechanism M, defined in Equation 13, performs accuracy-shaping with γi defined in
  Theorem 3 for each device i ∈ [n] and some small ϵ → 0+ . As such, M is Individually Ra-
  tional (IR) and has a unique Nash equilibrium at which device i will contribute m∗i ≥ moi
  updates, thereby eliminating the free-rider phenomena. Furthermore, since M is IR, devices
  are incentivized to participate as they gain equal to or more utility than by not participating.

  Corollary 1. When accuracy payoffs are linear for a device i, M defined in Equation 13 is
  contribution-maximizing. The proof follows from Theorem 4.2 in Karimireddy et al. (2022).

Our usage of a non-linear accuracy payoff function ϕi promotes increased data production compared
to a linear payoff (see Section 6). However, proof of data maximization for non-linear payoffs is not
possible as one cannot perfectly bound the composition function ϕ(a + γ(m)) as you can with the
linear payoff a + γ(m). Our accuracy-shaping function is still data maximizing when linear.
Honest Devices. Our setting assumes honest devices. They only store the rewarded model returned
by the server after training. In the case that devices are dishonest, slight alterations to the federated
training scheme can be made. Namely, schemes that train on varying-sized models such as (Diao
et al., 2020; Li & Wang, 2019; Hu et al., 2021; Arivazhagan et al., 2019) can be implemented (where
model sizes correspond to the amount of data contributed) to alleviate honesty issues.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Server Utility Comparison.                (b) Average Data Contribution Comparison.

Figure 3: Improved Server Utility on CIFAR-10. RealFM increases central server utility (3a)
on CIFAR-10 for 16 devices compared to relevant baselines. Tasked with non-linear (and possi-
bly non-uniform) payoff functions, RealFM achieves over 15x more utility than a FL version of
(Karimireddy et al., 2022) (denoted as Linear RealFM). RealFM incentivizes devices to produce
over 250% more data points (3b) than they would on their own.
6   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
To test the efficacy of RealFM, we analyze how well it performs at (i) improving utility for the
central server and devices, and (ii) increasing the amount of data contributions to the federated
training process on image classification experiments. We use CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)
and MNIST (Deng, 2012) as our real-world datasets.
Experimental Baselines. Few FL mechanisms eliminate the free-rider effect, with none doing so
without sharing data, in the non-convex setting. Therefore, we adapt the mechanism proposed in
(Karimireddy et al., 2022) as the baseline to compare against (we denote this adaptation as Linear
RealFM). We also compare RealFM to a local training baseline where we measure the average
device utility attained by devices if they did not participate in the mechanism. Server utility is
inferred in this instance by using the average accuracy of locally trained models.
Testing Scenarios. We denote (LP) as linear payoff and (NLP) as non-linear payoff. We test Re-
alFM under uniform (U-NLP) as well as non-uniform costs (NU-C) and payoffs & costs (NU-PC).
Since Linear RealFM does not use a payoff function, we only test it under uniform (U-LP) and
non-uniform costs (NU-C). Finally, for local training, the non-uniform results are nearly identical to
their uniform counterparts, so we remove them to save space.
Experimental Setup. Within our experiments, both 8 and 16 devices train a ResNet18 and a small
convolutional neural network for CIFAR-10 and MNIST respectively. As detailed in Appendix
C, we carefully select and tune a(m) to match the empirical training results on both datasets as
closely as possible. Once tuned, we select a marginal cost ce such that, by Equation 4, the local
optimal data contribution is 3, 000 and 5, 500 (3, 500 and 7, 000) for each of the 8 and 16 devices
respectively on CIFAR-10 (MNIST). When performing uniform cost experiments, each device uses
ce as its marginal cost (and thus each device has the same amount of data). For non-uniform cost
experiments, ce is the mean of a Gaussian distribution from which the marginal costs are sampled.
                                              1
Our uniform payoff function is ϕi (a) = (1−a)    2 − 1 for each device i. For non-uniform payoff
                                     1
experiments, we set ϕi (a) = zi ( (1−a)2 − 1) where zi is uniformly sampled within [0.9, 1.1]. A list
of hyper-parameters, additional experimental details, and 8 devices results are found in Appendix C.
RealFM Dramatically Improves Server Utility. RealFM is powered by the incentives provided by
its accuracy-shaping function. By Theorem 3, devices provably contribute more data when accuracy-
shaping occurs. As the total amount of data m grows due to the incentives of accuracy shaping, a
higher-performing model is trained by the server. A higher-performing model results in higher utility
for the server (Equation 2). This is backed up empirically, as Figures 3a and 4a showcase upwards
of 3 magnitudes greater utility compared to state-of-the-art FL mechanisms.
RealFM Incentivizes Devices to More Actively Contribute to Federated Training. Figures 3b
and 4b showcase the power of RealFM, via its accuracy-shaping function, to incentivizes devices
to contribute more data points. Through its construction, RealFM’s accuracy-shaping function in-
centivizes devices to contribute more data than they would locally in exchange for greater utility.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a) Server Utility Comparison.                (b) Average Data Contribution Comparison.

Figure 4: Improved Server Utility on MNIST. Tasked with non-linear (and possibly non-uniform)
payoff functions, RealFM achieves over 3 magnitudes more server utility than a FL version of
(Karimireddy et al., 2022) (denoted as Linear RealFM). RealFM incentivizes devices to produce
nearly 700% more data points (4b) than on their own.
This is important for two reasons. First, incentivizing devices to contribute more than local training
proves that the free-rider effect is not taking place. Second, higher data contribution lead to better-
performing models and higher accuracies. This improves the utility for all participants. Overall,
RealFM is superior at incentivizing contributions compared to state-of-the-art FL mechanisms.
RealFM Increases Device Utility. As shown in Figure 5, devices participating in RealFM also
boost their utility. The improvement stems from (i) effective accuracy-shaping by RealFM and
(ii) the use of non-linear payoff functions ϕ, which more precisely map the benefit derived from
an increase in model accuracy. RealFM’s accuracy-shaping function is defined (Theorem 3) to
improve device utility if devices contribute more data than they would locally. Incorporating ϕ into
device utility makes it more realistic and spurs increased data contribution. With utilities that grow
increasingly great with improved accuracy, devices are incentivized to contribute more data in order
to chase higher model accuracy and subsequent utility.


    (a) Average Device Utility Gained on CIFAR-10.       (b) Average Device Utility Gained on MNIST.

Figure 5: Improved Device Utility on Real-World Data. RealFM improves device utility derived
from accuracy by upwards of 6x and 4 magnitudes on CIFAR-10 and MNIST respectively. Only
uniform experiments are run to save space since the non-uniform results are nearly identical.

7     C ONCLUSION
Without proper incentives, modern FL frameworks fail to attract devices to participate. Furthermore,
current FL mechanisms which incorporate incentives fall victim to the free-rider problem. RealFM
is the first FL mechanism which boosts device participation and data contribution all while eliminat-
ing the free-rider phenomena without requiring data to be shared. Device and server utility is greatly
improved in RealFM by the construction of a novel and realistic utility function which more pre-
cisely models the relationship between accuracy and utility. Empirically we found that RealFM’s
realistic device utility and effective incentive structure, through the use of a novel accuracy-shaping
function, resulted in higher-performing models during federated training. As a result, RealFM pro-
vides higher utilities to the server and participating devices compared to its peer FL mechanisms.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Daron Acemoglu and Asu Ozdaglar. Lecture notes for course “6.207/14.15 networks”, October
  2009.
Asad Ali, Inaam Ilahi, Adnan Qayyum, Ihab Mohammed, Ala Al-Fuqaha, and Junaid Qadir. A
  systematic review of federated learning incentive mechanisms and associated security challenges.
  Computer Science Review, 50:100593, 2023.
Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Vinay Aggarwal, Aaditya Kumar Singh, and Sunav Choudhary. Fed-
 erated learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, 2019.
Mengjing Chen, Yang Liu, Weiran Shen, Yiheng Shen, Pingzhong Tang, and Qiang Yang. Mecha-
 nism design for multi-party machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08996, 2020.
Mingshu Cong, Han Yu, Xi Weng, and Siu Ming Yiu. A game-theoretic framework for incentive
 mechanism design in federated learning. Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 205–
 222, 2020.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Heterofl: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01264, 2020.
Yann Fraboni, Richard Vidal, and Marco Lorenzi. Free-rider attacks on model aggregation in feder-
  ated learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1846–1854.
  PMLR, 2021.
Li Hu, Hongyang Yan, Lang Li, Zijie Pan, Xiaozhang Liu, and Zulong Zhang. Mhat: An efficient
  model-heterogenous aggregation training scheme for federated learning. Information Sciences,
  560:493–503, 2021.
Enric Junqué de Fortuny, David Martens, and Foster Provost. Predictive modeling with big data: is
  bigger really better? Big data, 1(4):215–226, 2013.
Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato, Shengli Xie, and Junshan Zhang. Incentive mechanism for
   reliable federated learning: A joint optimization approach to combining reputation and contract
   theory. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(6):10700–10714, 2019.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Wenshuo Guo, and Michael I Jordan. Mechanisms that incentivize data
  sharing in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04557, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Daliang Li and Junpu Wang. Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03581, 2019.
Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Zehui Xiong, Chunyan Miao, Dusit Niyato, Qiang Yang, Cyril Leung, and
 H Vincent Poor. Hierarchical incentive mechanism design for federated machine learning in
 mobile networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(10):9575–9588, 2020.
Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Jianqiang Huang, Zehui Xiong, Jiawen Kang, Dusit Niyato, Xian-Sheng
 Hua, Cyril Leung, and Chunyan Miao. Towards federated learning in uav-enabled internet of
 vehicles: A multi-dimensional contract-matching approach. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
 Transportation Systems, 22(8):5140–5154, 2021.
Jierui Lin, Min Du, and Jian Liu. Free-riders in federated learning: Attacks and defenses. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1911.12560, 2019.
Yuan Liu, Mengmeng Tian, Yuxin Chen, Zehui Xiong, Cyril Leung, and Chunyan Miao. A contract
  theory based incentive mechanism for federated learning. In Federated and Transfer Learning,
  pp. 117–137. Springer, 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lingjuan Lyu, Xinyi Xu, Qian Wang, and Han Yu. Collaborative fairness in federated learning.
  Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 189–204, 2020a.
Lingjuan Lyu, Jiangshan Yu, Karthik Nandakumar, Yitong Li, Xingjun Ma, Jiong Jin, Han Yu, and
  Kee Siong Ng. Towards fair and privacy-preserving federated deep models. IEEE Transactions
  on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 31(11):2524–2541, 2020b.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning,
 2018.
Rachael Hwee Ling Sim, Yehong Zhang, Mun Choon Chan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Col-
  laborative machine learning with incentive-aware model rewards. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 8927–8936. PMLR, 2020.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable ef-
  fectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 843–852, 2017.
Florian Tramer and Dan Boneh. Differentially private learning needs better features (or much more
  data). arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.11660, 2020.
Xuezhen Tu, Kun Zhu, Nguyen Cong Luong, Dusit Niyato, Yang Zhang, and Juan Li. Incentive
  mechanisms for federated learning: From economic and game theoretic perspective. IEEE trans-
  actions on cognitive communications and networking, 8(3):1566–1593, 2022.
Bo Wang, Hongtao Li, Ximeng Liu, and Yina Guo. Frad: Free-rider attacks detection mechanism
  for federated learning in aiot. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023.
Jianhua Wang. Pass: Parameters audit-based secure and fair federated learning scheme against free
   rider. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07292, 2022.
Jianhua Wang, Xiaolin Chang, Ricardo J Rodrı̀guez, and Yixiang Wang. Assessing anonymous
   and selfish free-rider attacks in federated learning. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Computers and
   Communications (ISCC), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2022.
Tianhao Wang, Johannes Rausch, Ce Zhang, Ruoxi Jia, and Dawn Song. A principled approach to
  data valuation for federated learning. Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 153–167,
  2020.
Yuntao Wang, Zhou Su, Tom H Luan, Ruidong Li, and Kuan Zhang. Federated learning with fair
  incentives and robust aggregation for uav-aided crowdsensing. IEEE Transactions on Network
  Science and Engineering, 9(5):3179–3196, 2021.
Xinyi Xu and Lingjuan Lyu. A reputation mechanism is all you need: Collaborative fairness and
  adversarial robustness in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10464, 2020.
Xinyi Xu, Lingjuan Lyu, Xingjun Ma, Chenglin Miao, Chuan Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang
  Low. Gradient driven rewards to guarantee fairness in collaborative machine learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16104–16117, 2021.
Rongfei Zeng, Chao Zeng, Xingwei Wang, Bo Li, and Xiaowen Chu. A comprehensive survey of
  incentive mechanism for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15406, 2021.
Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Zhihao Qu, Deze Zeng, and Song Guo. A learning-based incentive mecha-
  nism for federated learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(7):6360–6368, 2020a.
Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Kun Wang, Song Guo, and Yuanqing Xia. Big data analytics by crowdlearn-
  ing: Architecture and mechanism design. IEEE Network, 34(3):143–147, 2020b.
Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Song Guo, and Zhihao Qu. Incentive mechanism design for federated learn-
  ing: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Network, 35(4):310–317, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiangxin Zhu, Carl Vondrick, Deva Ramanan, and Charless C Fowlkes. Do we need more training
  data or better models for object detection?. In BMVC, volume 3. Citeseer, 2012.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 RealFM Appendix
A    N OTATION & R ELATED W ORK

                               Table 1: Notation Table for RealFM.

                                     Definition                            Notation
                                Number of Devices                             n
                           Local FedAvg Training Steps                        h
                   Optimal Attainable Accuracy on Learning Task              aopt
                            Difficulty of Learning Task                       k
                              Number of Data Points                           m
                          Total Data Point Contributions                      m
                                Accuracy Function                           a(m)
                                    Mechanism                                M
                               Server Profit Margin                          pm
                              Server Payoff Function                         ϕC
                                 Model Parameters                             w
                            Marginal Cost for Device i                        ci
                           Payoff Function for Device i                       ϕi
                                  Device i Utility                            ui
                          Local Optimal Device i Utility                      u0i
                     Rewarded Mechanism Utility for Device i                  uri
                   Local Optimal Data Contribution for Device i              moi
                 Mechanism Optimal Data Contribution for Device i            m∗i
                        Mechanism Model Accuracy Reward                       ar
                           Mechanism Monetary Reward                          R
                Marginal Monetary Reward per Contributed Data Point         r(m)
                      Accuracy-Shaping Function for Device i                  γi


Federated Mechanisms (Continued). As detailed in Section 2, there is a wide swath of mecha-
nisms proposed for FL. The works (Zhan et al., 2021; Tu et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021; Ali et al.,
2023) survey the different methods of incentives present in FL literature. The goal of the presented
methods are solely to increase device participation within FL frameworks. The issues of free rid-
ing and increased data or gradient contribution are not covered. (Sim et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021)
design model rewards to meet fairness or accuracy objectives. In these works, as detailed below,
devices receive models proportionate to the amount of data they contribute but are not incentivized
to contribute more data. Our work seeks to incentivize devices to contribute more during training.
Collaborative Fairness and Federated Shapley Value. Collaborative fairness in FL (Lyu et al.,
2020a;b; Xu & Lyu, 2020; Sim et al., 2020) is closely related to our paper. The works Lyu et al.
(2020a;b); Xu & Lyu (2020); Sim et al. (2020) seek to fairly allocate models with varying perfor-
mance depending upon how much devices contribute to training in FL settings. This is accomplished
by determining a ”reputation” (a measure of device contributions) for each device, using a hyperbolic
sine function, to enforce devices converge to different models relative to their amount of contribu-
tions during FL training. Thus, devices who contribute more receive a higher-performing model than
those who do not contribute much. There are a few key differences between this line of work and our
own, namely: (1) Our mechanism incentivizes devices to both participate in training and increase
their amount of contributions. There are no such incentives in collaborative fairness. (2) We model
device and server utility. Unlike collaborative fairness, we do not assume that devices will always
participate in FL training. (3) Our mechanism design provably eliminates the free-rider phenomena
unlike collaborative fairness, since devices who try to free-ride receive the same model performance
as they would on their own (Equations 12 and 13). (4) No monetary rewards are received by devices
in current collaborative fairness methods.
While the overarching goal of our work is to incentivize and increase device participation, through
mechanism design, within FL, important future research directions remain. Federated Shapley


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Value, first proposed in Wang et al. (2020), allows for estimation of the Shapley Value in a FL
setting. This is crucial to appraise the data coming from each device and pave the way for rewarding
devices with important data during the training process. Data is not equally valuable in real-world
settings, and relaxing the assumption of equally valued data within our paper is important future
work. We aim to use Wang et al. (2020) to tackle the problem of data heterogeneity.

                                                            102                                                  0
          102
                                                            101                                                100
          101
                                                            100                                                101
          100                                                 0
                                                            100
Utility


                                                                                                     Utility
            0


                                                  Utility
          100                                                                                                  102
                                                            101
                                                                                                               103
          101                                               102
          102     Power Function i                          103     Power Function i                           104     Power Function i
          103
                  Linear i                                  104
                                                                    Linear i                                   105
                                                                                                                       Linear i
                101      103         105   107                    101      103         105     107                   101      103         105   107
                  Data Contribution (mi)                            Data Contribution (mi)                             Data Contribution (mi)

          (a) Marginal Cost ci = 1e−4.                      (b) Marginal Cost ci = 1e−3.                       (c) Marginal Cost ci = 1e−2.

Figure 6: Utility Functions for Varying Cost and Payoff Functions. Using both linear, ϕi (a) = a,
                         1
and power, ϕi (a) = (1−a)  2 −1, payoff functions, we compare how device utilities change with rising

costs. Once marginal costs ci become too high, the utility is always negative and devices will not
collect data for training. We use â(m) as defined in Equation 1, with aopt = 0.95 and k = 1.


B           P ROOF OF T HEOREMS

Theorem 1. Consider a device i with marginal cost per data point ci , accuracy function â(m)
satisfying Assumption 1, and accuracy payoff ϕi satisfying Assumption 2. This device will collect
the following optimal amount of data moi :

              o     0                                        if maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) ≤ 0,
            mi =      ∗            ′       ∗      ′  ∗                                      (14)
                    m , such that ϕi (â(m )) · â (m ) = ci else.

Proof. Let m0 := sup{m | â(m) = 0} (the point where a(m) begins to increase from 0 and
become equivalent to â(m)). Thus, ∀mi > m0 , a(mi ) = â(mi ) > 0. Also, given Assumptions 1
and 2 and Equation 3, ui (0) = 0. The derivative of Equation 3 for device i is,
                                                 u′i (mi ) = ϕ′i (a(mi )) · a′ (mi ) − ci .                                                     (15)

Case 1: maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) ≤ 0.
Each device i starts with a utility of 0 since by Assumptions 1 and 2 ui (0) = 0. Since
maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) ≤ 0, there is no utility gained by device i to contribute more data. Therefore,
the optimal amount of contributions remains at zero: m∗i = 0.
Case 2: maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) > 0.
Sub-Case 1: 0 ≤ mi ≤ m0 . By definition of m0 , a(mi ) = 0 ∀mi ∈ [0, m0 ]. Therefore, from
Equation 3 and Assumptions 1 and 2, ui (mi ) = −ci mi < 0 ∀mi ∈ (0, m0 ]. Since ui (0) = 0 and
ui (mi ) < 0 for mi > 0, device i will not collect any contribution: m∗i = 0.
Sub-Case 2: mi > m0 . Since ∀mi > m0 , a(mi ) = â(mi ) > 0, Equation 15 becomes,
                                                 u′i (mi ) = ϕ′i (â(mi )) · â′ (mi ) − ci .                                                   (16)
We begin by showing that ϕi (â(mi )) is bounded. By Assumption 1, â(mi ) < aopt < 1 ∀mi . Thus,
ϕi (â(mi )) < ϕi (aopt ) < ∞ ∀mi since â(mi ) and ϕi are non-decreasing and continuous by As-
sumptions 1 and 2. Due to ϕi (â(mi )) being concave, non-decreasing, and bounded (by Assumption
2), we have from Equation 16 that the limit of its derivative,
                               lim ϕ′i (â(mi )) · â′ (mi ) = 0 =⇒                     lim u′i (mi ) = −ci < 0.                                (17)
                           mi →∞                                                       mi →∞


                                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since ϕi (â(mi )) is concave and non-decreasing, its gradient ϕ′i (â(mi )) · â′ (mi ) is maximized when
mi = m0 and is non-increasing afterwards. Using the maximal derivative location mi = m0 in
union with Case 2 (maxmi ≥0 ui (mi ) > 0) and Sub-Case 2 (ui (m) ≤ 0 ∀m ∈ [0, m0 ]) yields
u′i (m0 ) > 0 (the derivative must be positive in order to increase utility above 0).
Now that u′i (m0 ) > 0, limmi →∞ u′i (mi ) < 0, and ϕ′i (â(mi )) · â′ (mi ) is non-increasing, there must
exist a maximum mi = m∗ such that ϕ′i (â(m∗ )) · â′ (m∗ ) = ci .

  Corollary 2. Under uniform payoff functions ϕi (a(m)) = ϕ(a(m)) ∀i, two devices j, k with
  respective marginal costs cj ≤ ck satisfy uj (moj ) ≥ uk (m∗k ) and m∗j ≥ m∗k .

Corollary 2 states that a device with lower marginal cost has higher utility and would contribute
more data than a device with a higher marginal cost.

Proof. With uniform payoff functions, each device i’s utility and utility derivative become
                 ui (mi ) = ϕ(a(mi )) − ci mi ,     u′i (mi ) = ϕ′ (a(mi )) · a′ (mi ) − ci .          (18)
Due to ϕi (a(m)) being concave and non-decreasing, its derivative ϕ′ (a(mi ))·a′ (mi ) is non-negative
and non-increasing. Let mok be the optimal amount of data contribution by device k.
Case 1: cj = ck . By Equation 18, if cj = ck then 0 = u′k (mok ) = u′j (mok ). This implies mok = moj
and subsequently uk (mok ) = uj (mok ).
Case 2: cj < ck . By Equation 18, if cj < ck , then 0 = u′k (mok ) < u′j (mok ). Since ϕ(a(mi )) is
concave and non-decreasing, its derivative is non-increasing with its limit going to 0. Therefore,
more data ϵ > 0 must be collected in order for u′j to reach zero (i.e. u′j (mok + ϵ) = 0). This implies
that moj = mok + ϵ > mok . Furthermore, since 0 = u′k (mok ) < u′j (mok ), the utility for device j is still
increasing at mok and is fully maximized at moj . This implies that uj (moj ) > uk (mok ).

Theorem 2. Consider a feasible mechanism M returning utility [MU (mi ; m−i )]i to device i
([MU (0; m−i )]i = 0). Define the utility of a participating device i as,
                             uri (mi ; m−i ) := [MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi .                            (19)
If uri (mi , m−i ), is quasi-concave for mi ≥ mui := inf{mi | [MU (mi ; m−i )]i > 0} and continu-
ous in m−i , then a pure Nash equilibrium with meq data contributions exists such that,
  uri (meq ) = [MU (meq )]i − ci meq   r        eq       U       eq
                                  i ≥ ui (mi ; m−i ) = [M (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi for mi ≥ 0.
                                                                                         (20)

Proof. We start the proof by examining two scenarios.
Case 1: maxmi uri (mi ; m−i ) ≤ 0.
In the case where the marginal cost of producing updates −ci mi is so large that the device utility ui
will always be non-positive, the best response [B(m)]i given a set of contributions m for device i
is,
                              [B(m)]i = arg max uri (mi ; m−i ) = 0.                              (21)
                                               mi ≥0

As expected, device i will not perform any updates meq
                                                    i  = 0. Therefore, Equation 8 is fulfilled
since as maxmi uri (mi ; m−i ) ≤ 0 we see,

[MU (meq )]i − ci meq    U                             U       eq
                   i = [M (0; m−i )]i − ci (0) = 0 ≥ [M (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi for all mi ≥ 0.
                                                                                         (22)
Case 2: maxmi ui (mi ; m−i ) > 0.
Denote mui := inf{mi | [MU (mi ; m−i )]i > 0}. On the interval of integers mi ∈ [0, mui ], device i
’s utility is non-positive,
            uri (mi ; m−i ) = [MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi = −ci mi ≤ 0,           ∀mi ∈ [0, mui ].       (23)


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For mi ≥ mui , we have that ui (mi ; m) is quasi-concave. Let the best response for a given set of
contributions m−i for device i be formally defined as,
             [B(m)]i := arg max uri (mi ; m−i ) = arg max[MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi .                   (24)
                              mi ≥0                          mi ≥0

Suppose there exists a fixed point m̃ to the best response, m̃ ∈ B(m̃). This would mean that m̃ is
an equilibrium since by Equation 24 we have for any mi ≥ 0,
                        [MU (m̃i ; m̃−i )]i − ci m̃i ≥ [MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi .                     (25)
Thus, now we must show that B has a fixed point (which is subsequently an equilibrium). To do
so, we first determine a convex and compact search space. As detailed in Case 1, uri (0, m−i ) = 0.
Therefore, we can bound 0 ≤ maxmi uri (mi , m−i ). Since M is feasible, M(m) is bounded above
by MU max . Thus, we find

                                0 ≤ max uri (mi ; m−i ) ≤ MU
                                                           max − ci mi .                               (26)
                                      mi

Rearranging  yields mi ≤ MU                          u
                            max /ci . Since mi ≥ mi , we can restrict our search space to C :=
      u    U            n                                                       C
Q
  j [mj , Mmax /cj ] ⊂ R , where our best response mapping is now over B : C → 2 .

  Lemma 1 (Kakutani’s Theorem). Consider a multi-valued function F : C → 2C over convex
  and compact domain C for which the output set F (m) (i) is convex and closed for any fixed m,
  and (ii) changes continuously as we change m. For any such F , there exists a fixed point m
  such that m ∈ F (m).

Since within this interval of mi uri (mi , m−i ) is quasi-concave, B(m) must be continuous in
m (from Acemoglu & Ozdaglar (2009)). Now by applying Lemma 1, Kakutani’s fixed point
theorem, there exists such a fixed point m̃ such that m̃ ∈ B(m̃) where m̃i ≥ mui . Since
maxmi uri (mi ; m−i ) > 0 and uri (mi ; m−i ) ≤ 0 for mi ∈ [0, mui ], m̃i is certain to not fall within
[0, mui ] ∀i due to the nature of the arg max in Equation 24. Therefore, Equation 25 holds as the fixed
point m̃ exists and is the equilibrium of M.
Theorem 3. Consider a device i with marginal cost ci and accuracy payoff function ϕi satisfying
Assumption 2. Denote device i’s optimal local data contribution as moi and its subsequent accuracy
ā = a(moi ). Define the derivative of ϕi (a) with respect to a as ϕ′i (a). For any ϵ → 0+ and marginal
server reward r(m) ≥ 0, device i has the following accuracy-shaping function γi (m) for m ≥ moi ,
                         ′        √
                         −ϕi (ā)+ ϕ′i (ā)2 +2ϕ′′i (ā)(ci −r(m)+ϵ)(m−moi ) if ϕ′′ (ā) > 0
                                                    ′′                            i
                 γi := (c −r(m)+ϵ)(m−mo )ϕi (ā)                                                   (27)
                         i        ′ϕi (ā)
                                                i
                                                                              if ϕ′′ (ā) = 0
                                                                                         i

Given the defined γi (m), the following inequality is satisfied for m ∈ [moi , m∗i ],
                  ϕi (a(moi ) + γi (m)) − ϕi (a(moi )) > (ci − r(m))(m − moi ).      (28)
                                   ∗            o                           o
                                                           P
The new optimal contribution is mi := {m ≥ mi | a(m+ j̸=i mj ) = a(mi )+γi (m)}. Accuracy
shaping improves device i’s data contribution m∗i ≥ moi for any contribution m−i .

Proof. By the mean value version of Taylor’s theorem we have,
             ϕi (ā + γi ) = ϕi (ā) + γi ϕ′i (ā) + 1/2γi2 ϕ′′i (z),   for some z ∈ [ā, ā + γi ].   (29)
Since ϕi (a) is both increasing and convex with respect to a,
                             ϕi (ā + γi ) − ϕi (ā) ≥ γi ϕ′i (ā) + 1/2γi2 ϕ′′i (ā).                 (30)
In order to ensure ϕi (ā + γ) − ϕi (ā) > (ci − r(m))(m − moi ), we must select γ such that,
                           γi ϕ′i (ā) + 1/2γi2 ϕ′′i (ā) > (ci − r(m))(m − moi ).                     (31)
Case 1: ϕ′′i (ā) = 0. In this case, Equation 31 becomes,
                                    γi ϕ′i (ā) > (ci − r(m))(m − moi ).                               (32)


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order for Equation 31, and thereby Equation 11, to hold we select ϵ → 0+ such that,
                                          (ci − r(m) + ϵ)(m − moi )
                                  γi :=                             .                                (33)
                                                   ϕ′i (ā)

Case 2: ϕ′′i (ā) > 0. Determining when the left- and right-hand sides of Equation 31 are equal is
equivalent to solving the quadratic equation for γi ,
                          −ϕ′i (ā) ± ϕ′i (ā)2 + 2ϕ′′i (ā)(ci − r(m))(m − moi )
                                     p
                     γi =                                                                    (34)
                                                   ϕ′′i (ā)
                          −ϕ′i (ā) + ϕ′i (ā)2 + 2ϕ′′i (ā)(ci − r(m))(m − moi )
                                     p
                        =                                                         .          (35)
                                                   ϕ′′i (ā)
The second equality follows from γi having to be positive. In order for Equation 31, and thereby
Equation 11, to hold we select ϵ → 0+ such that,
                       −ϕ′i (ā) + ϕ′i (ā)2 + 2ϕ′′i (ā)(ci − r(m) + ϵ)(m − moi )
                                  p
                 γi :=                                                                      (36)
                                                 ϕ′′i (ā)
As a quick note, for m = moi one can immediately see that γi (m) = 0. To finish the proof, now
that Equation 11 is proven to hold for the prescribed γi , device i is incentivized to contribute more
as the added utility ϕi (ā + γi ) − ϕi (ā) is larger than the incurred cost (ci − r(m))(m − moi ). There
is a limit to this incentive, however. TheP     maximum value that γi can be is bounded by the accuracy
from all contributions: a(moi ) + γi ≤ a( j mj ). Thus, device i reaches a new optimal contribution
m∗i which is determined by,
                                                    X
                     m∗i := {m ≥ moi | a(m +             mj ) = a(moi ) + γi (m)} ≥ moi .             (37)
                                                j̸=i



Theorem 4. Our realistic federated mechanism M, defined in Equation 13, performs accuracy-
shaping with γi defined in Theorem 3 for each device i ∈ [n] and some small ϵ → 0+ . As such, M
is Individually Rational (IR) and has a unique Nash equilibrium at which device i will contribute
m∗i ≥ moi updates, thereby eliminating the free-rider phenomena. Furthermore, since M is IR,
devices are incentivized to participate as they gain equal to or more utility than by not participating.

Proof. We first prove existence of a unique Nash equilibrium by showcasing how our mechanism
M fulfills the criteria laid out in Theorem 2. The criteria in Theorem 2 largely surrounds the utility
of a participating device i,
                             uri (mi ; m−i ) := [MU (mi ; m−i )]i − ci mi .                          (38)

Feasibility. Before beginning, we note that M trivially satisfies the only non-utility requirement
that [MU (0; m−i )]i = P  0 (as a(0) = ϕi (0) = 0). As shown in Equation 13, M returns accu-
racies between 0 and a( m) to all devices. This satisfies the bounded accuracy requirement.
Furthermore, the utility provided by our mechanism MU is bounded as well. Since aopt is the
largest attained accuracy by our defined accuracy function â(m) and aopt < 1, the maximum util-
ity is ϕi (aopt ) < ∞. Now, that M is proven to be Feasible, we only need the following to prove
that M has a pure equilibrium: (1) uri (mi ; m−i ) is continuous in m−i and (2) quasi-concave for
mi ≥ mui := inf{mi | [MU (mi ; m−i )]i > 0}.
Continuity.      By definition of uri (mi ; m−i ), Equation 38, we only need to consider
    U
[M (mi ; m−i )]i since that is the only portion affected by m−i . By definition of the utility re-
turned by our mechanism M, shown in Equation 12, no discontinuities arise for a fixed mi and
varying m−i . By assumptions on continuity in Assumptions 1 and 2, ϕi (a(m)) is continuous for
all m. Thus, for non-zero utility (zero utility would lead to zero reward), we find the marginal mon-
etary reward function r(m) in Equation 9 is continuous. Therefore, each piecewise component of
[MU (mi ; m−i )]i is continuous since they are sums of continuous functions. Finally, we show that
                                                            P The accuracy-shaping function γi is
the piecewise functions connect with each other continuously.
defined such that γi (moi ) = 0 and a(moi ) + γi (m∗i ) = a( m), which finishes proof of continuity.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quasi-Concavity. For all values of mi ≥ mui , our mechanism M produces positive utility. By
construction, our mechanism M is strictly increasing for mi ≥ mui . Our mechanism M returns
varying utilities within three separate intervals. While piece-wise, these intervals are continuous
and M is strictly increasing with respect to mi in each. The first interval, consisting of the con-
cave function ϕi (a(mi )), is quasi-concave by construction. The second interval consists of a linear
function r(m) · (mi − moi ) added to a quasi-concave ϕi (a(mi ) + γi (mi )) function, resulting in a
quasi-concave function (note that ϕi (â(mi )) is concave). Finally, the third interval consists of a lin-
ear function r(m) · (mi − m∗i ) added to a concave function ϕi (a(mi )), which is also quasi-concave.
In sum, this makes [MU (mi ; m−i )]i a quasi-concave function. Since −ci mi is a linear function,
the utility of a participating device uri (mi ; m−i ) will also be quasi-concave function, as the sum of
a linear and quasi-concave function is quasi-concave.
Existence of Pure Equilibrium with Increased Data Contribution. Since [MU (m)]i satisfies
feasibility, continuity, and quasi-concavity requirements, M is guaranteed to have a pure Nash equi-
librium by Theorem 2. Furthermore, since M performs accuracy-shaping with γi prescribed in
Theorem 2, it is guaranteed that each device i will produce m∗i ≥ moi updates.
Individually Rational (IR). We prove M is IR by looking at each piecewise portion of Equation 13:
Case 1: mi ≤ moi (Free-Riding). When mi ≤ moi , a device would attempt to provide as much or
less than the amount of contribution which is locally optimal. The hope for such strategy would be
free-riding: enjoy the performance of a well-trained model as a result of federated training while
providing few (or zero) data points in order to save costs. Our mechanism avoids the free rider
problem trivially by returning a model with an accuracy that is proportional to the amount of data
contributed by the device. This is shown in Equation 13, as devices receive a model with accuracy
a(mi ) if mi ≤ moi (i.e., devices are rewarded with a model equivalent to one that they could’ve
trained themselves if they fail to contribute an adequate amount of data). In this case, devices
receive the same model accuracy as they would’ve on their own and thus IR is satisfied in this case.
Case 2: mi ∈ (moi , m∗i ]. Via the results of Theorem 3, the accuracy of the model returned by
M when mi ∈ (moi , m∗i ] is greater than a model trained by device i on mi local contributions.
Mathematically this is described as ar (mi ) = a(mi ) + γi (mi ) > a(mi ) for mi ∈ (moi , m∗i ]. Since
ϕi is increasing, this ensures that Equation 6 holds.
Case 3: mi ≥ m∗i . By Theorem 3, P    by definition of m∗i when mi = m∗i then the accuracy of a
returned model by M is equal to a( j mj ). Therefore, given a fixed set of contributions from
all other devices m−i , device i will still attain a model with accuracy a( j mj ) for mi ≥ m∗i
                                                                           P
(since the limits of accuracy shaping
                                P     have been reached for the given contributions). Due to this,
Equation 6 trivially holds as a( j mj ) ≥ a(mi ).

B.1   ACCURACY M ODELING

Our model for accuracy stems from Example 2.1 in Karimireddy et al. (2022), which in turn comes
from Theorem 11.8 in Mohri et al. (2018). Below is the mentioned generalization bound,
Proposition 1 (Generalization Bounds, Karimireddy et al. (2022) Example 2.1). Suppose we want
to learn a model h from a hypothesis class H which minimizes the error over data distribu-
tion D, defined to be R(h) := E(x,y)∼D [e(h(x), y)], for some error function e(·) ∈ [0, 1]. Let
such an optimal model have error (1 − aopt ) ≤ 1. Now, given access to {(xl , yl )}l ∈ [m]
which are m i.i.d. samples from D, we can compute the empirical risk minimizer (ERM) as
                     P
ĥm = arg minh∈H l∈[m] e(h(x), y). Finally, let k > 0 be the pseudo-dimension of the set of
functions {(x, y) → e(h(x), y) : h ∈ H}, which is a measure of the difficulty of the learning task.
Then, standard generalization bounds imply that with probability at least 99% over the sampling of
the data, the accuracy is at least
                                                   p
                                                      2k(2 + log(m/k)) + 4
                   1 − R(ĥm ) ≥ â(m) := aopt −             √                 .               (39)
                                                                m
A simplified expression for our analytic analysis use is,
                                                        p
                                     â(m) = aopt − 2 k/m.                                           (40)


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS C ONTINUED

In this section we provide durther details into how our image classification experiments were run.
As a note, we ran each experiment three times, varying the random seeds. All bar plots in our paper
showcase the mean results of the three experiments. In Figures 7 and 8, we plot error bars. The error
bars are quite thin, as the results did not vary much between each of the three experiments.

C.1    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

The experimental process involved careful tuning of our theoretical accuracy function â(m) in order
to match the empirical accuracy results we found. In fact, for CIFAR-10 we use â(m) defined in
Equation 1 with carefully selected values for k and aopt to precisely reflect the empirical results
 p for our CIFAR-10 training. For MNIST, however, an accuracy function of â(m) = aopt −
found
2 k/m was more reflective of the ease of training on MNIST. Overall, to ensure precise empirical
results, we followed the following process for each experiment (for both CIFAR-10 and MNIST as
well as for 8 and 16 devices):

1. Determine aopt and k such that â(m) is tuned to most precisely reflect our empirical results.
2. Select an amount of data that each device should have in expectation of varying costs and payoffs
   (this amount should ensure that there is enough unique datapoints to share amongst devices).
3. From the prescribed amount of data and a(m), derive the marginal cost ce required to produce
   the desired data quantity.
4. For non-uniform experiments, draw a marginal cost at random from a Gaussian with mean ce
   and/or draw a payoff function ϕi with a zi sampled within [0.9, 1.1] (detailed in Section 6).
5. Save an initial model for training.
6. Train this initial model locally on each device until convergence, generating alocal .
7. Using the initial model, train the model in a federated manner until convergence, generating af ed .
8. Using the accuracy-shaping function, compute the amount of additional data contributions re-
   quired to raise alocal to af ed . This is the incentivized amount of added contributions.

We also use the expected payoff function for the central server: ϕC = 1/(1 − a)2 − 1. Within
experiments, for simplicity, we set the profit margin pm = 1 (greedy server). Below, we detail the
hyper-parameters used in our CIFAR-10 and MNIST experiments.

                      Table 2: Hyper-parameters for CIFAR-10 Experiments.

       Model      Batch Size    Learning Rate     aopt    k     Epochs    Local FedAvg Steps h
      ResNet18       128            1e-3          0.9     18     100               6



                        Table 3: Hyper-parameters for MNIST Experiments.

      Model    Batch Size    Learning Rate      aopt      k     Epochs    Local FedAvg Steps h
      CNN         128            1e-3          0.995     0.25     50               6


C.2    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

It is interesting to note how well RealFM performs on MNIST (in terms of the vastly improved
utility seen in Figures 4 and 10) while FedAvg only improves model accuracy by a mere couple
of percentage points. The reason stems from the payoff function ϕi which heavily rewards models
that have accuracies close to 100%. This scenario is rational in real-world settings. Competing
companies in industry will all likely have models which are high-performing (above 95% accuracy).
Since the competition is stiff, companies with the best model performance will likely attract the most
customers since their product is the best. Therefore, the utility for achieving model performance
close to 100% should become larger and larger as one gets closer to 100%.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) 8 Devices on CIFAR-10.                           (b) 8 Devices on MNIST.

Figure 8: Test Accuracy for Local versus Federated Training on CIFAR-10 and MNIST. As
expected, FedAvg greatly outperforms Local Training by nearly 14% for 8 devices respectively on
CIFAR-10. MNIST is an easier dataset to classify, so both Local Training and FedAvg do great jobs
at classifying digits. However, FedAvg does perform at a 99+% accuracy whereas Local Training
sits around 98%. While this may seem to be a small gap, the utility gained by having a nearly perfect
classification scheme is much greater than that having only 98%.


           (a) 16 Devices on CIFAR-10.                          (b) 16 Devices on MNIST.

Figure 7: Test Accuracy for Local versus Federated Training on CIFAR-10 and MNIST. As
expected, FedAvg greatly outperforms Local Training by nearly 20% for 16 devices respectively on
CIFAR-10. MNIST is an easier dataset to classify, so both Local Training and FedAvg do great jobs
at classifying digits. However, FedAvg does perform at a 99+% accuracy whereas Local Training
sits around 98%. While this may seem to be a small gap, the utility gained by having a nearly perfect
classification scheme is much greater than that having only 98%.


8 Device Image Classification Results. Below we provide CIFAR-10 and MNIST results for 8
devices. These plots mirror those shown in Section 6 for 16 devices. In both cases, we find that
utility sharply improves for the central server and participating devices. Data contribution also
improves for CIFAR-10 and MNIST. Under all scenarios RealFM performs the best compared to
all other baselines. First, we start with the test accuracy curves for both datasets.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Server Utility Comparison.                (b) Average Data Contribution Comparison.

                       Figure 9: Server Utility for 8 Devices on CIFAR-10.


          (a) Server Utility Comparison.                (b) Average Data Contribution Comparison.

                        Figure 10: Server Utility for 8 Devices on MNIST.


  (a) Average Device Utility Gained on CIFAR-10.          (b) Average Utility Gained on MNIST.

             Figure 11: Improved Device Utility for 8 Devices on Real-World Data.


                                                   21
