Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G RAPH M ETANETWORKS FOR P ROCESSING D IVERSE
N EURAL A RCHITECTURES
 Derek Lim ∗                             Haggai Maron                         Marc T. Law
 MIT CSAIL                               Technion / NVIDIA                    NVIDIA
 dereklim@mit.edu                        hmaron@nvidia.com                    marcl@nvidia.com

 Jonathan Lorraine                                       James Lucas
 NVIDIA                                                  NVIDIA
 jlorraine@nvidia.com                                    jalucas@nvidia.com


                                               A BSTRACT
             Neural networks efficiently encode learned information within their parameters.
             Consequently, many tasks can be unified by treating neural networks themselves
             as input data. When doing so, recent studies demonstrated the importance of ac-
             counting for the symmetries and geometry of parameter spaces. However, those
             works developed architectures tailored to specific networks such as MLPs and
             CNNs without normalization layers, and generalizing such architectures to other
             types of networks can be challenging. In this work, we overcome these chal-
             lenges by building new metanetworks — neural networks that take weights from
             other neural networks as input. Put simply, we carefully build graphs representing
             the input neural networks and process the graphs using graph neural networks.
             Our approach, Graph Metanetworks (GMNs), generalizes to neural architectures
             where competing methods struggle, such as multi-head attention layers, normal-
             ization layers, convolutional layers, ResNet blocks, and group-equivariant linear
             layers. We prove that GMNs are expressive and equivariant to parameter permu-
             tation symmetries that leave the input neural network functions unchanged. We
             validate the effectiveness of our method on several metanetwork tasks over diverse
             neural network architectures.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Neural networks are well-established for predicting, generating, and transforming data. A newer
paradigm is to treat the parameters of neural networks themselves as data. This insight inspired re-
searchers to suggest neural architectures that can predict properties of trained neural networks (Eil-
ertsen et al., 2020), generate new networks (Erkoç et al., 2023), optimize networks (Metz et al.,
2022), or otherwise transform them (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a). We refer to these
neural networks that process other neural networks as metanetworks, or metanets for short.
Metanets enable new applications, but designing them is nontrivial. A common approach is to flatten
the network parameters into a vector representation, neglecting the input network structure. More
generally, a prominent challenge in metanet design is that the space of neural network parameters
exhibits symmetries. For example, permuting the neurons in the hidden layers of a Multilayer Per-
ceptron (MLP) leaves the network output unchanged (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). Ignoring these symme-
tries greatly degrades the metanet performance (Peebles et al., 2022; Navon et al., 2023). Instead,
equivariant metanets respect these symmetries, so that if the input network is permuted then the
metanet output is permuted in the same way.
Recently, several works have proposed equivariant metanets that have shown significantly improved
performance (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a;b). However, these networks typically require
highly specialized, hand-designed layers that can be difficult to devise. A careful analysis of its
symmetries is necessary for any input architecture, followed by the design of corresponding equiv-
ariant metanet layers. Generalizing this procedure to more complicated network architectures is
    ∗
        Work done while interning at NVIDIA.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of Graph Metanetworks (GMNs) Our method converts neural network ar-
chitectures into a parameter graph where edges correspond to network parameters. The bias (b)
and batch-normalization parameters are incorporated via additional nodes with edges to the relevant
layer’s neurons. The graph is processed by a graph neural network operating on edge attributes.
Fixed-length (invariant) predictions can be extracted by pooling the output graph features.

time-consuming and nontrivial, so existing methods can only process simple input networks with
linear and convolutional layers, and cannot process standard modules such as normalization layers
or residual connections — let alone more complicated modules such as attention blocks. Moreover,
these architectures cannot directly process input neural networks with varying architectures, such as
those with different numbers of layers or hidden units.
This work offers a simple and elegant solution to metanet design that respects neural network param-
eter symmetries. As in the concurrent work of Zhang et al. (2023), our technique’s crux is represent-
ing an input neural network as a graph (see Figure 1). We show how to efficiently transform a neural
network into a graph such that standard techniques for learning on graphs – e.g., Message Passing
Neural Networks Gilmer et al. (2017); Battaglia et al. (2018) or Graph Transformers (Rampášek
et al., 2022) – will be equivariant to the parameter symmetries. One of our key contributions is
in developing a compact parameter graph representation, which in contrast to established compu-
tation graphs allows us to handle parameter-sharing layers like convolutions and attention layers
without scaling with the activation count. While past work is typically restricted to processing
MLPs and simple Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989), we validate ex-
perimentally that our graph metanets (GMNs) generalize to more complicated networks such as
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), residual networks (He et al., 2016), normalization layers (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015; Ba et al., 2016; Wu & He, 2018), general group-equivariant architectures (Ravan-
bakhsh et al., 2017) like Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017), and more.
We prove theoretically that our metanets are equivariant to permutation symmetries in the input
network, which we formulate via neural graph automorphisms (Section 2.2). This generalizes the
hidden neuron permutations in MLPs and channel permutations of CNNs covered in prior work to
arbitrary feedforward neural architectures. We further prove that our metanets operating on com-
putation graphs are at least as expressive as prior methods — meaning they can approximate them
to arbitrary accuracy — and can express the forward pass of any input feedforward neural network,
generalizing a result of Navon et al. (2023) (Section 3).
Empirical evaluations show that our approach solves a variety of metanet tasks with diverse neural
architectures. As part of this effort, we trained new datasets of diverse image classifiers, including
2D CNNs, 1D CNNs, DeepSets, ResNets, and Vision Transformers. Our method is easier to imple-
ment than past equivariant metanets while being at least as expressive, and it is applicable to more
general input architectures. Crucially, our GMNs achieve strong quantitative performance across all
tasks we explored.

2   G RAPH AUTOMORPHISM - BASED M ETANETS
We first explain how neural networks can be encoded as Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). There
are many choices in representing neural networks as DAGs, perhaps the most common being a


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


computation graph (see Appendix C). This work introduces a more compact representation, referred
to as parameter graphs.
We then introduce one of the paper’s main concepts — Neural DAG Automorphisms. This concept
generalizes previously studied symmetry groups for MLPs and CNNs to arbitrary feedforward ar-
chitectures represented as DAGs. To conclude this section, we describe our GNN-based metanet
that operates over these graphs and is equivariant to Neural DAG Automorphisms. A glossary of
our notation is provided in Appendix Table 4.
Motivation. Certain permutations of parameters in neural networks do not change the function
they parameterize. For example, consider a simple MLP defined such that fθ (x) := W2 σ(W1 x)
with one hidden layer, where θ := (W2 , W1 ) are the parameters of the network, and σ is a
nonlinear element-wise activation function. For any permutation matrix P , if we define θ̃ :=
(W2 P ⊤ , P W1 ), then for all inputs x, we have fθ (x) = fθ̃ (x). This P corresponds to a per-
mutation of the order of the hidden neurons, which is well-known not to affect the network function
(Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). Likewise, permuting the hidden channels of a CNN does not affect the
network function (Navon et al., 2023; Entezari et al., 2022; Ainsworth et al., 2023).
While these permutation symmetries for MLPs and simple CNNs are easy to determine by manual
inspection, it is more difficult to determine the symmetries of general architectures. For exam-
ple, simple residual connections introduce additional neuron dependencies across layers. Instead of
manual inspection, we show that graph automorphisms (i.e. graph isomorphisms from a graph to
itself) on DAGs representing feedforward networks correspond to permutation parameter symme-
tries. From this observation, it can be shown that GNNs acting on these DAGs are equivariant to
their permutation symmetries.
Overview of our approach. See Figure 1 for an illustration. Given a general input feedforward
neural network, we first encode it as a graph in which each parameter is associated with an edge and
then process this graph with a GNN. The GNN outputs a single fixed-length vector or predictions
for each node or edge depending on the learning task. For instance, one graph-level task is to predict
the scalar accuracy of an input neural network on some task. An edge-level task is to predict new
weights for an input neural network to change its functionality somehow.
We now discuss the graph construction, the symmetries of these graphs, and the GNN we use.

2.1      G RAPH CONSTRUCTION FOR GENERAL FEEDFORWARD ARCHITECTURES

2.1.1      C OMPUTATION GRAPHS

Every feedforward neural network defines a
computation graph as a DAG (Zhang et al.,
2023), where nodes are neurons and edges hold
neural network parameter weight values (see
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). Thus, this gives a method to
construct a weighted graph. However, the com-
putation graph approach has some downsides.
For one, it may be expensive due to weight-
sharing: for instance, a 1-input-and-output-
channel 2D-convolution layer with a kernel size
of 2 has 4 parameters, but the 4 parameters are Figure 2: An example computation graph for a
used in the computation of many activations network with a single convolutional layer. The
(e.g. 1024 activations for a 32 × 32 input grid). layer has a 2 × 2 filter kernel, a single input and
Further, we may want to add input node and output channel, and applies the filter with a stride
edge features – such as layer number – to help of 2. Even in this small case of a 4×4 input image,
performance and expressive power1 . Figure 2 the graph has 16 edges for only 4 parameters.
illustrates an example of a (small) computation
graph for convolutions (for visual clarity, we exclude bias terms). More details, including the exact
formal correspondence between feedforward neural network functions and computation graphs, are
given in Appendix C.1.
   1
       In Section 3, our proofs rely on these features to show graph metanets can express existing metanets.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Parameter subgraph constructions for assorted layers that we implemented in our em-
pirical evaluation. Their descriptions are given in Section 2.1.2. Further details are discussed in
Appendix B.


2.1.2   PARAMETER GRAPHS

To deal with the challenges of computation graphs, we propose alternate neural network graph con-
structions — some examples of which are shown in Figure 3 — that are (a) efficient and (b) allow
expressive metanets. We call these graphs parameter graphs because we design the graphs so that
each parameter is associated with a single edge of the graph (whereas a parameter may be associated
to many edges in a computation graph).
We design modular subgraphs that can be created for each layer and then stitched together. Our
goal is to design parameter graphs with at most one edge for each parameter in the neural network.
Additionally, they should capture the correct set of parameter permutation symmetries. Full details
are in Appendix B, but we discuss the major points behind the design of a selection of parameter
graphs here.
Linear layers. Figure 1 depicts three linear layers in sequence. Each linear layer’s parameter
subgraph coincides with its computation graph, but even so, there are important design choices to
be made. Bias parameters could be encoded as node features as done by Zhang et al. (2023) or as
self-loop edges on each neuron. Instead, we include a bias node for each layer and encode the bias
parameters as edges from that node to the corresponding neurons in the layer.
The bias node approach is preferable because the self-loop or node feature approaches to encoding
biases can hinder the expressive power of the metanet. In particular, the results of Navon et al. (2023)
and Zhou et al. (2023a) show that the permutation equivariant linear metanet maps for MLP inputs
include message-passing-like operations where the representation of a bias parameter is updated via
the representations of other bias parameters in the same layer. Using a message passing GNN on a
graph with bias nodes allows us to naturally express these operations in a single graph metanet layer,
as explained in Appendix D.1.3.
Convolution layers. Convolutions and other group equivariant linear layers leverage parameter
sharing, where the same parameter is used to compute many activations (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017).
Therefore, representing convolutions as a computation graph introduces scaling issues and binds the
network graph to a choice of input size. To avoid this, we develop a succinct and expressive param-
eter graph representation of convolutions. This is depicted in the left of Figure 3 for a convolution
layer with a 2 × 2 filter, one input channel, and two output channels. Note that we have two output
channels here, unlike the computation graph in Figure 2, where there is only one.
Our subgraph construction allocates a node for each input and output channel. We then have parallel
edges between each input and output node for each spatial location in the filter kernel — making this
a multigraph. Bias nodes are added as in the linear layers. This subgraph contains exactly one edge
for each parameter in the convolution layer while capturing the parameter permutation symmetries
as graph automorphisms. The spatial position of each weight within the kernel is included by a
positional encoding in the corresponding edge feature.
In Section 4.1, we use our graph metanets to process 1D and 2D convolutional networks, as well as
DeepSets networks that consist of permutation equivariant linear layers (Zaheer et al., 2017).
Multi-head attention layers. Attention layers (Vaswani et al., 2017) also exhibit parameter sharing
across sequence length. As with convolutions, we design an efficient subgraph representation where
each parameter appears as a single edge. There is one node for each feature dimension of the input,

                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Examples of neural DAG automorphisms for linear layers, convolutional layers, and resid-
ual layers. Possible node permutations are illustrated using red and purple dashed arrows, the same
color represents an identical transformation.


vectors used in attention computation, and output. There are two sets of edges: a set that corresponds
to the query, key, and value maps, and a second set corresponding to the final output mapping.
In the middle of Figure 3 we show a single-headed self attention layer, with bias nodes excluded
for visual clarity. Generalizing this to multi-head attention simply requires adding additional node
features to the middle layer that indicate which head each node belongs to.
Residual layers. A residual connection does not introduce any additional parameters, but it does
affect the permutation symmetries in the parameter space of the network. Therefore, it is crucial to
represent residual connections as additional parameter-free edges within the parameter graph. The
top-right of Figure 3 shows a residual connection bypassing a linear layer. The edges are drawn as
dashed lines to emphasize that there are no associated parameters. As is natural in the computation
graph, we fix the weight of the residual edge to be 1.

2.2   N EURAL DAG AUTOMORPHISMS

The prior section describes how to represent (feedforward) neural networks as DAGs. A natural
question from an equivariant learning perspective is: what are the symmetries of this DAG repre-
sentation? Specifically, we consider graph automorphisms, which are structure-preserving transfor-
mations of a graph unto itself. A neural DAG automorphism of a DAG (V, E) associated with a
neural network is a permutation of nodes ϕ : V → V that preserves adjacency, preserves types
of nodes (e.g. ϕ cannot map hidden neurons to input neurons), and preserves weight-sharing con-
straints (i.e. tied weights must still be tied after permuting the endpoints with the automorphism);
see Appendix C.2 for more details. Every automorphism ϕ also induces a permutation of edges
ϕe : E → E, where edge (i, j) is mapped to ϕe ((i, j)) = (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)).
Intuitively, a neural DAG automorphism represents a permutation of the neural network parameters
via the induced edge permutation, ϕe . We write Φ(θ) to represent this permutation on the parameters
themselves, meaning Φ(θ)(ϕ(i),ϕ(j)) = θ(i,j) . Hidden node permutations in MLPs and hidden
channel permutations in CNNs are special cases of neural DAG automorphisms, which we explain
in Appendix C.3. To formalize these notions, we show that every neural DAG automorphism ϕ of
a computation graph is a permutation parameter symmetry, in the sense that the induced parameter
permutation Φ does not change the neural network function. Figure 4 illustrates several neural DAG
automorphisms.
Proposition 1. For any neural DAG automorphism ϕ of a computation graph, the neural network
function is left unchanged: ∀x ∈ X , fθ (x) = fΦ(θ) (x).

A proof is given in Appendix C.4. Recall that our goal is to design metanets equivariant to parameter
permutation symmetries. Proposition 1 shows to achieve this it is necessary to design metanets that
are equivariant to neural DAG automorphisms. Graph metanets achieve this exactly since GNNs are
equivariant to permutation symmetries of graphs (Maron et al., 2019).
Proposition 2. Graph metanets are equivariant to parameter permutations induced by neural DAG
automorphisms.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


These results formally justify using graph metanets on computation graphs for equivariance to pa-
rameter permutation symmetries. Now, noting the parameters are stored as edge features in our
computation and parameter graphs, we design graph neural networks that operate on these DAGs.

2.3   F ORMULATING M ETANETS AS GNN S

After constructing the input graphs, we use a GNN as our metanet to learn representations and
perform downstream tasks. We desire GNNs that learn edge representations since the input neural
network parameters are placed on the edges of the constructed graph. While countless GNN variants
have been developed in the last several years (Hamilton, 2020), most learn node representations.
For simplicity, we mostly loosely follow the general framework of Battaglia et al. (2018), which
defines general message-passing GNNs that update node, edge, and global features. For a graph, let
vi ∈ Rdx be the feature of node i, e(i,j) ∈ Rde a feature of the directed edge (i, j), u ∈ Rdu be a
global feature associated to the entire graph, and let E be the set of edges in the graph. The directed
edge (i, j) represents an edge starting from j and ending at i. We allow multigraphs, where there
can be several edges (and hence several edge features) between a pair of nodes (i, j); thus, we let
E(i,j) denote the set of edge features associated with (i, j). Then, a general GNN layer updating
these features can be written as:
                                                                                     
                                              X
                     vi ← MLPv2 vi ,                  MLPv1 (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u), u             (1)
                                           j,e(i,j) ∈E(i,j)
                                 e
                  e(i,j) ← MLP (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)                                              (2)
                                                               !
                                     X            X
                      u ← MLPu             vi ,         e, u                                       (3)
                                       i          e∈E

Intuitively, node features are updated by message passing along neighbors (Equation 1), the features
of adjacent nodes update the features of the edges connecting them (Equation 2), and the global
feature u is updated with aggregations of all features (Equation 3). While our graphs are DAGs, we
are free to use undirected edges by ensuring that (i, j) ∈ E implies (j, i) ∈ E with e(i,j) = e(j,i) .
We often choose to allow message passing between layers in both directions.
For parameter-level metanet tasks with per-parameter predictions, we let the prediction be the fi-
nal feature e(i,j) of the parameter’s corresponding edge. We pool edge features for network-level
metanet tasks where a fixed-length vector is the final prediction for each graph. We can pool node
features but found pooling edge features sufficient. We do not use global features for empirical
results, but we find them crucial for the expressive power results of Proposition 3.

3     E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF G RAPH M ETANETS (GMN S )
Ideally, one does not sacrifice expressive power when restricting a neural architecture to satisfy
group equivariance constraints. We want our metanet architecture to be powerful enough to learn
useful functions of network parameters. To this end, we first show that GMNs can express two
existing equivariant metanets on MLP inputs. Consequently, GMNs are at least as expressive as
these approaches.
Proposition 3. On MLP inputs (where parameter graphs and computation graphs coincide), graph
metanets can express StatNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020) and NP-NFN (Zhou et al., 2023a).

The proof is given in Appendix D.1. StatNN is based on permutation-invariant statistics of each
weight or bias, which graph metanetworks can easily compute. The linear layers of NP-NFN consist
of local message-passing-like operations and global operations that the global feature can capture.
Second, we show that GMNs can simulate the forward pass of an input neural network repre-
sented by the DAG of its computation graph (Appendix C.1). This substantially generalizes a result
of Navon et al. (2023), who show that their DWSNets can simulate the forward pass of MLPs.
Proposition 4. On computation graph inputs, graph metanets can express the forward pass of any
input feedforward neural network as defined in Section C.1.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results for predicting the test accuracy of input neural networks trained on CIFAR-10.
The top results use a training set of 15 000 uniformly selected input networks, the middle results use
10% of this training set, and the bottom results only train on input networks of low hidden dimension
(while testing on networks with strictly higher hidden dimension). Our method performs best in all
setups, with increasing benefits in the low-data and OOD regimes.

                                                                            Varying CNNs                            Diverse Architectures
                                                                              2
                    Metanet                                               R              τ                            R2                 τ
                    DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017)                     .778±.002      .697±.002                   .562±.020         .559±.011
           50%



                    DMC (Eilertsen et al., 2020)                       .948±.009      .876±.003                   .957±.009         .883±.007
                    GMN (Ours)                                         .978±.002      .915±.006                   .975±.002         .908±.004
                    DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017)                     .692±.006      .648±.002                   .126±.015         .290±.010
           5%


                    DMC (Eilertsen et al., 2020)                       .816±.038      .762±.014                   .810±.046         .758±.013
                    GMN (Ours)                                         .876±.010      .797±.005                   .918±.002         .828±.005
                    DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017)                     .741±.015      .683±.005                   .128±.071         .380±.014
           OOD


                    DMC (Eilertsen et al., 2020)                       .387±.229      .760±.024                  −.134 ± .147       .566±.055
                    GMN (Ours)                                         .891±.037      .870±.010                   .768±.063         .780±.030


                            VaryingCNNs
                         Varying    CNNs                                   Diverse Architectures
                                                                         Diverse   Architectures                 DiverseDiverse Architectures Test
                                                                                                                          Architectures,
                                                   Train                                      Train 5                 CNN
                                                   Test                                       Test                    1D CNN
           3                                                      2                                 4                 DeepSets
 Density


                                                                                                                      ResNet
 Density


                                                        Density


                                                                                                   Density
           2                                                                                                 3        ViT

                                                                  1                                          2
           1
                                                                                                             1
           0                                                      0                                          0
               .1   .2    .3   .4   .5   .6   .7   .8      .9         .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                          CIFAR-10 Accuracy  CIFAR-10Accuracy
                                        CIFAR-10     Accuracy             CIFAR-10 Test Accuracy
Figure 5: Histograms of CIFAR-10 accuracies for our Varying CNNs and Diverse Architectures
datasets. Left and middle show train and test accuracy for the two datasets. Right shows test accu-
racy of Diverse Architectures split by model type.

The above result applies only to GMNs operating on computation graphs. This makes it directly
applicable to the parameter graphs for MLPs as they coincide with the computation graph. However,
we expect that a similar result is possible for more general parameter graphs. We leave formal proof
of this to future work.


4          E XPERIMENTS

4.1            P REDICTING ACCURACY FOR VARYING A RCHITECTURES

Task. As in prior works (Unterthiner et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023a), we train metanets to predict
the test accuracy of input neural networks. We consider image classification neural networks trained
on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009), and the metanet task is to take the parameters of an
input network and predict the network’s image classification accuracy on the CIFAR-10 test set.
Datasets. To demonstrate the flexibility of our graph metanets, we train image classifiers that signif-
icantly vary in size and architecture. For our “Varying CNNs” dataset, we train about 30 000 basic
2D CNNs varying in common architectural design choices like hidden dimension, number of convo-
lution layers, number of fully connected layers, and type of normalization layers (BatchNorm (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) or GroupNorm (Wu & He, 2018)).
For our “Diverse Architectures” dataset, we also train four other diverse image classifiers to test our
model’s generalization with multiple architectures: (i) basic 1D CNNs treating images as raster or-
dered sequences of pixels, (ii) DeepSets treating images as pixel sets, which maintains pixel position
information with positional encodings (Zaheer et al., 2017), (iii) ResNets (He et al., 2016), and (iv)
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). This dataset also totals about 30 000 networks. The
Vision Transformers’ patch embedding module can be viewed as a convolution, which is how we
encode this module as a graph (the Transformer layer graph encodings are described in Figure 7).


                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5 shows these trained networks span a wide range of accuracies, between 10% and 77.5%
for Varying CNNs and between 7.5% and 87.8% for Diverse Architectures. Also, the number of
parameters in these networks ranges from 970 to 21 165 in Varying CNNs and from 970 to 87 658 for
Diverse Architectures. These networks are significantly more diverse and achieve higher accuracy
than the dataset of Unterthiner et al. (2020), who train small CNNs of a fixed architecture that obtain
at most 56% test accuracy on CIFAR-10. Also, our Diverse Architectures dataset contains many
more network types and modules than the datasets of Eilertsen et al. (2020) and Schürholt et al.
(2022), which are limited to CNNs.
Metanetworks. For our graph metanet, we consider a simple message passing GNN as in Sec-
tion 2.3 that does not use a global graph feature. To obtain an invariant prediction, we mean-pool
over edge representations.
We cannot apply competing permutation equivariant methods like DWSNet (Navon et al., 2023) or
NFN (Zhou et al., 2023a), because they cannot process normalization layers, input neural networks
of different sizes, or modules like self-attention. Instead, as a baseline, we consider the Deep Meta
Classifier (DMC) from Eilertsen et al. (2020), which vectorizes an input network’s parameters and
processes it with a 1D CNN, allowing the use of differently sized networks. We also consider a
baseline that treats the parameters as a set and applies a DeepSets network (Zaheer et al., 2017) to
output a scalar prediction. Note that the DeepSets baseline is invariant to permutation parameter
symmetries, but it is also invariant to permutations that do not correspond to parameter symmetries
(which significantly outnumber permutation parameter symmetries), so it has low expressive power.
We evaluate our method and the two baselines across six different data settings. Using both the
Varying CNN dataset and the Diverse Architectures dataset. We explore training on about half of
the input networks, training on only 10% of this previous split, and an out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization setting where we train on a reduced set of architectures that have smaller hidden
dimension than the held-out architectures.
Results. See Table 1 for quantitative results and Figure 8 in the Appendix for scatterplots in the
OOD setting on Diverse Architectures. We report the R-Squared value and the Kendall τ coefficient
of the predicted generalization against the true generalization. Our GMNs outperform both baselines
in predicting accuracy for input networks across all six data settings. When we restrict to 10% of
the full training set size, we see that GMNs generalize substantially better than the baselines. This
performance gap is maintained in the more challenging OOD generalization setting, where the non-
equivariant DMC performs very poorly in R2 . The improved GMN performance could be from high
expressive power (which the DeepSets baseline lacks), with better generalization due to equivariance
to parameter permutation symmetries (which DMC lacks).


4.2   E DITING 2D INR S
Table 2: Test MSE (lower is better) for edit-         Table 3: Results for self-supervised learning of
ing 2D INRs, following the methodology of             neural net representations, in test MSE of a linear
(Zhou et al., 2023a). Results of baselines are        regressor on the learned representations. Num-
from (Zhou et al., 2023a;b).                          bers besides GMN from Navon et al. (2023).
 Metanetwork     Contrast        Dilate                        Metanetwork          Test MSE
 MLP             .031            .306                          MLP                  7.39 ±.19
 MLP-Aug         .029            .307                          MLP + Perm. aug      5.65 ±.01
 NFN-PT          .029            .197                          MLP + Alignment      4.47 ±.15
 NFN-HNP         .0204 ±.0000    .0706 ±.0005                  INR2Vec (Arch.)      3.86 ±.32
 NFN-NP          .0203 ±.0000    .0693 ±.0009                  Transformer          5.11 ±.12
 NFT             .0200 ±.0002    .0510 ±.0004                  DWSNets              1.39 ±.06
 GMN (ours)      .0197 ±.0000    .0603 ±.0010                  GMN (ours)           1.13 ±.08


Next, we empirically test the ability of GMNs to process simple MLP inputs to compare against
less-flexible permutation equivariant metanets such as NFN (Zhou et al., 2023a) and NFT (Zhou
et al., 2023b). For this, we train metanetworks on the 2D INR editing tasks of (Zhou et al., 2023a),
where the inputs are weights of an INR representing an image, and the outputs are weights of an
INR representing the image with some transformation applied to it.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2 shows our results. We see that our GMNs outperform most metanetworks on these simple
input networks. In particular, GMN outperforms all methods on the Contrast task, and is only beat
by NFT on the Dilate task.

4.3   S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING WITH INR S

We also compare GMNs against another less-flexible permutation equivariant metanet, DWS-
Nets (Navon et al., 2023), in the self-supervised learning experiments of Navon et al. (2023). Here,
the input data are MLPs fit to sinusoidal functions of the form x 7→ a sin(bx), where a, b ∈ R
are varying parameters. The goal is to learn a metanet encoder that gives strong representations of
input networks, using a contrastive-learning framework similar to SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020). Our
GMNs learn edge representations, which are then mean-pooled to get a vector representation of each
input network. The downstream task for evaluating these representations is fitting a linear model on
the metanet representations to predict the coefficients a and b of the sinusoid that the input MLP
represents.
Table 3 shows the results. GMNs outperform all baselines in this task. Thus, even in the most
advantageous setting for competitors, which they are restricted to, GMNs are empirically successful
at metanet tasks.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we proposed Graph Metanetworks, an approach to processing neural networks with
theoretical and empirical benefits. Theoretically, our approach satisfies permutation parameter sym-
metry equivariance while having provably high expressive power. Empirically, we can process di-
verse neural architectures, including layers that appear in state-of-the-art models, and we outperform
existing metanetwork baselines across all tasks that we evaluated.

Limitations We make substantial progress towards improving the scalability of GMNs by intro-
ducing parameter graphs. However, large neural networks can have billions of parameters and pro-
cessing them may be more difficult. We believe that standard scalable GNN methods can be used
to scale to the billion parameter regime (as existing GNNs are capable of processing graphs with
billions of edges (Hu et al., 2021) using modest computing resources), but we have not yet tried
to use Graph Metanets at such a scale. Additionally, we argue that parameter graphs are easier to
design than specialized architectures of prior work, but we do not give formal constraints on their
design. Further work investigating parameter graphs is promising; for instance, our theory of neural
DAG automorphisms depends on the more expensive computation graphs, but it could possibly be
extended to parameter graphs. Moreover, our approach only accounts for permutation-based pa-
rameter symmetries and does not account for e.g. symmetries induced by scaling weights in ReLU
networks (Dinh et al., 2017; Godfrey et al., 2022).

Future work Our graph-based approach to metanets is promising for future development. This pa-
per mostly uses a basic message-passing GNN architecture, which can be further improved using the
many GNN improvements in the literature. Furthermore, our theoretical developments largely apply
to computation graphs and we expect future work can extend these results to the more practical pa-
rameter graphs. Since graph metanets can process modern neural network layers like self-attention
and spatial INR feature grids, they can be used to process and analyze state-of-the-art neural net-
works. Further, future work could try applying graph metanets to difficult yet impactful metanets
tasks such as pruning, learned optimization, and finetuning pretrained models.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Matan Atzmon, Jiahui Huang, Karsten Kreis, Francis Williams, and Xiaohui Zeng for
helpful comments. We would also like to thank Jun Gao, Or Perel, and Frank Shen for helpful input
on some of our early INR experiments. DL is funded by an NSF Graduate Fellowship. HM is the
Robert J. Shillman Fellow, and is supported by the Israel Science Foundation through a personal
grant (ISF 264/23) and an equipment grant (ISF 532/23).


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Samuel Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models mod-
  ulo permutation symmetries. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CQsmMYmlP5T.
Bruno Andreis, Soro Bedionita, and Sung Ju Hwang. Set-based neural network encoding. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16625, 2023.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
  Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
  2018.
Matthias Bauer, Emilien Dupont, Andy Brock, Dan Rosenbaum, Jonathan Schwarz, and Hyunjik
 Kim. Spatial functa: Scaling functa to imagenet classification and generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2302.03130, 2023.
Léon Bottou and Patrick Gallinari. A framework for the cooperation of learning algorithms. Ad-
   vances in neural information processing systems, 3, 1990.
Adriano Cardace, Pierluigi Zama Ramirez, Francesco Ballerini, Allan Zhou, Samuele Salti,
  and Luigi Di Stefano. Neural processing of tri-plane hybrid neural fields. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.01140, 2023.
Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efficient geometry-aware
  3d generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16123–16133, 2022.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks
  with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
Cameron Diao and Ricky Loynd. Relational attention: Generalizing transformers for graph-
  structured tasks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Laurent Dinh, Razvan Pascanu, Samy Bengio, and Yoshua Bengio. Sharp minima can generalize
  for deep nets. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1019–1028. PMLR, 2017.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Emilien Dupont, Hyunjik Kim, SM Eslami, Danilo Rezende, and Dan Rosenbaum. From data to
  functa: Your data point is a function and you can treat it like one. International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Gabriel Eilertsen, Daniel Jönsson, Timo Ropinski, Jonas Unger, and Anders Ynnerman. Classifying
  the classifier: dissecting the weight space of neural networks. Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Rahim Entezari, Hanie Sedghi, Olga Saukh, and Behnam Neyshabur. The role of permutation in-
  variance in linear mode connectivity of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dNigytemkL.

                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziya Erkoç, Fangchang Ma, Qi Shan, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Hyperdiffusion: Generat-
  ing implicit neural fields with weight-space diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14300–14310, October 2023.
Jiřı́ Fiala and Jan Kratochvı́l. Locally constrained graph homomorphisms—structure, complexity,
    and applications. Computer Science Review, 2(2):97–111, 2008.
Marc Finzi, Max Welling, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. A practical method for constructing equiv-
 ariant multilayer perceptrons for arbitrary matrix groups. In International conference on machine
 learning, pp. 3318–3328. PMLR, 2021.
Cedric Gegout, Bernard Girau, and Fabrice Rossi. A mathematical model for feed-forward neural
  networks : theoretical description and parallel applications. Research Report LIP RR-1995-23,
  Laboratoire de l’informatique du parallélisme, September 1995. URL https://hal-lara.
  archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02101945.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Charles Godfrey, Davis Brown, Tegan Emerson, and Henry Kvinge. On the symmetries of deep
  learning models and their internal representations. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
  Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
William L Hamilton. Graph representation learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Robert Hecht-Nielsen. On the algebraic structure of feedforward network weight spaces. In Ad-
  vanced Neural Computers, pp. 129–135. Elsevier, 1990.
Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural networks, 4
  (2):251–257, 1991.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Hongyu Ren, Maho Nakata, Yuxiao Dong, and Jure Leskovec. Ogb-lsc:
 A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09430, 2021.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.
Jinwoo Kim, Saeyoon Oh, and Seunghoon Hong. Transformers generalize deepsets and can be
   extended to graphs & hypergraphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
   28016–28028, 2021.
Jinwoo Kim, Dat Nguyen, Seonwoo Min, Sungjun Cho, Moontae Lee, Honglak Lee, and Seunghoon
   Hong. Pure transformers are powerful graph learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 35:14582–14595, 2022a.
Jinwoo Kim, Saeyoon Oh, Sungjun Cho, and Seunghoon Hong. Equivariant hypergraph neural
   networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 86–103. Springer, 2022b.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Boris Knyazev, Michal Drozdzal, Graham W Taylor, and Adriana Romero Soriano. Parameter
  prediction for unseen deep architectures. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:29433–29448, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009. URL https:
  //www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Ffcv: Accelerating training by removing data bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12011–12020, 2023.

Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John Denker, Donnie Henderson, R. Howard, Wayne Hubbard,
  and Lawrence Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation network. In
  D. Touretzky (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 2. Morgan-
  Kaufmann, 1989. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  1989/file/53c3bce66e43be4f209556518c2fcb54-Paper.pdf.

Derek Lim, Joshua David Robinson, Lingxiao Zhao, Tess Smidt, Suvrit Sra, Haggai Maron, and
  Stefanie Jegelka. Sign and basis invariant networks for spectral graph representation learning. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Or Litany, Haggai Maron, David Acuna, Jan Kautz, Gal Chechik, and Sanja Fidler. Feder-
  ated learning with heterogeneous architectures using graph hypernetworks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.08459, 2022.

Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=S1eYHoC5FX.

Luca De Luigi, Adriano Cardace, Riccardo Spezialetti, Pierluigi Zama Ramirez, Samuele Salti, and
  Luigi di Stefano. Deep learning on implicit neural representations of shapes. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=OoOIW-3uadi.

Liheng Ma, Chen Lin, Derek Lim, Adriana Romero-Soriano, Puneet K Dokania, Mark Coates,
  Philip Torr, and Ser-Nam Lim. Graph inductive biases in transformers without message passing.
  In ICML, 2023.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=Syx72jC9tm.

Luke Metz, James Harrison, C Daniel Freeman, Amil Merchant, Lucas Beyer, James Bradbury,
  Naman Agrawal, Ben Poole, Igor Mordatch, Adam Roberts, et al. Velo: Training versatile learned
  optimizers by scaling up. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09760, 2022.

Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 41(4):1–15,
  2022.

Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Idan Achituve, Ethan Fetaya, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. Equiv-
  ariant architectures for learning in deep weight spaces. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.

William Peebles, Ilija Radosavovic, Tim Brooks, Alexei A Efros, and Jitendra Malik. Learning to
 learn with generative models of neural network checkpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12892,
 2022.

Ladislav Rampášek, Michael Galkin, Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Anh Tuan Luu, Guy Wolf, and Do-
  minique Beaini. Recipe for a general, powerful, scalable graph transformer. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:14501–14515, 2022.

Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Jeff Schneider, and Barnabas Poczos. Equivariance through parameter-
  sharing. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2892–2901. PMLR, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Konstantin Schürholt, Diyar Taskiran, Boris Knyazev, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Damian Borth.
  Model zoos: A dataset of diverse populations of neural network models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:38134–38148, 2022.
Towaki Takikawa, Joey Litalien, Kangxue Yin, Karsten Kreis, Charles Loop, Derek
  Nowrouzezahrai, Alec Jacobson, Morgan McGuire, and Sanja Fidler. Neural geometric level
  of detail: Real-time rendering with implicit 3D shapes. 2021.
Veronika Thost and Jie Chen. Directed acyclic graph neural networks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Thomas Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Sylvain Gelly, Olivier Bousquet, and Ilya Tolstikhin. Predict-
  ing neural network accuracy from weights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11448, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Clement Vignac, Igor Krawczuk, Antoine Siraudin, Bohan Wang, Volkan Cevher, and Pascal
  Frossard. Digress: Discrete denoising diffusion for graph generation. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=UaAD-Nu86WX.
Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), pp. 3–19, 2018.
Saining Xie, Alexander Kirillov, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Exploring randomly wired neural
  networks for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1284–1293, 2019.
Jiaxuan You, Jure Leskovec, Kaiming He, and Saining Xie. Graph structure of neural networks. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10881–10891. PMLR, 2020.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
David W. Zhang, Miltiadis Kofinas, Yan Zhang, Yunlu Chen, Gertjan J. Burghouts, and Cees G. M.
  Snoek. Neural networks are graphs! graph neural networks for equivariant processing of neural
  networks. In 2nd Annual Topology, Algebra, and Geometry in Machine Learning Workshop, 2023.
Muhan Zhang, Shali Jiang, Zhicheng Cui, Roman Garnett, and Yixin Chen. D-vae: A variational
 autoencoder for directed acyclic graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
 2019.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Kaylee Burns, Yiding Jiang, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter, and Chelsea
  Finn. Permutation equivariant neural functionals. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023a.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Yiding Jiang, Kaylee Burns, Winnie Xu, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter,
  and Chelsea Finn. Neural functional transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13546, 2023b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Table 4: Glossary and notation
                 MLP                                Multilayer Perceptron
                 CNN                           Convolutional Neural Network
                 GNN                               Graph Neural Network
                GMN                                 Graph Metanetwork
                  INR                          Implicit Neural Representation
          x, y, z, · · · ∈ R                               Scalars
         x, y, z, · · · ∈ Rn                               Vectors
       X, Y , Z, · · · ∈ Rn×m                             Matrices
            X , Y, Z, . . .                      The domain of x, y, z, . . .
        din , dx , de , du ∈ N   The size of the network input or node/edge/global features
               i, j ∈ N                              An index for edges
                 (i, j)                       A directed edge from index j to i
                   P                                A permutation matrix
                   W                        A weight matrix in a neural network
                    σ                      An element-wise nonlinearity function
          x ∈ X = Rdin                         The input for a neural network
                θ∈Θ                               The parameters of an NN
         fθ (x) : X → X ′             A function parameterized by an neural network
                θ̃ ∈ Θ                  A symmetry of θ, which induces the same f
                   V                                 The set of vertices
                   E                                  The set of edges
                    S                       Set of parameter-sharing constraints
          DAG = (V, E)                            A Directed Acyclic Graph
             ϕ:V →V                                  An automorphism
                e∈E                                       An edge
            ϕe : E → E                  The edge permutation for an automorphism
             Φ:Θ→Θ                  The network parameter permutation induced by ϕe
            e(i,j) ∈ Rde                    The features for the edge from i to j
              vi ∈ Rdx                             The features for a node
               u ∈ Rd u                               A global feature
             hθv (x) ∈ R                   Activation at node v for fθ on input x

A    R ELATED W ORK

Metanetworks. Recently, several works developed metanets equivariant to permutation parameter
symmetries of simple networks. DWSNets (Navon et al., 2023) and NFN (Zhou et al., 2023a) derive
the form of linear layers that are group-equivariant to permutation parameter symmetries of simple
MLPs (and NFN also handles CNNs). NFTs (Zhou et al., 2023b) use special parameter-permutation-
equivariant attention layers and layer-number features to build Transformer-like metanets.
Other types of metanets have been developed, including those based on statistics such as weight
mean and standard deviation (Unterthiner et al., 2020), 1D convolutional models on the flattened
weight vector (Eilertsen et al., 2020), hierarchical LSTMs and per-parameter MLPs (Metz et al.,
2022), and set functions applied to chunked parameter sets (Andreis et al., 2023).
Special metanets have also been developed to process implicit neural representations (INRs) repre-
senting shapes, images, or other types of continuous data (Dupont et al., 2022; Luigi et al., 2023;
Bauer et al., 2023). However, these approaches require special training procedures for the input neu-
ral networks and/or access to forward passes of the input network. In contrast, graph metanets can
process datasets of independently trained neural networks of diverse architectures without modify-
ing the inputs or requiring forward passes through the inputs, as we demonstrate in our experiments.
The recent work of Zhang et al. (2023) also proposes graph neural networks as metanets. They use
the computation graph construction of MLPs – not our general parameter graphs – which allows
us to scale efficiently for models with parameter sharing (like CNNs). Moreover, they adopt a
different graph construction for bias nodes, where our approach is inspired by expressive power
considerations from the form of the parameter-permutation-equivariant linear maps (Navon et al.,


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2023; Zhou et al., 2023a). Finally, Zhang et al. (2023) evaluate their method empirically on simple
networks, but they have limited theoretical guarantees and empirical results on other networks.
NNs as Graphs. Many works consider neural networks as graphs, including early works that aimed
at developing unified frameworks for neural networks (Bottou & Gallinari, 1990; Gegout et al.,
1995). The graph perspective has been used in several application areas, including: neural architec-
ture search (Liu et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019), analyzing relationships between graph structure and
performance (You et al., 2020), and federated learning with differing neural architectures (Litany
et al., 2022). Several works process neural networks in some graph representation (Zhang et al.,
2019; Thost & Chen, 2021; Knyazev et al., 2021; Litany et al., 2022), but these works generally
operate on a much coarser network representation (e.g. where a node can correspond to a whole
convolutional layer), whereas in our approach we desire each parameter to correspond to an edge.
GNNs and Edge Representations. There has been much work on graph neural networks (GNNs)
in recent years, leading to many variants that can be used in our framework (Hamilton, 2020). GNNs
learning edge representations instead of just node or whole-graph representations are particularly rel-
evant. These include message-passing-like architectures, architectures based on graph-permutation-
equivariant linear layers, and Transformers for graph data (Battaglia et al., 2018; Maron et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2021; 2022a;b; Diao & Loynd, 2023; Vignac et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023).


B    M ORE G RAPH C ONSTRUCTION D ETAILS

We implemented a procedure to automatically build the parameter graph given a PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2017) definition of a model that uses supported layers. Our approach converts all layers in the
network into their parameter subgraph representation and iteratively stitches the subgraphs together
to form the overall parameter graph.
This section details how we build the per-layer subgraphs we partially described in Section 2.1. We
also include additional examples in Figure 7, which we explain below.

Node and edge features For all subgraph constructions, we use node and edge features to improve
the expressive power of our GMNs. Some examples include layer index, neuron type (input neuron
index, output neuron index, or layer type), edge direction (when message-passing in an undirected
manner), and positional encodings (for parameters with associated spatial features, such as convo-
lutions or the spatial feature grids detailed below). In all cases except for the residual layers, edge
features always include the parameter value. All nodes and edges always include integer features for
the layer index and neuron type. Importantly, these added features are invariant under neural DAG
automorphisms, so adding them does not break the equivariance properties of our Graph Metanets.

Linear layers For each linear layer, we use node and edge features corresponding to the layer
index and the node/edge type. The latter is an integer value identifying that each node/edge is either
a linear weight or bias type.

Convolution layers For convolutions, we include additional edge features to identify each param-
eter’s spatial position in the filter kernel. We use integer coordinates appended to the other edge
features that indicate layer index and edge type. The node features include only the layer index and
node type.

Equivariant linear layers We can also handle general group-equivariant linear layers, of which
convolutions are a special case. The high-level idea is the same: each layer has a node for each
“channel”, and each node in the input layer is connected with db edges to each node in the output
layer, where db is the dimension of the space of equivariant linear maps.
More specifically, let the input space of the layer be Rn1 , the output space be Rn2 , and the symmetry
group be G. Suppose the group acts via representations ρ1 (g) ∈ GL(n1 ) on the input and ρ2 (g) ∈
GL(n2 ) on the output. Then the set of all G-equivariant linear maps, i.e. the set of linear maps
T : Rn1 → Rn2 such that T ◦ ρ1 (g) = ρ2 (g) ◦ T for all g ∈ G, forms a vector space of dimension
that we denote as db (Maron et al., 2019; Finzi et al., 2021). Let B1 , . . . , Bdb be a basis for the space


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of equivariant linear maps. Then a group equivariant linear layer takes the form
                                                  db
                                                  X
                                           x 7→         wi Bi x,                                     (4)
                                                  i=1

for some learnable weights wi ∈ R. These weights wi are the parameters of the layer.
As is often done in practice, this can be extended to mul-
tiple input or output feature dimensions (also called chan-
nels) as follows. We now let the input space be Rn1 ×d1
and the output space be Rn2 ×d2 , where d1 is the num-
ber of input channels and d2 the number of output chan-
nels. The group now acts independently on each chan-
nel: via representations ρ̃1 (g) = ρ1 (g) ⊗ Id1 ×d1 on the
input, and ρ̃2 (g) = ρ2 (g) ⊗ Id2 ×d2 on the output; e.g.
for an input matrix X ∈ Rn1 ×d1 , the action is given by
g · X = ρ1 (g)X. The basis of equivariant linear maps for
this space is now has db d1 d2 elements, and they take the
form Bi ⊗ Ejl , where i ∈ [db ], j ∈ [d2 ], and l ∈ [d1 ]. An
equivariant linear layer then takes the form                   Figure 6: Example of the graph con-
                                                               struction for a group-equivariant linear
                            db
                           X                                   map, for the specific case of the group
                    X 7→       Bi XW (i) ,                 (5) Sn of permutations acting on sets of n
                           i=1                                 elements in Rn×d (Zaheer et al., 2017).
where Wi ∈ R    d1 ×d2
                       are learnable weights. To construct a   There  are two types of equivariant linear
graph for this layer, we let the input layer have d1 nodes,    maps   for this case. The depicted linear
and the output layer have d2 nodes. For j ∈ [d2 ] and          layer maps   Rn×2 → Rn×3 .
l ∈ [d1 ], we connect input node l to input node j with dB
                                        (i)
edges. The ith edge has as weight Wj,l . Moreover, the ith edge has a feature denoting that it is part
of Bi — in convolutions this is an encoding of the spatial position of the parameter in the kernel.
As an example, consider the permutation equivariant DeepSets linear layer (Zaheer et al., 2017).
Here, the group G of permutations on n elements acts on Rn by permuting coordinates. There are
two G-equivariant linear maps from Rn → Rn , I and 11⊤ (so dB = 2). Thus, the equivariant linear
layer from Rn×d1 → Rn×d2 takes the form
                                    X 7→ XW (1) + 11⊤ XW (2) .                                       (6)
See Figure 6 for an illustration of how we encode this layer, as is used for our experiments in
Section 4.1.

Multi-head attention layers For multi-head attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), we can include the
head index as an additional node/edge feature for the relevant nodes and edges (though we do not
currently do this in our experiments of Section 4.1, where we only use 2-head attention layers).
Otherwise, we treat the edges as standard linear parameters.

Residual layers No parameters are associated with the edges for residual layers. Consequently,
the edge features do not include the parameter values (we replace them with a constant value of 1).
Otherwise, we include the layer index (for the starting layer) and an integer value identifying the
edge as a residual connection.

Normalization layers Similar to bias nodes, normalization layers such as BatchNorm (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015), LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016), and GroupNorm (Wu & He, 2018) can be represented
by two additional nodes corresponding to the learned mean and variance. Edges are drawn between
these nodes and the neurons to be normalized. The middle of Figure 7 depicts a normalization layer
with 3 neurons. We include the layer index and an integer value for both the node and edge features,
identifying them as either the mean/variance and which normalization layer they correspond to. The
different types of normalization layers are distinguished via node and edge features: for instance,
LayerNorm mean parameter nodes are given a different node label from BatchNorm mean parameter
nodes.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Additional examples of parameter subgraph constructions. We include linear layers in iso-
lation for completeness (left), an example of a normalization layer (middle), and a spatial parameter
grid (right).


Spatial parameter grids An increasingly common design pattern in Implicit Neural Representa-
tions (INRs) introduces a grid of parameters that are accessed according to input coordinates, such
as: triplanar grids (Chan et al., 2022), octrees (Takikawa et al., 2021), and hash grids (Müller et al.,
2022). A typical implementation of these parameter grids involves finding a set of features according
to the input coordinates and then using linear interpolation to combine the features. The resulting
feature vector is then fed into an MLP to decode the features of a target object.
We show a subgraph construction for a simple 2D parameter grid in the right of Figure 7. The 2D grid
contains only four entries at the corners of the domain, with two feature channels. We assume the
two feature vectors are bilinearly interpolated based on the input coordinates (X, Y ). The resulting
vector is concatenated with the input coordinates to produce a four-dimensional vector. In practice,
we can add positional encoding of the grid position to the edge features for each element of the
spatial parameter grid.
Note that the graph construction for the triplanar grid can largely be reused for dense voxel feature
grids, or hash grids (Müller et al., 2022). The same principles also apply to sparse feature grids,
for example, those using octrees (Takikawa et al., 2021). A recent work by Cardace et al. (2023)
develops a Transformer-based metanet for processing INRs with triplanar grid features.

B.1    C ODE FOR C ONSTRUCTING PARAMETER G RAPHS

We plan to release the code for constructing parameter graphs at a later date. Here, we outline some
basics about how the code works. The code takes as input a PyTorch sequential module, which
consists of several modules applied in sequence to some data. We iteratively build a graph, starting
from the first layer in the input. For each layer in the input (e.g. a linear layer), we convert the layer
to a subgraph, using the constructions outlined in Section 2.1 and Appendix B. We connect each of
each of these subgraphs to the graph that we are iteratively building, until we have done this for all
of the layers. We also have a way to invert this process, i.e. to go from parameter graph to neural
network module. This is useful for metanet applications where we wish to modify the weights of
an input neural network. To do this, we take an architecture specification and the edge weights of
a parameter graph, and we then iteratively build a PyTorch module of the correct architecture and
parameter values.


C     T HEORY: E QUIVARIANCE AND N EURAL G RAPH AUTOMORPHISMS

C.1    DAG S AND C OMPUTATION G RAPHS

Consider a DAG (V, E), with weights θ ∈ R|E| for each edge. We assume throughout that this
DAG is connected. We may also have parameter-sharing constraints (e.g. in the case of convolution
layers), which is a set S that partitions the edge set E, so that if edges (i1 , j1 ) and (i2 , j2 ) are in the
same equivalence class, then θ(i1 ,j1 ) = θ(i2 ,j2 ) . Further choose a nonlinearity σ : R → R. Let there
be din input nodes in a set Vin , dout output nodes in Vout , some number of bias nodes in Vbias , and
every other node in a set Vhidden . This defines a neural network function fθ : Rdin → Rdout with
computation graph given by the DAG. To define the function, for an input x ∈ Rdin we first define


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the activation of node i ∈ V to be a real value hθi (x) ∈ R, which is defined recursively as follows:
                                                                   i ∈ Vin
                                  
                                  xi
                                  
                                                                   i ∈ Vbias
                                  1
                                  
                        hθi (x) =      P
                                                            θ                                      (7)
                                  
                                   σ       (i,j)∈E θ(i,j) hj (x)  i ∈ Vhidden
                                  
                                  P                    θ
                                       (i,j)∈E θ(i,j) hj (x)       i ∈ Vout
Note that the activations are well-defined because the graph is a DAG. Here, we slightly abuse
notation and assume that nodes 1, . . . , din are the input nodes. Finally, the neural network function
is given by the values of the activations at the output nodes:
                             fθ (x) = [hθj1 (x), . . . , hθjdout (x)] ∈ Rdout .                    (8)
Where j1 , . . . , jdout ∈ Vout are the output nodes. In the main paper, we generally consider our more
efficient parameter graphs instead of computation graphs, since computation graphs may be much
larger in general due to parameter sharing, in which one parameter is associated with many edges.
Nonetheless, we study the theory of computation graphs here, as they are more closely related to the
neural network function fθ , and they can be defined unambiguously for feedforward neural networks
(whereas we make some choices in our definitions of parameter graphs). We discuss extensions of
our theoretical results to parameter networks in Appendix C.5.

C.2   N EURAL DAG AUTOMORPHISMS

We define an automorphism (of Neural DAGs) to be a bijection ϕ : V → V with the following three
properties:

      1. Edge preservation: (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) ∈ E if and only if (i, j) ∈ E.
      2. Node label preservation: input nodes, output nodes, and bias nodes are fixed points, mean-
         ing they are mapped to themselves.
      3. Weight sharing preservation: if θ(i1 ,j1 ) and θ(i2 ,j2 ) are constrained to be equal, then
         θ(ϕ(i1 ),ϕ(j1 )) and θ(ϕ(i2 ),ϕ(j2 )) are also constrained to be equal.

In particular, node label preservation means that if i and j are two distinct input, output, or bias
nodes, then ϕ(i) = i and ϕ(j) = j, and we cannot have ϕ(i) = j.

C.3   N EURAL DAG AUTOMORPHISMS G ENERALIZE K NOWN PARAMETER S YMMETRIES

This result shows that every hidden neuron permutation in an MLP is an automorphism, and also
that every automorphism of an MLP DAG takes this form.
Proposition 5. A permutation ϕ : V → V of an MLP DAG is a Neural DAG Automorphism if and
only if ϕ only permutes hidden neurons, and ϕ(i) is in the same layer as i for each hidden neuron i.

Proof. ( =⇒ ) Suppose ϕ is a Neural DAG Automorphism. Then because of the node label preser-
vation property, we know that ϕ maps each input neuron, output neuron, and bias neuron to itself,
meaning that ϕ only permutes hidden neurons. Moreover, since ϕ is a graph isomorphism, it does
not change path lengths: the maximum path length between i and j is the same as that between ϕ(i)
and ϕ(j). Hence, ϕ preserves layer number of each hidden neuron.
( ⇐= ) Suppose ϕ only permutes hidden neurons and preserves the layer of each hidden neuron. We
need only show edge preservation to show that ϕ is a Neural DAG Automorphism. If (i, j) ∈ E,
then we know that layer(j) = layer(i) − 1, so layer(ϕ(j)) = layer(ϕ(i)) − 1. As MLPs are fully
connected between adjacent layers, this means that (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) ∈ E. Analogously, if (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) ∈
E, then layer(j) = layer(i) − 1, so (i, j) ∈ E. We have thus showed edge preservation and are
done.

For this next proposition, we will analyze the symmetries of simple CNN parameter spaces. In
particular, we will assume the CNN only consists of convolutional layers (and no pooling, or
fully connected layers). Every neuron has a spatial position and a channel index. For instance,


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


input neurons in a 32 × 32 input with 3 channels are indexed by a spatial position (x, y) ∈
{1, . . . , 32} × {1, . . . , 32}, and a channel c ∈ {1, 2, 3}. We say that a permutation ϕ : V → V
permutes hidden channels if it only permutes hidden neurons, ϕ(i) has the same spatial position as
i, and channel(i) = channel(j) if and only if channel(ϕ(i)) = channel(ϕ(j)).
Here, we can show that any permutation of hidden channels that preserves neuron layers is a Neural
DAG Automorphism, though we do not show the converse. Nonetheless, this direction shows that
Neural DAG Automorphisms capture the known permutation parameter symmetries of CNNs, and
thus our Graph Metanetwork framework can handle these symmetries.
Proposition 6. Let ϕ : V → V be a permutation of a CNN computation graph that permutes hidden
channels and preserves neuron layers. Then ϕ is a Neural DAG Automorphism.



Proof. Suppose ϕ only permutes hidden channels and preserves the layer of each hidden neuron.
Then ϕ satisfies node label preservation, and also weight sharing preservation. Now, consider an
edge (i, j) ∈ E, so layer(j) = layer(i) − 1, and also the spatial positions of i and j fit within the
convolution filter of this layer. Since ϕ preserves layers, we have layer(j) = layer(i) − 1. Further,
since ϕ only permutes hidden channels, the spatial position of ϕ(i) is the same as i, and likewise
the spatial position of ϕ(j) is the same as j. Thus, (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) ∈ E. A similar argument show that
(ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) being in E implies that (i, j) ∈ E, so we are done.


C.4   N EURAL DAG AUTOMORPHISMS P RESERVE N ETWORK F UNCTIONS

Proposition 7. For any neural DAG automorphism ϕ of a computation graph, the neural network
function is left unchanged: ∀x ∈ X , fθ (x) = fΦ(θ) (x).



Proof. We will show a stronger statement: namely that the activations of the network with permuted
parameters are permuted version of the activations of the original network. In other words, we will
show that
                                                         Φ(θ)
                                         hθv (x) = hϕ(v) (x)                                       (9)

for all nodes v ∈ V . This is sufficient to show the proposition for the following reason. Let the
output nodes be j1 , . . . , jdout . Since a neural DAG automorphism ϕ maps each output node to itself,
if equation 9 holds, then

                                             Φ(θ)                Φ(θ)
                             fΦ(θ) (x) = [hj1       (x), . . . , hjd     (x)]                     (10)
                                                                   out
                                             Φ(θ)                 Φ(θ)
                                       = [hϕ(j1 ) (x), . . . , hϕ(jd            (x)]              (11)
                                                                        out )

                                       = [hθj1 (x), . . . , hθjdout (x)]                          (12)
                                       = fθ (x).                                                  (13)

The second line follows as ϕ leaves the output nodes unchanged. The third line follows from equa-
tion 9. Thus, it suffices to show equation 9. We proceed by induction on the layer number of v, i.e.
the maximum path distance from an input node to v.
For the base case, if v is an input node, then ϕ(v) = v, so

                                                                       Φ(θ)
                               hθv (x) = xv = hΦ(θ)
                                               v    (x) = hϕ(v) (x).                              (14)

Bias nodes always have activation 1, so this combined with the fact that automorphisms map bias
nodes to themselves show equation 9 for bias nodes.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, consider a hidden node i at layer l > 0, and suppose that equation 9 holds for all nodes of
lower layers. If i is a hidden node, then we have
                                                          
   Φ(θ)                                            Φ(θ)
                          X
  hϕ(i) (x) = σ                  Φ(θ)(ϕ(i),ϕ(j)) hϕ(j) (x)                                (15)
                   (ϕ(i),ϕ(j))∈E
                                                    
                                           Φ(θ)
                         X
            = σ                   θ(i,j) hϕ(j) (x)                      definition of Φ(θ)   (16)
                   (ϕ(i),ϕ(j))∈E
                                              
                         X
            = σ                   θ(i,j) hθj (x)                                 induction   (17)
                   (ϕ(i),ϕ(j))∈E
                                        
                     X
            = σ             θ(i,j) hθj (x)                 edge preservation property of ϕ   (18)
                   (i,j)∈E

            = hθi (x).                                                                         (19)
If i is an output node, then the same derivation holds without the nonlinearity σ. Thus, we have
shown equation 9, and we are done.

C.5   F ROM COMPUTATION GRAPHS TO PARAMETER GRAPHS

We conjecture that Proposition 1 can be extended to automorphisms over parameter graphs instead
of computation graphs. Here we discuss the formal intuition behind this conjecture.
To prove that the network function remains unchanged after an automorphism of the parameter
graph, we could show that any automorphism of the parameter graph corresponds to an automor-
phism of the computation graph. One way to do this is through a surjective homomorphism from
the computation graph to the parameter graph that is locally-injective (Fiala & Kratochvı́l, 2008).
This requires that each 1-neighbourhood in the computation graph is mapped injectively to a 1-
neighbourhood in the parameter graph.
Intuitively, this allows us to define an automorphism on the parameter graph and lift the automor-
phism to the computation graph through the preimage of the homomorphism. Concretely, we apply
the parameter graph automorphism to the computation graph by permuting the preimage sets for
each node in the parameter graph under the homomorphism.
Using this machinery, we expect that the proof of Proposition 1 can be extended to parameter graphs.
One point of difficulty is that our parameter graph construction allows for multigraphs — which are
valuable for succinct representations and also make it easier to stitch together subgraphs.

C.6   E QUIVARIANCE OF G RAPH M ETANETWORKS TO N EURAL DAG AUTOMORPHISMS

Here, we show that graph metanetworks are equivariant to architecture graph symmetries. In partic-
ular, consider an architecture graph G = (V, E). We also allow modifications to the graph, so that G
does not need to be the exact DAG of the computation graph; for instance, G can be the undirected
version of the computation graph. Consider a fixed ordering of the n nodes, and let X ∈ Rn×dx
be the input node features, and A ∈ Rn×n×de be the input edge features. For any permutation
η : V → V , we define the standard group action: η(X) ∈ Rn×dx is defined by η(X)η(i),k = Xi,k ,
and η(A) ∈ Rn×n×de is defined by η(A)η(i),η(j),k = Ai,j,k .
Consider a graph function that updates node features and edge features, say GNN : Rn×dx ×
Rn×n×de → Rn×dx × Rn×n×de . For inputs X and A, let GNN(X, A)X ∈ Rn×dx denote the
updated node features, and GNN(X, A)A ∈ Rn×n×de denote the updated edge features. We say
such a function is permutation equivariant if for all permutations η : [n] → [n], it holds that
                         GNN(η(X), η(A))X                 X
                                        η(i),k = GNN(X, A)i,k                                  (20)
                         GNN(η(X), η(A))A                      A
                                        η(i),η(j),k = GNN(X, A)i,j,k .                         (21)


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Graph neural networks have exactly this permutation equivariance (Maron et al., 2019). Thus, since
any architecture graph symmetry τ is a permutation [n] → [n], it holds that graph metanetworks are
equivariant to architecture graph symmetries. Thus, we restate our result:
Proposition 8. Graph metanets are equivariant to parameter permutations induced by neural DAG
automorphisms.
However, this would also seem to imply that graph metanetworks are equivariant to more permuta-
tions than just architecture graph symmetries, which would be undesirable because this would mean
reduced expressivity. The key to fixing this problem is via adding the additional node and edge
features described in Appendix B. Recall that we choose additional node and edge features, say
X̃ and Ã, that are invariant to neural DAG automorphisms. That is, ϕ(X̃) = X̃ and ϕ(Ã) = Ã
for any neural DAG automorphism ϕ. Also, we add these features in a fixed manner, so they do
not depend on the choice of node indices. Thus, the output node features of the Graph Metanet
on the original graph are GNN([X, X̃], [A, Ã])X , whereas after applying a permutation they are
GNN([η(X), X̃], [η(A), Ã])X . These outputs are in general not equal up to a permutation. How-
ever, when η is a neural DAG automorphism, they are equal, because
            GNN([ϕ(X), X̃], [ϕ(A), Ã])X
                                       η(i),k                                                    (22)
            = GNN([ϕ(X), ϕ(X̃)], [ϕ(A), ϕ(Ã)])X
                                               η(i),k                X̃, Ã invariant to ϕ       (23)
           = GNN([X, X̃], [A, Ã])Xi,k                               GNN equivariance.           (24)
The same argument holds for output edge features.

D     T HEORY: E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF G RAPH M ETANETWORKS
Representation vs. Approximation. In this Appendix section, we prove results on the expressive
power of Graph Metanets. For these results, there is some continuous target function ftarget that we
wish to approximate (either StatNN, NP-NFN, or forward passes through a neural network). In our
proofs, for ease of exposition we show that if we assume that the MLPs of our Graph Metanets can
be arbitrary continuous functions, then there is some Graph Metanet that is exactly ftarget .
However, MLPs cannot generally express every continuous function. Instead, MLPs are known to
be universal approximators of continuous functions (Hornik, 1991), meaning that for any continuous
ftarget with inputs from a compact domain, for every precision ϵ > 0 there is an MLP that is within
ϵ (in some function-space metric) to ftarget . We will call any function class with this property a
universal function class. If our metanets were just a single MLP, then it would be trivial to go from
an exact representation statement to an approximation statement. However, in general our metanets
are compositions of several MLPs and other operations.
Despite this discrepancy, we can appeal to standard techniques that have been used in recent works
in the study of expressive power of equivariant neural networks to show approximation results (Lim
et al., 2023; Navon et al., 2023). In particular, if a neural network architecture can be written as a
composition of functions fL ◦ · · · ◦ f1 , and each of the functions comes from a universal function
class, then the composition also forms a universal function class. Thus, one need only show that
each component can be approximated to show that an entire target function can be approximated.
This is captured in the following lemma, which is proved in Lim et al. (2023).
Lemma 1. Let X ⊆ Rd0 be compact, and let F1 , . . . , FL be families of continuous functions, where
Fi consists of functions from Rdi−1 → Rdi . Let F be the set of compositions of these functions, so
F = {fL ◦ · · · ◦ f1 : X → RdL , fi ∈ Fi }.
For each i, let F̃i be a family of continuous functions that universally approximates Fi . Then the
family of compositions F̃ = {f˜L ◦ · · · ◦ f˜1 : f˜i ∈ F̃i } universally approximates F.

D.1     P ROOF : S IMULATING E XISTING M ETANETWORKS

D.1.1    S IMULATING S TAT NN
In its most expressive form, StatNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020) computes statistics from each weight
and bias of an MLP or CNN input, and then applies an MLP on top of these statistics. The

                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


statistics considered by Unterthiner et al. (2020) are the mean, variance, and qth percentiles for
q ∈ {0, 25, 50, 75, 100}. These are all continuous permutation invariant functions of the input, i.e.
for any of these statistics s and flattened weight vector w (e.g. w = vec(W (l) ) for a weight matrix
W (l) or w = b(l) for a bias vector b(l) ), it holds that s(w) = s(P w) for any permutation matrix
P . This is the key to showing that Graph Metanets can express StatNN, since the global graph fea-
ture update can compute these permutation invariant functions, and then the final invariant layer can
apply an MLP on the global graph feature.
Proposition 9. Graph Metanetworks can express StatNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020) on MLP input
networks.

Proof. Let W (1) , . . . , W (L) be the weights and b(1) , . . . , b(L) the biases of an input MLP. Let s be a
continuous permutation invariant function with output in Rds , and let MLPStatNN : R2Lds → R be
the MLP of the StatNN, so
          StatNN(W (1) , . . . , W (L) , b(1) , . . . , b(L) ) = MLPStatNN (s(W (1) ), . . . , s(b(L) )).   (25)
We will show that a Graph Metanetwork can express this function. Let the edge features e(i,j) ∈ R3
be three dimensional, with the first dimension holding the parameter value, the second dimension
denoting the layer index, and the third dimension denoting whether the edge is associated to a weight
or bias parameter. We will not require node features for this proof. Thus, our Graph Metanetwork
will take the form
                                         e(i,j) ← MLPe (e(i,j) )                                            (26)
                                                                           !
                                                                   X
                                              u ← MLPu                     e ,                              (27)
                                                                   e∈E

and the result will be that u ∈ R will be the desired StatNN output.

  P s is a continuous permutation invariant function, it can be expressed in the form s(w) =
Since
ρ( i ϕ(wi )) for continuous functions ρ : Rdϕ → Rds and ϕ : R → Rdϕ (Zaheer et al., 2017). Let
MLPe : R3 → R2L×dϕ be given by
                 [MLPe (e(i,j) )]l,: = ϕ(e(i,j) ) · 1 [e(i,j) ]2 = l, [e(i,j) ]3 = weight

                                                                                           (28)
                    e        l+L,:
                                     = ϕ(e(i,j) ) · 1 [e(i,j) ] = l, [e(i,j) ] = bias
                                                               2               3

              [MLP (e(i,j) )]                                                              (29)
for l = 1, . . . , L. Here, [a]i is the ith entry of the vector a, [A]i,: denotes the ith entry of the matrix
A, and 1 is one if the condition is true and zero otherwise. Note that we write the output of MLPe
as a matrix to make indexing simpler, but it functionally is just a vector.
Then note that the input to MLPu is e∈E e, which is a matrix A ∈ R2L×dϕ that satisfies:
                                           P
                                                     X
                                            [A]l,: =     ϕ(vec(W (l) )i )                               (30)
                                                         i
                                                       X
                                           l+L,:
                                       [A]         =          ϕ(vec(b(l) )i ).                              (31)
                                                         i

Hence, we have that
                                               ρ([A]2l,: ) = s(W (l) )                                      (32)
                                                     2l+1,:          (l)
                                             ρ([A]            ) = s(b ).                                    (33)
Thus, we can let MLPu : R2L×dϕ → R be given by
                          MLPu (A) = MLPStatNN ρ([A]1,: ), . . . , ρ([A]2L,: )

                                                                                                            (34)
and we are done.

D.1.2    S IMULATING NP-NFN
Proposition 10. Graph Metanetworks can express NP-NFN (Zhou et al., 2023a) on MLP input
networks.


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. GNN Form. Here is the form of our GNN, where for simplicity of the proof, we move
the global graph feature update before the other updates and remove one of the node-update MLPs.
Note that the MLPu is inside the sum — this is important for our construction.
                                        X
                                              MLPu e(i,j) , u

                                u←                                                          (35)
                                         (i,j)∈E
                                            X
                                  vi ←                  MLPv (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)                    (36)
                                         j:(i,j)∈E
                                                e
                               e(i,j) ← MLP (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u).                                    (37)

Graph Form. We make the graph undirected by including the reverse edge for each edge in the
DAG and labelling these as backward edges. We assume the nodes and edges are endowed with
certain features at the start (the global graph feature u is initialized to 0). Each node has the features:
layer number and node type (input neuron number, output neuron number, hidden neuron, or bias
neuron number). Each edge has the features: weight value, layer number, weight type, whether it is
backward or not, and whether it is a weight or bias edge. Notably, each of these features is invariant
to neural graph automorphisms. The node and edge features belong to the following sets:

                                                            {0, . . . , L}
               vi ∈                                                                                     (38)
                       {in1 , . . . , indin , out1 , . . . , outdout , bias1 , . . . , biasL , hidden}
                                                     
                                      R
                               {1, . . . , L}
            e(i,j) ∈                                                                                   (39)
                                                     
                        {forward, backward}
                           {weight, bias}

Without biases. For illustration, we will first prove this result for the case when we are only pro-
cessing weights and no biases. First, we recall the form of the NP-NFN linear layer (Zhou et al.,
2023a). It takes MLP weights W ∈ W = RdL ×dL−1 × . . . × Rd1 ×d0 , and outputs new weight
                                                                                               (l)
representations H(W ) ∈ W. We let W (l) denote the weight matrix of the lth layer, and let Wi,j be
the (i, j)th entry of this matrix. Then, the NP-NFN linear layer takes the form:
                                       L
                                                    !
                              (l)               (s)          (l)            (l−1)
                                      X
                       H(W )i,j =         a1 W⋆,⋆ + al,l
                                            l,s
                                                        2 W⋆,j + a3
                                                                    l,l−1
                                                                          Wj,⋆                   (40)
                                      s=1
                                                  (l)                (l+1)            (l)
                                      + al,l       l,l+1
                                         4 Wi,⋆ + a5     W⋆,i                + al6 Wi,j ,              (41)

where we define W (0) = 0 and W (L+1) = 0 for the boundary cases of l = 1 and l = L. Here, the
a ∈ R are learnable scalars, and the ⋆ denotes a summation over all relevant indices. For instance,
                                (1)    Pn1      (1)     (1)   Pn1 Pn0          (1)
for W (1) ∈ Rn1 ×n0 , we have W⋆,k = i=1     Wi,k and W⋆,⋆ = i=1        j=1 Wi,j .

First, we use the global graph feature to compute the first summands. Let MLPu have an output
space of RL , and let

                                  [MLPu (e, u)]l = [e]1 · 1[[e]2 = l],                                 (42)

where [y]i ∈ R is the ith entry of the vector y, and 1 is one if the condition inside is true, and
zero otherwise. Since the first column of e holds the weight and the second column holds the layer
number, the global graph feature is updated as
                                      h                    i⊤
                                          (1)          (L)
                                 u ← W⋆,⋆      . . . W⋆,⋆     ∈ RL .                          (43)

Next, we consider the node feature updates. We define MLPv to have an output space of R2 , such
that
                   [MLPv (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)]1 = [e(i,j) ]1 · 1[[e(i,j) ]3 = backward]              (44)
                   [MLP (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)] = [e(i,j) ] · 1[[e(i,j) ] = forward].
                          v                   2                 1              3
                                                                                                       (45)


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For a node v that is the kth node in layer l (where the input nodes are at layer 0), the node update is
then given by:
                                         h                  i
                                              (l+1)     (l)
                                    v ← W⋆,k         Wk,⋆ ∈ R2 .                                  (46)

Finally, we define the edge update. We let MLPe have an output space of R, such that for any
forward edge (i, j) the update is (writing l = [e(i,j) ]2 for brevity):

         MLPe (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u) =                                                                           (47)
              L
              X
                     al,s  s   l,l    1   l,l−1
                      1 [u] + a2 [vj ] + a3     [vj ]2 + al,l    2   l,l+1
                                                          4 [vi ] + a5     [vi ]1 + al6 [e(i,j) ]1 .             (48)
               s=1

                                                                                                           (l)
By plugging in the above forms of u, vi , and vj (and noting that [e(i,j) ]1 = Wi,j ), we see that this
new edge representation is exactly the NP-NFN update, so we are done.
With biases. Recall the form of the NP-NFN linear layer where the input MLP also has biases:

                        H(W, b) = (W̃ , b̃)                                                                      (49)
                                       L
                                                           !
                               (l)                   (s)                  (l)                      (l−1)
                                       X
                            W̃i,j =          al,s
                                              1 W⋆,⋆           + al,l       l,l−1
                                                                  2 W⋆,j + a3     Wj,⋆                           (50)
                                       s=1
                                                   (l)                   (l+1)               (l)
                                         + al,l
                                            4 Wi,⋆ + a5
                                                        l,l+1
                                                              W⋆,i + al6 Wi,j                                    (51)
                                               L
                                                          !
                                                      (s)          (l)      (l−1)
                                             X
                                         +       al,s
                                                  7 b⋆      + al8 bi + al9 bj                                    (52)
                                             s=1
                                       L
                                                         !
                               (l)            (s)                         (l)                  (l+1)
                                       X
                             b̃j =       cl,s
                                          1 W⋆,⋆               + cl,l       l,l+1
                                                                  2 Wj,⋆ + c3     W⋆,j                           (53)
                                       s=1
                                             L
                                                                !
                                                    (s)                   (l)
                                             X
                                         +     cl,s
                                                4 b⋆                + cl5 bj                                     (54)
                                             s=1

Note that we define b(0) = 0, and once again define W (0) = 0 and W (L+1) = 0 for the boundary
cases.
We define the global model MLPu to have output in R2L , such that for l ∈ {1, . . . , L},

                      [MLPu (v, e, u)]l = [e]1 · 1 [e]2 = l, [e]4 = weight

                                                                                                                 (55)
                     [MLPu (e, u)]l+L = [e]1 · 1 [e]2 = l, [e]4 = bias ,

                                                                                                                 (56)

The global graph feature then takes the form
                           h                                                           i⊤
                                (1)          (L)                (1)              (L)
                      u ← W⋆,⋆       . . . W⋆,⋆                b⋆      ...      b⋆          ∈ R2L .              (57)


Next, we consider the node feature updates. We define MLPv to have an output space of R3 , such
that
     [MLPv (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)]1 = [e(i,j) ]1 · 1 [e(i,j) ]3 = backward, [e(i,j) ]4 = weight

                                                                                                  (58)
     [MLP (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)] = [e(i,j) ] · 1 [e(i,j) ] = forward, [e(i,j) ] = weight
          v                       2            1              3                   4

                                                                                                  (59)
     [MLP (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u)] = [e(i,j) ] · 1 [e(i,j) ] = forward, [e(i,j) ] = bias
          v                       3            1              3                   4

                                                                                                  (60)
For a non-bias node v that is the kth node in layer l, the node update is then given by:
                                      h                         i
                                         (l+1)       (l)    (l)
                                 v ← W⋆,k        Wk,⋆ bk ∈ R3 .                                                  (61)


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, we define the edge update. We let MLPe have an output space of R, such that for any
forward edge (i, j) the update is (writing l = [e(i,j) ]2 for brevity):

               MLPe (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u) =                                                       (62)
                 h                       i X L
                1 [e4(i,j) ] = weight          al,s  s   l,l    1   l,l−1
                                                1 [u] + a2 [vj ] + a3     [vj ]2                   (63)
                                           s=1

                                              + al,l    2   l,l+1
                                                 4 [vi ] + a5     [vi ]1 + al6 [e(i,j) ]1          (64)
                                                  L
                                                                                            !
                                                  X
                                              +     al,s
                                                     7 [u]
                                                          s+L
                                                              + al8 [vi ]3 + al9 [vj ]3            (65)
                                                  s=1
                                       L
                 +1 [e(i,j) ] = bias
                                       X
                             4
                                         cl,s  s   l,l    2   l,l+1
                                                                    [vj ]1

                                          1 [u] + c2 [vj ] + c3                                    (66)
                                           s=1
                                                L
                                                                                !
                                                X
                                              +   cl,s
                                                   4 [u]
                                                         s+L
                                                             + cl5 [e(i,j) ]1                      (67)
                                                  s=1

By plugging in the above forms of u, vi , and vj , we see that this new edge representation is exactly
the NP-NFN update, so we are done.

D.1.3    E XPRESSIVE P OWER WITH B IAS N ODES

Here, we explain how encoding biases in linear layers as bias nodes can aid expressive power (in the
simple case of MLPs). Intuitively, this is because the bias node allows for different bias parameters
of the same layer to communicate with each other in each layer of a message passing graph metanet,
whereas this is not as simple and requires at least two layers if biases are encoded as self-loops or
node features.
For a specific example, when the graph metanet does not use a global feature (as in our experiments),
then the bias node can allow message passing between biases within the same layer. In the NP-NFN
case covered in Appendix D.1.2, we see that the global feature allows message passing between
biases of any layer. When there is no global feature, letting vb(l) denote the bias node of the lth
layer, then our graph metanet can nonetheless update
                                                   dl
                                                       (l)  (l)
                                                   X
                                         vb(l) ←      bi = b⋆                                      (68)
                                                   i=1
                                                               (l)
                                      e(b(l) ,i) ← cvb(l) = cb⋆                                    (69)
for some scalar c ∈ R. This is one of the equivariant linear maps included in NP-NFN. On the
other hand, a graph metanet with no global feature cannot compute this in one layer if the biases are
encoded as self-loops or node features — this would require at least two layers.

D.2     P ROOF : S IMULATING F ORWARD PASSES

Proposition 11. On computation graph inputs, graph metanets can express the forward pass of any
input feedforward neural network as defined in Section 2.2.

Proof. We will prove this statement by showing that a graph metanet can compute the activations
hθv (x) for an input network fθ and input x. In particular, we will show that l layers of a graph
metanet can compute the activation hθv (x) for any node v with layer number at most l, where the
layer number is defined as the maximum path distance from any input node to v. We do this by
induction on l. For the base case, hθv (x) = xv for any input node v, so at depth zero of the graph
metanet the induction hypothesis is satisfied. Also, the activation for a bias node is always 1, which a
graph metanet can compute using a node-update MLP that outputs 1 for any node with the bias-node
label.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For a hidden node i with layer number l > 0, recall that we have (output nodes are handled simi-
larly):                                                         
                                             X
                               hθi (x) = σ        θ(i,j) hθj (x) .                        (70)
                                                  (i,j)∈E
     (l−1)
Let vi     denote the node feature computed for node i at depth l − 1 of the graph metanet. By
                    (l−1)
induction, we have vj     = hθj (x) for any node j in layer l − 1 or earlier. Recall the form of the
node update in a graph metanet layer:
                                                                                  
                                              X
                       vi ← MLPv2 vi ,               MLPv1 (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u), u             (71)
                                            (i,j)∈E

Let MLPv1 for depth l of the GNN be given by
                                MLPv1 (vi , vj , e(i,j) , u) = [e(i,j) ]1 vj ,                     (72)
and let MLPv2 for depth l be given by
                                       MLPv2 (vi , a, u) = σ(a).                                   (73)
Then the node update equation for the GNN is
                                                           
                                  (l)                 (l−1) 
                                            X
                                vi = σ       θ(i,j) vj                                            (74)
                                                 (i,j)∈E
                                                                       
                                                  X
                                        = σ               θ(i,j) hθj (x)                         (75)
                                                 (i,j)∈E

                                        = hθi (x).                                                 (76)
The same derivation holds for an output node i, replacing σ with the identity map. So, we are done
by induction.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
E.1     P REDICTING ACCURACY

E.1.1    C LASSIFIER T RAINING D ETAILS
For the predicting accuracy experiments, we train two datasets of about 30 000 CIFAR-10 im-
age classification neural networks each. We use the Fast Forward Computer Vision (FFCV) li-
brary (Leclerc et al., 2023) for fast training and build off their template training setup for CIFAR-10.
We use random horizontal flips, random translations, and Cutout (DeVries & Taylor, 2017) as data
augmentation. The learning rate schedule has a linear warmup and then a linear decay to zero. All
the other hyperparameters are given in Table 5; we sample many of the hyperparameters for each
neural network. For the Diverse Architectures dataset, we train about 6000 of each of the 5 types of
networks, while for the Varying CNNs dataset we train about 30 000 of the 2D-CNNs.

E.1.2    M ETANETWORK T RAINING D ETAILS
Data splits. For the 50% training data experiment, we take a random split of 15 000 training
networks, and for the 5% training data experiment we take a random split of 1500 training networks.
Then 2000 random networks are selected for validation, and the rest are for testing.
For the OOD experiments, we only train and validate on networks of the lowest hidden dimension
of each architecture. This means that we only train and validate on CNNs (both 2D and 1D) of
hidden dimension 24, DeepSets of hidden dimension 32, ResNets of hidden dimension 16, and ViTs
of hidden dimension 32. 2000 of these shallower networks are chosen for validation, and the rest for
training. Then we test on all networks with higher hidden dimension.


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Hyperparameters for the CIFAR-10 image classifiers that we trained for the predicting
accuracy experiments in Section 4.1.
            Model       Hyperparameter                          Distribution / Choice
            All         Learning rate                            10−Uniform(1,3)
                        Weight decay                             10−Uniform(2,5)
                        Label smoothing                          Uniform(0, .2)
                        Optimizer               Uniform({SGD, Adam, RMSprop})
            CNN (2D)    Hidden dimension                     Uniform({24, 28, 32})
                        # Convolution layers                    Uniform({1, 2, 3})
                        # Linear layers                           Uniform({1, 2})
                        Normalization type     Uniform({BatchNorm, GroupNorm})
                        Dropout                                    Uniform(0, .25)
                        Kernel size                                              3
            CNN (1D)    Hidden dimension                     Uniform({24, 28, 32})
                        # Convolution layers                    Uniform({1, 2, 3})
                        # Linear layers                           Uniform({1, 2})
                        Normalization type     Uniform({BatchNorm, GroupNorm})
                        Dropout                                    Uniform(0, .25)
                        Kernel size                                              9
            DeepSets    Hidden dimension                       Uniform({32, 64})
                        # Equivariant layers                   Uniform({2, 3, 4})
                        # Linear layers                          Uniform({1, 2})
                        Normalization type     Uniform({BatchNorm, GroupNorm})
                        Dropout                                  Uniform(0, .25)
            ResNet      Hidden dimension                         Uniform({16, 32})
                        # Blocks                                 Uniform({2, 3, 4})
                        # Linear layers                                           1
                        Normalization type                             BatchNorm
                        Dropout                                                   0
            ViT         Hidden dimension                         Uniform({32, 48})
                        # Transformer blocks                      Uniform({2, 3})
                        # Linear layers                                          1
                        Normalization type                             LayerNorm
                        Dropout                                    Uniform(0, .25)


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Additional results for predicting accuracy on the dataset of small CNNs from Unterthiner
et al. (2020). We see that GMNs outperform all metanetworks. Here, we use the Graph Transformer
GRIT (Ma et al., 2023) as our graph learning model for GMN, as we find it performs better than the
message passing models that we tried.
                                 Metanetwork             Test τ
                                 NFN-HNP               .934±.001
                                 NFN-NP                .922±.001
                                 StatNN                .915±.002
                                 NFT                   .926±.001
                                 GMN (ours)            .938±.000


Figure 8: Scatterplots of actual test accuracies (x-axis) and metanetwork-predicted test accuracies
(y-axis) for image classifiers from the Diverse Architectures dataset with the OOD train/test split.
Top row shows validation split input networks, and bottom row shows test split input networks.


Metanetworks. For each metanet, we first choose hyperparameters such that the total num-
ber of trainable parameters is around 750 000.            Then we search learning rates α ∈
{.0001, .0005, .001, .005, .01}, and choose the learning rate that achieves the best validation R2 .
Finally, we train the model using this best learning rate with 5 random seeds and report the mean
and standard deviation of the test set R2 and Kendall τ values.
We train all metanets with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014). The training loss is a binary
cross entropy loss between the predicted and true accuracy; each metanet has a sigmoid nonlinearity
at the end to ensure that its input is within [0, 1].

Small CNN Experiments To compare against previously proposed metanetworks, we also run
experiments on predicting accuracy of the small CNNs trained by Unterthiner et al. (2020), following
the experimental setup of Zhou et al. (2023a). Results are given in Table E.1.2. We see that our
GMNs outperform all other metanetworks. We use GRIT (Ma et al., 2023) as our graph learning
model, which is a type of Graph Transformer. Our GRIT model has 3 652 865 parameters, uses a
hidden dimension of 256, has 4 layers, is trained with a learning rate of 3e-4, and uses 16 heads in
its attention modules.

E.2   E DITING 2D INR S D ETAILS

We closely follow the experimental setup of Zhou et al. (2023a) for the experiments in Section 4.2.
As in their work, we train the metanets for 50 000 iterations with a batch size of 32, using the Adam
optimizer with .001 learning rate. We follow their setup to parameterize the updated weights θ̃ as


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


θ̃ = θ + γ · Metanet(θ), where θ are the parameters of the INR representing the unedited image,
and γ are learned scalars for each parameter that are initialized to .01. Our message passing GNN
metanetworks have 8 945 671 parameters, hidden dimension of 512, and 4 message passing layers.

E.3   S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING WITH INR S DETAILS

We closely follow the experimental setup of Navon et al. (2023) for the self-supervised learning
task. In particular, as they do in their experiments, we choose hyperparameters for our graph metanet
such that the number of trainable metanetwork parameters is about 100 000. Thus, we use a graph
metanetwork with 3 GNN layers and a hidden dimension of 76.
We follow the same training procedure as Navon et al. (2023), which uses a contrastive objective
with data augmentations given by adding Gaussian noise to the weights and masking weights to
zero. As in Navon et al. (2023), we evaluate our metanet on three random seeds, and report the
mean and standard deviation across these three runs.


                                                 29
