Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F REE N OISE : T UNING -F REE L ONGER V IDEO
D IFFUSION VIA N OISE R ESCHEDULING
 Haonan Qiu1 , Menghan Xia∗2 , Yong Zhang2 ,
 Yingqing He2,3 , Xintao Wang2 , Ying Shan2 , Ziwei Liu∗1
 1
   Nanyang Technological University
 2
   Tencent AI Lab
 3
   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology



                                                A BSTRACT
             With the availability of large-scale video datasets and the advances of diffusion
             models, text-driven video generation has achieved substantial progress. How-
             ever, existing video generation models are typically trained on a limited number
             of frames, resulting in the inability to generate high-fidelity long videos during in-
             ference. Furthermore, these models only support single-text conditions, whereas
             real-life scenarios often require multi-text conditions as the video content changes
             over time. To tackle these challenges, this study explores the potential of extend-
             ing the text-driven capability to generate longer videos conditioned on multiple
             texts. 1) We first analyze the impact of initial noise in video diffusion models.
             Then building upon the observation of noise, we propose FreeNoise, a tuning-free
             and time-efficient paradigm to enhance the generative capabilities of pretrained
             video diffusion models while preserving content consistency. Specifically, instead
             of initializing noises for all frames, we reschedule a sequence of noises for long-
             range correlation and perform temporal attention over them by window-based fu-
             sion. 2) Additionally, we design a novel motion injection method to support the
             generation of videos conditioned on multiple text prompts. Extensive experiments
             validate the superiority of our paradigm in extending the generative capabilities of
             video diffusion models. It is noteworthy that compared with the previous best-
             performing method which brought about 255% extra time cost, our method incurs
             only negligible time cost of approximately 17%. Generated video samples are
             available at our website: http://haonanqiu.com/projects/FreeNoise.html.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models bring breakthrough developments in image generation (Rombach et al., 2022), en-
abling users without any art background to easily create unique and personalized designs, graphics,
and illustrations based on specific textual descriptions. Building upon this success, there is a grow-
ing interest in extending this concept to video generation (He et al., 2022; Ge et al., 2023; Blattmann
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c; Luo et al., 2023). As targeting for modeling higher dimensional
data, video diffusion model demands a notably increased requirement in model capacity and data
scale. As a result, current video diffusion models are generally trained on a small number of frames.
Consequently, during the inference stage, the quality of the generated video tends to decrease as the
length of the video increases due to longer videos are not supervised during the training stage. One
straightforward approach is to generate video fragments of the same length as the training videos
and then stitch them together, eliminating the training-inference gap. However, this method results
in disconnected and incoherent fragments. To address this issue, the fragments can be fused during
the denoising process and smoothly connected in the final video (Wang et al., 2023a). However,
the long-distance fragments often have a large content gap to fuse and thus it struggles to maintain
the content consistency in the long video. Although some auto-regressive-based methods (Villegas
et al., 2022) get rid of this problem by progressively generating the next frame, content consistency
is still hard to guarantee due to the error accumulation.
     ∗
         Corresponding Authors


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In VideoLDM(Blattmann et al., 2023), the generated frame depends not only on the initial noise for
the current frame but also on the initial noises for all frames. This means that resampling the noise
of any frame will significantly influence other frames due to the full interaction facilitated by the
temporal attention layers. This makes it challenging to introduce new content while maintaining the
main subjects and scenes of the original video. To address this challenge, we inspect the tempo-
ral modeling mechanism of VideoLDM, where the temporal attention module is order-independent,
whereas the temporal convolution module is order-dependent. Our experimental observation indi-
cates that the per-frame noises serve as a foundation for determining the overall appearance, while
their temporal order influences the content built upon that foundation. Motivated by this, we pro-
pose FreeNoise, a tuning-free and time-efficient paradigm to achieve longer video inference. The
key idea is to construct a sequence of noise frames with long-range correlation and perform tem-
poral attention over them by the way of window-based fusion. It mainly contains two key designs:
Local Noise Shuffling and Window Based Attention Fusion. By applying the local noise shuffling
to a sequence of fixed random noise frames for length extension, we achieve a sequence of noise
frames with both internal randomness and long-range correlation. Meanwhile, the window-based
attention fusion enables the pre-trained temporal attention modules to process frames of any longer
length. Particularly, the overlapped window slicing and merging operation only happens in temporal
attention while introducing no computation overhead to other modules of the VideoLDM, which
benefits the computational efficiency significantly.
In addition, most video generation models (Blattmann et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023)
only utilize a single-text condition to control the video even when multi-text conditions are given.
For instance, the sentence “A man sleeps on the desk and then reads the book” which contains
two stages but only one condition will be reflected in the generated video. This limitation arises
from the fact that the training dataset usually contains only a single-text condition. However, in
a single-shot scene, the main subject usually involves multiple actions. To address the challenge
of generating videos based on multiple prompts without tuning the pretrained models, we propose
Motion Injection. This approach leverages the characteristics of diffusion models, where different
time steps recover varying levels of information (image layout, shapes of the objects, and fine visual
details) during the denoising process (Patashnik et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). It gradually injects
new motion during the time steps associated with object shapes, following the completion of the
previous motion. Importantly, this design does not introduce any additional inference time.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) We investigate the temporal modeling mechanism
of video diffusion models and identify the influence of initial noises. 2) We design a tuning-free
paradigm for longer video generation, which outperforms existing state-of-the-art notably in both
video quality and computational efficiency. 3) We propose an effective motion injection approach
that achieves multi-prompt long video generation with decent visual coherence.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   V IDEO D IFFUSION M ODELS

Latent Diffusion Models (LDM). Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020)
are generative models that formulate a fixed forward diffusion process to gradually add noise to the
data x0 ∼ p(x0 ) and learn a denoising model to reverse this process. The forward process contains
T timesteps, which gradually add noise to the data sample x0 to yield xt through a parameterization
trick:
                             p                                              √
       q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),      q(xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I) (1)
                                                                     Qt
where βt is a predefined variance schedule, t is the timestep, ᾱt = i=1 αi , and αt = 1 − βt . The
reverse denoising process obtains less noisy data xt−1 from the noisy input xt at each timestep:
                         pθ (xt−1 | xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t) , Σθ (xt , t)) .                   (2)

Here µθ and Σθ are determined through a noise prediction network ϵθ (xt , t), which is supervised
by the following objective function, where ϵ is sampled ground truth noise and θ is the learnable
network parameters.
                                                                2
                                  min Et,x0 ,ϵ ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)∥2 ,                           (3)
                                      θ


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Once the model is trained, we can synthesize a data x0 from random noise xT by sampling xt
iteratively. Recently, to ease the modeling complexity of high dimensional data like images, Latent
Diffusion Model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) is proposed to formulate the diffusion and denoising
process in a learned low-dimensional latent space. It is realized through perceptual compression with
                                                                                            ′   ′
an autoencoder, where an encoder E maps x0 ∈ R3×H×W to its latent code z0 ∈ R4×H ×W and
a decoder D reconstructs the image x0 from the z0 . Then, the diffusion model θ operates on the
image latent variables to predict the noise ϵ̂.
                        z0 = E (x0 ) , xˆ0 = D (z0 ) ≈ x0 , ϵ̂ = ϵθ (zt , y, t),                  (4)
The network is a sequence of the following layers, where h represents the hidden feature in a certain
layer and y denotes conditions like text prompts. Conv and ST are residual convolutional block and
spatial transformer, respectively.
          h′ = ST(Conv(h, t), y), ST = Projin ◦ (Attnself ◦ Attncross ◦ MLP) ◦ Projout ,          (5)
Video Latent Diffusion Model (VideoLDM) (Blattmann et al., 2023) extends LDM to video gen-
                                                                                      ′  ′
eration and trains a video diffusion model in video latent space. The z0 ∈ R4×N ×H ×W becomes 4
dimensions, and θ consequently becomes temporal-aware architecture consisting of basic layers as
the following equation, where Tconv denotes temporal convolutional block and TT denotes temporal
transformers, serving as cross-frame operation modules.
h′ = TT(ST(Tconv(Conv(h, t)), y)), TT = Projin ◦ (Attntemp ◦ Attntemp ◦ MLP) ◦ Projout .
                                                                                                  (6)
Following the same architecture, some similar text-to-video models have been proposed (Blattmann
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b), primarily differing in training strategies or auxiliary designs (such
as fps conditioning, image-video joint training, etc.). AlignYourLatent (Blattmann et al., 2023) is
designed to train only the temporal blocks based on a pre-trained text-to-image model (i.e., Stable
Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022)). In contrast, ModelScope (Wang et al., 2023b) is proposed
for fully training the entire model with a SD checkpoint pre-loaded.

2.2   L ONG VIDEO GENERATION .

Generating long videos poses challenges due to the increased complexity introduced by the temporal
dimension, resource limitations, and the need to maintain content consistency. Many GAN-based
methods (Skorokhodov et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2022; Ge et al., 2022) and diffusion-based meth-
ods (Harvey et al., 2022; Voleti et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023; He et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023; Ho et al.,
2022) are proposed to generate long videos. Despite their advantages, those approaches necessitate
extensive training on large long video datasets. Recently, a tuning-free method, Gen-L-Video (Wang
et al., 2023a) is proposed and successfully extends the video smoothly by merging some overlapping
sub-segments into a smoothly changing long segment during the denoising process. However, their
content consistency lacks preservation due to the large content gap among those sub-segments. Ben-
efiting from the design of noise rescheduling, our paradigm FreeNoise preserves content consistency
well in the generated long videos. Meanwhile, Gen-L-Video costs around 255% extra inference time
while FreeNoise only costs 17% additional inference time approximately. Another demand in long
video generation is multi-prompt control, as a single-text condition is often insufficient to describe
content that evolves over time. While some recent works (Yin et al., 2023; He et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023a) have explored this direction, they introduce a new lens when a new prompt is provided.
Phenaki (Villegas et al., 2022) utilizes an auto-regressive structure to generate one-shot long videos
under multi-text conditions but suffers from noticeable content variation. In our paradigm, we can
generate multiple motions while preserving the main subjects and scenarios.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
Given a VideoLDM pre-trained on videos with a fixed number of Ntrain frames, our goal is to gen-
erate longer videos (e.g., M frames where M > Ntrain ) without compromising quality by utilizing
it for inference. We require the generated M video frames to be semantically accurate and tempo-
rally coherent. In the following sections, we will first study the temporal modeling mechanism that
challenges VideoLDM in generating longer videos. Subsequently, we will introduce our efficient,
tuning-free approach to overcome these challenges. To further accommodate multi-prompt settings,
we propose a motion injection paradigm to ensure visual consistency.


                                                     3
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Inference with !!                                (b) Inference with [!! , !" ]


               (c) Inference with !"               (d) Sliding window inference with [!! , !" ]
       Figure 1: Challenges of longer video inference. The random noises ϵ1 and ϵ2 have the same number
       of frames as the model was trained on. All the results are generated under the same text prompt: “a
       man is boating on a lake”.

       3.1   O BSERVATION AND A NALYSIS

       Attentive-Scope Sensitivity. For longer video generation via VideoLDM, a straightforward so-
       lution is to feed M frames of random noises to the model for video generation through iterative
       denoising steps. Unfortunately, it fails to generate desired result, as the example illustrated in Fig-
       ure 1(b). The reason is easy to understand: the temporal attention modules perform global cross-
       frame operations that make all frames attentive to each other, however they are strictly trained to
       attend on Ntrain neighbor frames and struggle to handle more frames properly. In this case, the
       generated videos tend to cause semantic incompleteness or temporal jittering.

       Noise-Induced Temporal Drift. To bypass
                                                             w/o Tconv
w/o Tconv


       the issue above, one may argue to employ
       temporal sliding windows so that the tem-
       poral attention module can always process a
       fixed number of frames. Indeed, this solution
       makes desired content with a smooth tempo-
w Tconv


                                                             w Tconv


       ral transition. However, it struggles to main-
       tain the long-range visual consistency, as ex-
       ampled in Figure 1(d). To identify the under-
       lying(a)causes,
                Inference
                        wewith  initialthe
                            explore      noise       𝝐
                                               framesmodel-
                                           temporal             (a) Inference with initial noise frames 𝝐
       ing mechanism that consists of two kinds of
                                                             w/o Tconv
w/o Tconv


       cross-frame operations: temporal attention and
       temporal convolution. Temporal attention is
       order-independent, whereas temporal convolu-
       tion is order-dependent. When temporal con-
w Tconv


                                                             w Tconv


       volutions are removed, the output video frames
       hold a strict correspondence with the initial
       noise frames, irrespective of shuffling. In con-
       trast, depending    on the
                  (b) Inference     noise
                                 with       frame order, the
                                        shuffle(𝝐                     (b) Inference with shuffle(𝝐
       temporal convolution introduces new content to
       ensure the output video’s temporal continuity. Figure 2: Case study on temporal modeling. For
       Figure 2 demonstrates such a phenomena. It the ’w/o Tconv’ results in (a) and (b), the frames
       implies the conjecture that the per-frame noises corresponding to the same initial noise are marked
       serve as a foundation for determining the over- with bottom lines of the same color.
       all appearance, while their temporal order influences the content built upon that foundation. So, it
       is challenging for the temporal modules to achieve global coherence when independently sampled
       noises are combined for longer video generation.

       3.2   N OISE R ESCHEDULING FOR L ONG -R ANGE C ORRELATION

       To circumvent the challenges mentioned above, we propose a noise rescheduling paradigm for
       longer video inference. The key idea is to construct a sequence of noise frames with long-range
       correlation and perform temporal attention over them by the way of window based fusion. To gain
       semantically meaningful and visually smooth videos, the model inference should satisfy two basic


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Noise Rescheduling                                         Iterative Denoising
                                                         Denoising U-Net


                                                                                                                   Decoder
             Extending
                                                     Spatial CA        Temp SA

 Noise (𝑁𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 frames)         𝐳𝑇                                                        𝐳 𝑇−1           𝐳0
       𝑃1                             𝑃1                          𝑃2

 𝑙 ≤ 𝐿 and (𝑡 ≤ 𝑇𝛼 or 𝑡 ≥ 𝑇𝛽 ) 𝑙 > 𝐿 or (𝑇𝛼 < 𝑡 < 𝑇𝛽 )
       Multi-prompt based motion injection paradigm                        Sliding window based attention fusion
Figure 3: Overview of our proposed method. Given Ntrain frame of random noise, we first extend
it to the target M frames as the initial noise zT through noise rescheduling. Then, in the iterative
denoising process, the multi-prompt injection paradigm is conducted in the spatial cross-attention
layers (where t denotes timestep, l denotes layer number, P denotes text prompt) and the sliding
window based attention fusion is performed in temporal self-attention layers.

requirements: (i) the temporal attention only accepts fixed Ntrain frames, to bypass the attentive-
scope sensitivity issue; (ii) every Ntrain frames of features fed to the temporal attention always
correspond to Ntrain frames of independent and identically distributed noises, otherwise the gener-
ation fails because of the out-of-distribution input. Specifically, we propose two effective designs to
achieve this goal.

Local Noise Shuffle Unit. To acquire a video with M frames (M > Ntrain ), we initialize Ntrain
frames of random noise [ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ..., ϵNtrain ] independently and reschedule them for the remaining
length:
            [ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ..., ϵNtrain , shuffle(ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ..., ϵS ), ..., shuffle(ϵS̄(i+1) , ϵS̄(i+2) , ..., ϵS̄(i+S) ), ...],   (7)
where S denotes the size of the local shuffle unit and is a divisor of Ntrain . S̄i = i mod Ntrain ,
and i is the frame index. The operator shuffle(·) denotes shuffling the order of the frame sequence.
Through such a rescheduling strategy, we achieve a sequence of noise frames with both internal
randomness and long-range correlation. Note that, the randomness introduced by temporal shuffle
has considerable capacity to bring about content variation, as evidenced by Figure 2.

Window based Attention Fusion. Given longer initial noise frames, the spatial modules of Vide-
oLDM process them frame-wisely and the temporal convolution processes the frames in a sliding
window, which is the same case as they were trained. Differently, the temporal attention is per-
formed in a global manner and frames longer than Ntrain triggers attentive-scope sensitivity. So,
we need to deal with the computation of temporal attention so that it can process the longer sequence
in the same way as it was trained. Specifically, instead of calculating the temporal attention over all
frames, we only calculate temporal attention within each local sliding window of size U = Ntrain :
                                                                                    !
                                                                                T
          j                                                           Q i:i+U K
         Fi:i+U = Attntemp (Qi:i+U , Ki:i+U , Vi:i+U ) = Softmax            √ i:i+U Vi:i+U ,       (8)
                                                                              d
where i is the frame index and j is the window index. Here, we take the sliding stride as the same
value as S (the size of noise shuffle unit), so that each sliding window just covers Ntrain frames
of independent and identically distributed noises, i.e. {ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ..., ϵNtrain } with a shuffled order.
Figure 3 illustrates the diagram of our attention computation. As each frame is involved in the
attention computation of multiple local windows, we need to fuse these attentive outputs to achieve
a smooth temporal transition. According to our experiments, naively taking the average will cause
dramatic variation in the boundaries of windows. Therefore, we propose to fuse the window-based
outputs in a temporal smooth manner, namely computing the weighted sum by taking the frame
index distance from each window center as weights:
                                                     X Fij ∗ ( U − ⌊|i − cj |⌋)
                                             Fio =      P U2              j
                                                                                ,                                              (9)
                                                     j     j ( 2 − ⌊|i − c |⌋)

where | · | denotes absolute value, and cj is the central frame index of the j-th window that covers
frame i. F o is the output of the current temporal attention layer. Note that, the overlapped window


                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


slicing and merging operation only happen in temporal attention while introducing no computation
overhead to other modules of the U-Net, which benefits the computational efficiency significantly.

3.3   M OTION I NJECTION FOR M ULTI -P ROMPT V IDEO G ENERATION

Since the aforementioned inference paradigm enables the generation of longer videos, it is natural to
explore the potential for synthesizing videos with continuously changing events by utilizing multiple
text prompts. This is more challenging because the generation process introduces additional varying
factors (i.e. text prompts) that affect the video content mostly. In LDMs, changing a text prompt with
only one verb can lead to totally different video content, even with the same initial noises used (Cao
et al., 2023). Regarding this, we propose a motion injection strategy to modulate the influence of
multiple text prompts on video generation content. The key idea is to generate the whole video with
the first prompt at most denoising steps (more correlated to scene layout and appearances) and use
the target prompt only at some specific steps (more correlated to object shapes and poses).
In VideoLDM, text prompts are taken through the cross-attention mechanism:

             Fe = Attncross (Q,
                             e K,
                                e Ve ), Q
                                        e = l e Fepre , K
                                             Q
                                                         e = l e (P ), Ve = l e (P ),
                                                               K             V                     (10)

where Fepre is the intermediate features of the network, P is the text embedding by CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021a) encoder, and lQe , lKe , lVe are learned linear layers. According to recent research
works (Balaji et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023), LDMs synthesize different levels of visual content—
scene layout, shapes of the objects, and fine details, in the early, middle, and late steps of the de-
noising process respectively. In our scenarios, we expect the overall layout and object appearance
to be similar across prompts while the object poses or shapes should follow the target text prompts.
To this end, we gradually inject new motion through the cross attention layer during the time steps
associated with object shapes, denoted as [Tα , Tβ ]. For the sake of simplicity, we present our method
in the case of two text prompts:
                           (
                              Attncross Q,    e l e (Pe), l e (Pe) , if Tα < t < Tβ or l > L,
                                                 K         V
     Motion Injection :=                                                                            (11)
                              Attncross (Q, e l e (P1 ), l e (P1 )), otherwise
                                             K         V

                           
                            P1 , if n < Nγ ,
                                  n−N
                      Pe =   P1 + Nτ −Nγγ (P2 − P1 ),        if Nγ ≤ n < Nτ ,                      (12)
                             P2 , otherwise
                           

where Pi denotes the i-th prompt; Pe denotes the target prompt of motion injection, which depends on
the frame index n, and the frames between [Nγ , Nτ ] will be assigned with the linearly interpolated
embedding to achieve smooth transition; l > L denotes the last L cross-attention layers of the U-
Net (e.g. the decoder part). It means that the decoder part will always be provided with the target
prompt Pe across all the denoising steps, because the decoder features are more tightly aligned with
the semantic structures as observed in MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023).


4     E XPERIMENTS

Setting up.      We conduct experiments based on an open-source T2V diffusion model
VideoCrafter (Chen et al., 2023) for both singe-prompt and multi-prompt longer video generations.
The video diffusion model is trained on 16 frames and is required to sample 64 frames in the infer-
ence stage. The window and stride size are set to U = 16, S = 4 as default.
Evaluation Metrics. To evaluate our paradigm, we report Frechet Video Distance (FVD) (Un-
terthiner et al., 2018), Kernel Video Distance (KVD) (Unterthiner et al., 2019) and Clip Similarity
(CLIP-SIM) (Radford et al., 2021b). Since the longer inference methods are supposed to keep
the quality of the original fixed-length inference, we calculate the FVD between original generated
short videos and subset generated longer videos with corresponding lengths. CLIP-SIM is used to
measure the content consistency of generated videos by calculating the semantic similarity among
adjacent frames of generated videos.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 1: Quantitative comparison on longer video generation.
                    Method    FVD (↓)   KVD (↓)   CLIP-SIM (↑)   Inference Time (↓)
                    Direct    737.61    359.11        0.9104          21.97s
                    Sliding   224.55     44.09        0.9438          36.76s
                    GenL      177.63     21.06        0.9370          77.89s
                    Ours       85.83      7.06        0.9732          25.75s



  Direct



  Sliding



   GenL



      Ours


Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons of longer video generation. Left prompt: “A chihuahua in as-
tronaut suit floating in space, cinematic lighting, glow effect”. Right prompt: “A very happy fuzzy
panda dressed as a chef eating pizza in the New York street food truck”.

4.1    L ONGER V IDEO G ENERATION

We mainly compare our proposed FreeNoise to other tuning-free longer video generation methods
with diffusion models. We first directly sample 64 frames (Direct). Then we adopt temporal slid-
ing windows so that the temporal attention module can always process a fixed number of frames
(Sliding). The closest work to our paradigm is Gen-L-Video (GenL), which extends the video
smoothly by merging some overlapping sub-segments during the denoising process.
The synthesis results are shown in Figure 4. In the first line, the dog has severe artifacts and the
background of space is not clear. Obviously, directly sampling 64 frames through a model trained
on 16 frames will bring poor quality results due to the training-inference gap. When we use tempo-
ral sliding windows, the training-inference gap is eliminated thus more vivid videos are generated.
However, this operation ignores the long-range visual consistency thus the resulting subject and
background both look significantly different among different frames. Gen-L-Video promotes the
integration of frames by averaging the overlapping sub-segments and performs better in some cases.
However, it fails to maintain long-range visual consistency and suffers from content mutation. Ben-
efiting from noise rescheduling, all sub-segments in our paradigm share similar main subjects and
scenarios while still containing considerable content variation, keeping our main content even when
the generated video becomes longer. Results shown in Figure 4 exhibit that our FreeNoise success-
fully renders high-fidelity longer videos, outperforming all other methods.
In addition, we also compare the operation time of those methods on NVIDIA A100. As presented
in Table 1, it is observed that Gen-L-Video exhibits the longest inference time, nearly four times
longer than direct inference. This is primarily attributed to its default setting, which involves the
nearly global sampling of the entire set of latents four times. However, our paradigm only brings
less than 20% extra inference time by limiting most additional calculations within the temporal
attention layers.
Table 1 shows quantitative results. The quality of videos generated by direct inference is extremely
damaged by the training-inference gap, obtaining the worst FVD and KVD. The video quality from
the sliding method and Gen-L-Video is obviously improved but still worse than the results generated
by FreeNoise. Our FreeNoise also gains the best CLIP-SIM, indicating the superiority of our method
in content consistency.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: User study. Users are required to pick the best one among our proposed FreeNoise with the
other baseline methods in terms of content consistency, video quality, and video-text alignment.
                   Method    Content Consistency   Video Quality   Video-Text Alignment
                   Direct         11.73%                10.80%           11.11%
                   Sliding         6.17%                 6.79%            8.02%
                   GenL           24.38%                26.85%           29.63%
                   Ours           57.72%                55.56%           51.23%


   GenL


 Ours w/o
  Motion
 Injection

   Ours


Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons of multi-prompt video generation. Left multi-prompt: “A camel
running on the snow field” → “A camel standing on the snow field”. Right multi-prompt: “An
astronaut resting on a horse” → “An astronaut riding a horse”.

In addition, we conducted a user study to evaluate our results by human subjective perception. Users
are asked to watch the generated videos of all the methods, where each example is displayed in a
random order to avoid bias, and then pick up the best one in three evaluation aspects. As shown in
Table 2, our approach achieves the highest scores for all aspects: content consistency, video quality,
and video-text alignment, outperforming baseline methods by a large margin. Especially for content
consistency, our method has received almost twice as many votes as the second place.

Multi-prompt Video Generation. We extend our paradigm for multi-prompt video generation
by introducing the Motion Injection method. As shown in Figure 5, our method achieves coherent
visual coherence and motion continuity: The camel gradually changes from running to standing
while the distant mountains remain consistent appearances; The astronaut changes from resting on
a horse to riding a horse naturally. However, when we purely use the strategy of noise rescheduling
without motion injection, the scene will undergo unexpected changes because a new prompt often
introduces unexpected new contents other than the text description due to the inherent properties of
the Stable Diffusion model. But it can still work in some cases when the main objects and scenarios
are not obviously changed by the new prompt (like the bigfoot case in Figure 5). We also compare
with the existing tuning-free state-of-the-art method Gen-L-Video. Figure 5 shows that Gen-L-Video
also achieves the conversion of two actions. However, due to the drawbacks of content mutation, its
generated objects and scenarios are meaninglessly changed over time.

4.2   A BLATION S TUDY

Ablation for Noise Rescheduling. As noise rescheduling plays an essential role in our method,
we typically conduct an ablation to validate its importance, namely removing it from our proposed
inference paradigm. In addition, we also implement another variant of our method with the local
noise shuffle unit size as S = 8 (the sliding window stride is also changed to 8 accordingly).
As shown in Figure 6, without noise rescheduling, our method fails to keep content consistent.
Although each frame still matches the text description, they are not semantically connected. And
when the sliding window stride is 8, the synthesized features across windows are interacted in a less
tight manner. For example, the shape of the bowl is changed gradually in Figure 6. Since the stride
value of 4 is able to achieve enough content consistency, we do not consider the smaller stride value
of 2, which will bring the double extra inference time.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Random



    S=8



    Ours


Figure 6: Ablation study on noise rescheduling. Left prompt: “A cat eating food out of a bowl”.
Right prompt: “A video of milk pouring over strawberries, blueberries, and blackberries”.

Ablation for Motion Injection. To show the effec-
tiveness of our design choices in Motion Injection,         (a)
we study on two main hyper-parameters—layer se-           𝑙 ≤L
lection and timestep selection, as expressed in Equa-
tion 11. In our design, the last L cross-attention
layers of the U-Net (e.g. the decoder part) will al-         (b)
ways be provided with the target prompt Pe across all      𝑙>0
the denoising steps and P1 only maintains the layout
and visual details through the cross-attention layers
before the L in some denoising steps. For compari-          (c)
son, we construct another two variations that P1 con-     𝑡>1
trol the only decoder part and all layers, respectively.  𝑡<∞
Besides, the third variation allows P1 to control the
only decoder part across all the denoising steps. Fig-
                                                            (d)
ure 7 shows the results of those variations. When P1
is only allowed to control the decoder part, the run-      Ours
ning motion of the horse is suppressed. Meanwhile,
the appearance of the horse is changed obviously Figure 7: Ablation study on motion injection.
(shown in Figure 7(a)). When P1 is only allowed The multi-prompt is: “An astronaut riding a
to control both the encoder and the decoder part, the horse” → “An astronaut resting on a horse”.
appearance of the horse is kept but the running mo-
tion is still suppressed (shown in Figure 7(b)). It is because the decoder features are more tightly
aligned with the semantic structures, as observed in MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023). Compared to layer
factors, the choice of timesteps has relatively less influence. Even if we allow P1 to control the
only decoder part across all the denoising steps, the horse can still switch smoothly from running to
standing. However, this behavior influences the generation of layout and visual details. As a result,
a section of the horse’s leg will suddenly disappear (shown in Figure 7(c)), while this missing leg
appears bent and curled up in the same frame of our final result (shown in Figure 7(d)). Therefore,
the selection of time steps can help to achieve more precise control over the content level.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we addressed the limitations of current video generation models trained on a limited
number of frames and supporting only single-text conditions. We explored the potential of extending
text-driven generative models to generate high-fidelity long videos conditioned on multiple texts.
Through analyzing the impact of initial noise in video diffusion models, we proposed a tuning-
free and time-efficient paradigm to enhance the generative capabilities of pretrained models while
maintaining content consistency. Additionally, we introduced a novel motion injection method to
support multi-text conditioned video generation. Extensive experiments confirmed the superiority
of our paradigm in extending the generative capabilities of video diffusion models. Notably, our
method achieved this while incurring only approximately 17% additional time cost, compared to the
previous best-performing method that required a 255% extra time cost.



                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   E THICS S TATEMENT
The primary objective of this project is to empower individuals without specialized expertise to
create video art more effectively. Our paradigm, based on the pretrained video diffusion model,
assists the model in generating longer videos. It is important to note that the content generated by
our tuning-free paradigm remains rooted in the original model. As a result, regulators only need
to oversee the original video generation model to ensure adherence to ethical standards, and our
algorithm does not introduce any additional ethical concerns.

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have introduced the algorithm and implementation details in detail in the paper. A researcher fa-
miliar with the video diffusion model should be able to basically reproduce our method. In addition,
we have implemented our FreeNoise on three advanced video generation models.

      • VideoCrafter (Chen et al., 2023): https://github.com/AILab-CVC/FreeNoise.
      • AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2023): https://github.com/arthur-qiu/FreeNoise-AnimateDiff.
      • LaVie (Wang et al., 2023d): https://github.com/arthur-qiu/FreeNoise-LaVie.

8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore
Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-PhD-2022-01-035T), the Ministry of Education, Singapore,
under its MOE AcRF Tier 2 (MOE-T2EP20221- 0012) and NTU NAP.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i:
  Text-to-image diffusion models with an ensemble of expert denoisers. 2022.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023.
Tim Brooks, Janne Hellsten, Miika Aittala, Ting-Chun Wang, Timo Aila, Jaakko Lehtinen, Ming-
  Yu Liu, Alexei Efros, and Tero Karras. Generating long videos of dynamic scenes. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31769–31781, 2022.
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl:
 Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. 2023.
Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang, Jinbo Xing,
  Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, et al. Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-
  quality video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19512, 2023.
Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 102–118. Springer, 2022.
Songwei Ge, Seungjun Nah, Guilin Liu, Tyler Poon, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, David Jacobs,
  Jia-Bin Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yogesh Balaji. Preserve your own correlation: A noise prior
  for video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10474, 2023.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff:
  Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04725, 2023.
William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 diffusion modeling of long videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
 27953–27965, 2022.
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion mod-
  els for high-fidelity video generation with arbitrary lengths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13221,
  2022.
Yingqing He, Menghan Xia, Haoxin Chen, Xiaodong Cun, Yuan Gong, Jinbo Xing, Yong Zhang,
  Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, Ying Shan, et al. Animate-a-story: Storytelling with retrieval-
  augmented video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06940, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Yaofang Liu, Xiaodong Cun, Xuebo Liu, Xintao Wang, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Yang Liu,
  Tieyong Zeng, Raymond Chan, and Ying Shan. Evalcrafter: Benchmarking and evaluating large
  video generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11440, 2023.
Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10209–10218, 2023.
Or Patashnik, Daniel Garibi, Idan Azuri, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Lo-
  calizing object-level shape variations with text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11306, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 8748–8763, 2021a.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021b.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous video
  generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3626–3636, 2022.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2256–2265, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges. ICLR,
  2019.

Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02399,
  2022.

Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Chris Pal. Mcvd-masked conditional video diffusion
  for prediction, generation, and interpolation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:23371–23385, 2022.

Fu-Yun Wang, Wenshuo Chen, Guanglu Song, Han-Jia Ye, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Gen-l-video:
  Multi-text to long video generation via temporal co-denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18264,
  2023a.

Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Mod-
   elscope text-to-video technical report. 2023b.

Xiang Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Dayou Chen, Jiuniu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen,
  Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Videocomposer: Compositional video synthesis with motion con-
  trollability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02018, 2023c.

Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi Wang, Ceyuan Yang, Yinan
  He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, et al. Lavie: High-quality video generation with cascaded latent
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15103, 2023d.

Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan
  Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, et al. Nuwa-xl: Diffusion over diffusion for extremely
  long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12346, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sihyun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Subin Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Video probabilistic diffusion models in
  projected latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 18456–18466, 2023.
Yuxin Zhang, Weiming Dong, Fan Tang, Nisha Huang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Tong-Yee
  Lee, Oliver Deussen, and Changsheng Xu. Prospect: Expanded conditioning for the personaliza-
  tion of attribute-aware image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16225, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                (a) Lens Moving with the Subject


                                (b) Subject Moving off the Screen


                                (c) Subject Moving within the Screen

Figure 8: FreeNoise can produce three types of videos exhibiting significant movement: (a) the lens
moving with the subject, (b) the subject moving off the screen, and (c) the subject moving within
the screen.



A    A PPENDIX : I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

During sampling, we perform DDIM sampling (Song et al., 2020) with 50 denoising steps, setting
DDIM eta to 0. The inference resolution is fixed at 256 × 256 pixels. The scale of the classifier-free
guidance is set to 15.
For quantitative comparison, we generate a total of 2048 videos for each longer inference method,
utilizing 512 prompts (from a standard evaluation paper EvalCrafter (Liu et al., 2023)) and initial-
izing with 4 random initial noises. For calculating the FVD and KVD, we use videos generated by
direct inference with training length (16 frames) as the reference set. To align the video length, we
cut each long video (64 frames) into 4 segments with 16 frames. Correspondingly, we generate the
same number (8192) of short videos with direct inference.
In the user study, we mixed our generated videos with those generated by the other three baselines.
A total of 27 users were asked to pick the best one according to the content consistency video quality
and video-text alignment, respectively.



B    A PPENDIX : C ASE A NALYSIS OF S IGNIFICANT M OVEMENT

Videos with significant movement can be mainly divided into three types:
Lens Moving with the Subject. For videos of this type, the position of the subject does not change
much and the movement is shown through the regression of the background (Figure 8(a)).
Subject Moving off the Screen. For videos of this type, the subject will move off the screen
(Figure 8(b)). However, the subject will suddenly appear again due to semantic constraints.
Subject Moving within the Screen. For videos of this type, the subject will move within the
screen. Due to the size limitation of the screen, the subject will turn around (Figure 8(c)). However,
the current pretrained model behaves unnaturally when turning (even for original inference).
As shown in Figure 8, FreeNoise is able to produce all three types. These three types are auto-
matically determined during the inference stage based on the sampled random noises and the given
prompt.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    A PPENDIX : L IMITATION D ISCUSSION
As repeated locally shuffled noises are used, FreeNoise has a weakening effect on introducing new
content to the video as the length increases. In some cases, the displacement of the subject is limited
due to this weakening effect of FreeNoise. However, FreeNoise does not obliterate motion variation
or thoroughly fix the spatial structure of objects, such as an object moving from left to right on the
screen.
Currently the base model (inference without FreeNoise) only works well with videos of the lens
moving with the subject and still struggles to deal with the videos of the subject moving off/within
the screen effectively. Therefore, the performance of FreeNoise is also constrained by the base
model. We look forward to applying FreeNoise to more powerful video models in the future.


                                                  15
