Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I DENTIFYING P OLICY G RADIENT S UBSPACES
              Jan Schneider1∗      Pierre Schumacher1,2      Simon Guist1      Le Chen1
                                 2,3                         1
                   Daniel Häufle        Bernhard Schölkopf      Dieter Büchler1
                     1
                      Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
                     2
                       Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany
                 3
                   Institute for Computer Engineering, University of Heidelberg, Germany



                                              A BSTRACT

            Policy gradient methods hold great potential for solving complex continuous con-
            trol tasks. Still, their training efficiency can be improved by exploiting structure
            within the optimization problem. Recent work indicates that supervised learning
            can be accelerated by leveraging the fact that gradients lie in a low-dimensional
            and slowly-changing subspace. In this paper, we conduct a thorough evaluation of
            this phenomenon for two popular deep policy gradient methods on various sim-
            ulated benchmark tasks. Our results demonstrate the existence of such gradient
            subspaces despite the continuously changing data distribution inherent to rein-
            forcement learning. These findings reveal promising directions for future work on
            more efficient reinforcement learning, e.g., through improving parameter-space
            exploration or enabling second-order optimization.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has marked significant achievements in numerous challeng-
ing problems, ranging from Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013) to various real robotic challenges,
such as contact-rich manipulation (Gu et al., 2017; Kalashnikov et al., 2018), complex plan-
ning problems (Everett et al., 2018; Ao et al., 2022), and hard-to-control dynamic tasks (Cheng
et al., 2023; Kaufmann et al., 2023). Despite these notable successes, deep RL methods are often
brittle due to the use of function approximators with large numbers of parameters and persistently
changing data distributions – a setting notoriously hard for optimization. Deep RL, in its vanilla
form, operates under limited prior knowledge and structural information about the problem, conse-
quently requiring large numbers of interactions with the environment to reach good performance.
For supervised learning (SL), Gur-Ari et al. (2018) demonstrated that the gradients utilized for neu-
ral network optimization reside in a low-dimensional, slowly-changing subspace. Based on this
insight, recent works introduce more structured optimization procedures for SL by identifying and
harnessing these gradient subspaces. Exploiting this structure enables the optimization to be carried
out in a reduced-dimensional subspace, yielding enhanced efficiency with minimal, if any, loss in
performance (Li et al., 2018; Gressmann et al., 2020; Larsen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a).
Despite the benefits of subspace methods in SL, their adoption in deep RL has remained limited.
A straightforward way to transfer these principles is to find lower-dimensional subspaces in policy
gradient approaches (Peters & Schaal, 2008). Policy gradient (PG) methods estimate the gradient
of the RL objective ∇θ J(θ) to update the policy’s parameters θ using some form of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). Since most SL approaches using subspaces operate at the level of the SGD
optimization, PG algorithms would be a natural choice to leverage the knowledge about subspaces
from SL in the RL context. Nevertheless, in RL, such methods have been explored primarily within
the realm of evolutionary strategies (Maheswaranathan et al., 2019), representation learning (Le Lan
et al., 2023), and transfer learning (Gaya et al., 2022). A possible explanation is the constantly
changing data distribution of RL due to continual exploration that intuitively seems to hinder the
identification of gradient subspaces. The limited body of studies using subspaces in PG algorithms
underlines the need for a more profound discussion in this domain.
    ∗
        Correspondence to jan.schneider@tuebingen.mpg.de


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This paper conducts a comprehensive empirical evaluation of gradient subspaces in the context of
PG algorithms, assessing their properties across various simulated RL benchmarks. Our experi-
ments reveal several key findings: (i) there exist parameter-space directions that exhibit significantly
larger curvature compared to other parameter-space directions, (ii) the gradients live in the subspace
spanned by these directions, and (iii) the subspace remains relatively stable throughout the RL train-
ing. Additionally, we analyze the gradients of the critic – an integral part of the PG estimation in
actor-critic methods – and observe that the critic subspace often exhibits less variability and retains
a larger portion of its gradient compared to the actor subspace. We also test the robustness of PG
subspaces regarding mini-batch approximations of the gradient that are used in practice during train-
ing and evaluate a similar mini-batch approximation of the Hessian. Lastly, we explore the extent
to which the variation in the data distribution influences the aforementioned subspace analysis by
conducting experiments with both an on-policy as well as an off-policy algorithm, the latter of which
reuses previously collected data for training.
By shedding light on gradient subspaces in deep RL, this paper provides insights that can potentially
enhance RL performance by advancing parameter-space exploration or enabling second-order opti-
mization. We begin by reviewing existing literature on subspace approaches in Section 2, followed
by a recapitulation of the RL preliminaries in Section 3 as a foundation for the analysis of gradient
subspaces in RL in Section 4. Section 5 concludes this work with a discussion of the results and
implications of our work. The code for our experiments is available on the project website.


2   R ELATED WORK

Numerous works have studied the use of gradient subspaces in SL. These works can be roughly
divided into informed and random subspace approaches. In the following, we give an overview of
these papers and highlight works that investigate related concepts in RL.
Informed subspaces in supervised learning Informed subspace methods identify the subspace
from some part of the training process. For instance, Gur-Ari et al. (2018) show that the gradients
used for neural network optimization lie in a low-dimensional subspace of the parameter-space di-
rections with the highest curvature in the loss. Furthermore, they show that this subspace changes
slowly throughout the training. Recent works have highlighted numerous benefits of these insights.
Li et al. (2022a) apply principal component analysis on the network parameters at previous check-
points and use the top principal components as subspace. They apply SGD and BFGS algorithms
in the subspace and demonstrate superior learning performance compared to training in the original
parameter space. Similarly, Tuddenham et al. (2020) propose to use a BFGS method in a low-
dimensional subspace defined by the full-batch gradients with respect to individual classification
labels. Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2014) construct a second-order Taylor approximation of individual
loss terms efficiently in a low-dimensional subspace that captures recently observed gradients. With
this approximation, the overall loss is a sum of quadratic functions that can be optimized in closed
form. Chen et al. (2022) utilize insights about the low-dimensional subspaces to learn an optimizer
that scales to high-dimensional parameter spaces. Traditionally, learned optimizers are limited in
scale by the high output dimensionality of the network. By outputting parameter updates in the
low-dimensional subspace, Chen et al. circumvent this challenge and efficiently learn to optimize
large neural networks. Gauch et al. (2022) apply the knowledge of low-dimensional gradient sub-
space to few-shot adaptation by identifying a suitable subspace on the training task and utilizing it
for efficient finetuning on the test task. Likewise, Zhou et al. (2020) tackle differential privacy by
identifying a gradient subspace on a public dataset and projecting gradients calculated from the pri-
vate dataset into this subspace. Adding noise in the subspace instead of the parameter space lowers
the error bound of differential privacy to be linear in the number of subspace dimensions instead of
the parameter dimensions. Li et al. (2022b) tackle an overfitting problem of adversarial training by
identifying a gradient subspace in an early training phase before overfitting occurs. By projecting
later gradients into this subspace, they enforce that the training dynamics remain similar to the early
training phase, which mitigates the overfitting problem.
Random subspaces in supervised learning Gressmann et al. (2020) describe different modifica-
tions to improve neural network training in random subspaces, like resampling the subspace reg-
ularly and splitting the network into multiple components with individual subspaces. They utilize
these subspaces to reduce the communication overhead in a distributed learning setting by send-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ing the parameter updates as low-dimensional subspace coefficients. Li et al. (2018) quantify the
difficulty of a learning task by its intrinsic dimensionality, i.e., the dimensionality of the random
subspace needed to reach good performance. Aghajanyan et al. (2021) apply a similar analysis to
language models and find that the effectiveness of fine-tuning language models is tied to a low in-
trinsic dimensionality. Based on these findings, Hu et al. (2021) propose a method for fine-tuning
large models efficiently via low-rank parameter updates. Larsen et al. (2021) compare informed and
random subspaces and find that with informed subspaces, typically significantly fewer dimensions
are needed for training. Furthermore, they note the benefit of first training in the original space
for some time before starting subspace training, as this increases the probability of the subspace
intersecting with low-loss regions in the parameter space.
Subspace approaches to reinforcement learning Only a handful of works use subspace methods
for RL. Tang et al. (2023) identify a parameter subspace through singular value decomposition of the
policy parameters’ temporal evolution. They propose to cut off the components of the update step
that lie outside this subspace and additionally elongate the update in the directions corresponding to
the largest singular values. In contrast to our work, they focus solely on the policy network, consider
only off-policy learning algorithms, and do not establish a connection to the curvature of the learning
objective. Li et al. (2018) quantify the difficulty of RL tasks by their intrinsic dimensionality. To
that end, the authors optimize the value function of Deep Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013)
as well as the population distribution – a distribution over the policy parameters – of evolutionary
strategies (ES) (Salimans et al., 2017) in random subspaces. Maheswaranathan et al. (2019) define
a search distribution for ES that is elongated along an informed subspace spanned by surrogate
gradients. While the authors do not evaluate their approach for RL, they highlight the relevance to
RL due to the method’s ability to use surrogate gradients generated from learned models, similar to
the use of the critic in actor-critic methods. Gaya et al. (2022) enable improved generalization in
online RL by learning a subspace of policies. Recently, they extended their method to scale favorably
to continual learning settings (Gaya et al., 2023). Both methods explicitly learn a subspace of policy
parameters, while our work investigates the natural training dynamics of PG methods.


3     P RELIMINARIES

This section introduces the mathematical background and notation used throughout the paper. Fur-
thermore, we briefly describe the two RL algorithms that we will analyze in Section 4.

3.1   M ATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND AND NOTATION
                                                 ∂
For a given objective function J(θ), we use g = ∂θ J(θ) ∈ Rn to denote the gradient of a model with
                                       2
respect to its parameters θ and H = ∂∂2 θ J(θ) ∈ Rn×n to denote the corresponding Hessian matrix.
We use vi to denote the ith largest eigenvector of H. Note that we use “ith largest eigenvector” as
shorthand for “eigenvector with respect to the ith largest eigenvalue”. Since H is symmetric, all
eigenvectors are orthogonal to each other, and we assume ||vi || = 1.
In this work, we investigate projections of gradients into lower-dimensional subspaces, i.e., map-
pings from Rn to Rk with k ≪ n. These mappings are defined by a projection matrix P ∈ Rk×n .
ĝ = P g ∈ Rk denotes the projection of g into the subspace and g̃ = P + ĝ ∈ Rn is the mapping of ĝ
back to the original dimensionality that minimizes the projection error ||g − g̃||. Here, P + denotes
the pseudoinverse of P . If the projection matrix is semi-orthogonal, i.e., the columns are orthogonal
and norm one, the pseudoinverse simplifies to the transpose P + = P T . The matrix of the k largest
eigenvectors P = (v1 , . . . , vk )T is one example of such a semi-orthogonal matrix.

3.2   R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING

We consider tasks formulated as Markov decision processes (MDPs), defined by the tuple
(S, A, p, r). Here, S and A are the state and action spaces, respectively. The transition dynam-
ics p : S × A × S → [0, ∞) define the probability density of evolving from one state to another. At
each timestep the agent receives a scalar reward r : S × A → R. A stochastic policy, πθ (at | st ),
defines a mapping from state st to a probability distribution over actions at . RL aims to find an
optimal policy π ∗ , maximizing the expected cumulative return, discounted by γ ∈ [0, 1].


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The value function V π (s) represents the expected (discounted) cumulative reward from state s
following policy π, and the action value function Qπ (s, a) denotes the expected (discounted) cu-
mulative reward for taking action a in state s and then following π. The advantage function
Aπ (s, a) = Qπ (s, a) − V π (s) quantifies the relative benefit of taking an action a in state s over
the average action according to policy π.
RL algorithms generally can be divided into two styles of learning. On-policy methods, like Prox-
imal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), only use data generated from the current
policy for updates. In contrast, off-policy algorithms, such as Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) leverage data collected from different policies, such as old iterations of the policy.

3.2.1   P ROXIMAL P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
On-policy
     h       PG methods
                      i      typically
                                  h      optimize
                                            i     the policy πθ via an objective such as J(θ) =
                                                             θ (at |st )
Eπθ πθ (at | st )Ât = Eπold rt (θ)Ât with rt (θ) = ππold      (at |st ) and Ât being an estimator of the
advantage function at timestep t and πold denoting the policy before the update (Kakade & Lang-
ford, 2002). However, optimizing this objective can result in excessively large updates, leading to
instabilities and possibly divergence. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
is an on-policy actor-critic algorithm designed to address this issue by clipping the probability ratio
rt (θ) to the interval [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ], which removes the incentive for moving rt (θ) outside the interval,
resulting in the following actor loss.
                                        h                                               i
                     PPO
                    Jactor (θ) = Eπold min rt (θ)Ât , clip (rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) Ât                  (1)

The advantage estimation Ât = δt + (γλ)δt+1 + · · · + (γλ)T −t+1 δT −1 with δt = rt + γVϕ (st+1 ) −
Vϕ (st ) uses a learned value function Vϕ , which acts as a critic. The hyperparameter λ determines
the trade-off between observed rewards and estimated values. The critic is trained to minimize the
mean squared error between the predicted value and the discounted sum of future episode rewards
           Pt+T
Vttarget = τ =t γ τ −t rτ .
                                  PPO
                                         (ϕ) = E (Vϕ (st ) − Vttarget )2

                                 Jcritic                                                         (2)

3.2.2   S OFT ACTOR -C RITIC
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) is a policy gradient algorithm that integrates the
maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework with the actor-critic approach. As such, it op-
timizes a trade-off between the expected return and the policy’s entropy. It is an off-policy algorithm
and, as such, stores transitions in a replay buffer D, which it samples from during optimization.
To that end, SAC modifies the targets for the learned Q-function Qϕ to include a term that incen-
tivizes policies with large entropy Q̂t = rt + γ(Qϕ (st+1 , at+1 ) − log πθ (at+1 | st+1 )), resulting in
the following critic loss.
                                                                          2
                               SAC                1
                             Jcritic (ϕ) = ED,πθ     Qϕ (st , at ) − Q̂t                              (3)
                                                  2
Note that SAC, in its original formulation, trains an additional value function and a second Q-
function, but we omitted these details for brevity. The algorithm then trains the actor to minimize
the KL-divergence between the policy and the exponential of the learned Q-function.

                       SAC                                 exp(Qϕ (st , ·))
                      Jactor (θ) = ED DKL πθ (· | st )                                          (4)
                                                               Zϕ (st )
Zϕ (st ) denotes the normalization to make the right side of the KL-divergence a proper distribution.
Optimizing this loss increases the probability of actions with high value under the Q-function.

4    G RADIENT SUBSPACES IN POLICY GRADIENT ALGORITHMS

In Section 2, we have highlighted several works from SL that utilize low-dimensional gradient sub-
spaces for improving the learning performance. Naturally, we would like to transfer these benefits


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to policy gradient algorithms. However, the training in RL is significantly less stationary than in the
supervised setting (Bjorck et al., 2022). As the RL agent changes, the data distribution shifts since
the data is generated by the agent’s interactions with its environment. Furthermore, the value of a
state also depends on the agent’s behavior in future states. Thus, the targets for the actor and critic
networks change constantly. These crucial differences between SL and RL underscore the need to
analyze to which extent insights about gradient subspaces transfer between these settings.
The analysis presented in this section focuses on two policy gradient algorithms: PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), which are popular instantiations of on-policy and
off-policy RL. We apply the algorithms to twelve benchmark tasks from OpenAI Gym (Brockman
et al., 2016), Gym Robotics (Plappert et al., 2018a), and the DeepMind Control Suite (Tunyasuvu-
nakool et al., 2020). Our code builds upon the algorithm implementations of Stable Baselines3 (Raf-
fin et al., 2021). The learning curves are displayed in Appendix A. We ran each experiment for 10
random seeds and plot the mean and standard deviation for the results in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. Due
to space constraints, we show the analysis results only for selected tasks and present detailed results
for all twelve tasks in Appendix B. Moreover, we conduct an evaluation of the impact of the RL
algorithm’s hyperparameters on the gradient subspace in Appendix C.
For the following analyses, we calculate Hessian eigenvectors of the loss with respect to the net-
work parameters via the Lanczos method (Lehoucq et al., 1998) since it is an efficient method for
estimating the top eigenvectors that avoids explicitly constructing the Hessian matrix. Since we can
only estimate the Hessian from data, we use a large number of state-action pairs to obtain precise
estimates for the eigenvectors of the true Hessian, similar to how Ilyas et al. (2020) approximate
the true policy gradient. For PPO, we collect 106 on-policy samples. This would, however, not
be faithful to the diverse distribution of off-policy data that SAC uses for training. To match this
data distribution for the analysis, we save the replay buffer during training and use the data of the
complete replay buffer for estimating the Hessian. Note that the replay buffer also has a capacity of
106 samples but is not completely filled at the beginning of training.
As mentioned in Section 3, SAC and PPO each train two different networks, an actor and a critic.
We, therefore, conduct our analysis for each network individually. To verify that there exist high-
curvature directions spanning a subspace that stays relatively stable throughout the training and that
contains the gradient, we check three conditions:
        i) Some parameter-space directions exhibit significantly larger curvature in the actor/critic
           loss than other directions.
       ii) The actor/critic gradient mainly lies in the subspace spanned by these directions.
      iii) The subspaces for the actor and critic networks change slowly throughout the training.

4.1    T HE LOSS CURVATURE IS LARGE IN A FEW PARAMETER - SPACE DIRECTIONS

The Hessian matrix describes the curvature of a function, with the eigenvectors being the directions
of maximum and minimum curvature. The corresponding eigenvalues describe the magnitude of
the curvature along these directions. Therefore, we verify condition i) by plotting the spectrum of
Hessian eigenvalues for the actor and critic loss of PPO with respect to the network parameters in
Figure 1. The plots show that there are a few large eigenvalues for both the actor and critic loss.
All remaining eigenvalues are distributed close to zero. These plots confirm that there are a few
directions with significantly larger curvature; in other words, the problem is ill-conditioned.

4.2    T HE GRADIENT LIES IN THE HIGH - CURVATURE SUBSPACE

To verify condition ii) that the high-curvature subspace contains the gradients of the respective loss,
we measure how well these gradients can be represented in the subspace. Let Pk ∈ Rk×n be the
semi-orthogonal matrix that projects into the high-curvature subspace. Pk consists row-wise of the
k largest Hessian eigenvectors. We compute the relative projection error, i.e., the relative difference
between the original gradient g ∈ Rn and the projected gradient g̃ = Pk+ Pk g that is the result
of mapping into the high-curvature subspace and back into the original space. The fraction of the
gradient that can be represented in the subspace is then given by
                                                         ||g̃ − g||2
                                    Sfrac (Pk , g) = 1 −             ,                              (5)
                                                            ||g||2

                                                  5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      100
             25                       1000                                                   500
Eigenvalue    0                          0                              0                      0
             25                       1000                                                   500
                                                                      100
                  0   2000 4000              0   2000 4000                  0   2000 4000          0   2000 4000
                        Index                     Index                            Index                 Index
             (a) Finger-spin, actor   (b) Finger-spin, critic          (c) Walker2D, actor    (d) Walker2D, critic

  Figure 1: The spectrum of the Hessian eigenvalues for PPO on the tasks Finger-spin (a, b) and
  Walker2D (c, d). The Hessian is estimated from 106 state-action pairs. For both the actor (a, c) and
  critic (b, d) loss, there is a small number of large eigenvalues, while the bulk of the eigenvalues is
  close to zero. This finding shows that there is a small number of high-curvature directions in the loss
  landscapes, which is in accordance with results from SL.


  which simplifies to the following gradient subspace fraction criterion of Gur-Ari et al. (2018).
                                                                      ||Pk g||2
                                                   Sfrac (Pk , g) =                                                (6)
                                                                        ||g||2
  We derive this equality in Appendix D. Note that 0 ≤ Sfrac (Pk , g) ≤ 1 holds, where Sfrac (Pk , g) =
  1 implies that the subspace perfectly contains the gradient, while Sfrac (Pk , g) = 0 means that the
  gradient lies entirely outside the subspace. Due to the normalization by ||g||, this criterion is invariant
  to the scale of the gradient, which enables comparing gradient subspaces of different models and
  models at different stages of the training.
  To evaluate how the gradient subspace fraction evolves over time, we evaluate the criterion at check-
  points every 50,000 steps during the RL training. To compactly visualize this data, we split the
  training into three phases: initial, training, and convergence, and for each phase, we average the
  results of all timesteps of that phase. Since the algorithms require different numbers of timesteps for
  solving each of the tasks and reach different performance levels, we define the following heuristic
  criterion for the training phases. We first smooth the learning curves by averaging over a sliding
  window and compute the maximum episode return Rmax over the smoothed curve. Next, we calcu-
  late the improvement relative to the episode return Rinit of the initial policy at each timestep t of the
  smoothed learning curve as
                                                     R(t) − Rinit
                                          ∆R (t) =                .                                     (7)
                                                     Rmax − Rinit

  We then define the end of the initial phase as the first timestep at which the agent reaches 10% of
  the total improvement, i.e., ∆R (t) ≥ 0.1. Similarly, we define the start of the convergence phase as
  the first timestep at which the agent reaches 90% of the total improvement, i.e., ∆R (t) ≥ 0.9.
  We choose k = 100 as subspace dimensionality since this subspace already largely captures the
  gradients, and the largest 100 eigenvectors can still be calculated reasonably efficiently with the
  Lanczos method. Appendix B displays results for different subspace sizes. With the tuned hyperpa-
  rameters from RL Baselines3 Zoo that we use for training, the PPO actor and critic usually contain
  around 5,000 parameters, and the SAC actor and critic around 70,000 and 140,000 parameters (2
  Q-networks à 70,000 parameters), respectively. Hence, the subspace dimensionality is around 2%
  the size of the parameters for PPO and around 0.14% and 0.07% for SAC.
  We consider a precise approximation of the true gradient computed with 106 state-action pairs for
  PPO and the full replay buffer for SAC. We denote this approximation as precise gradient and the
  low-sample gradient used during regular RL training as mini-batch gradient. In a similar manner,
  we denote the Hessian estimated on the large dataset as precise Hessian and the estimate from 2048
  samples as mini-batch Hessian. We choose 2048 samples for the mini-batch Hessian since that is
  the amount of data that PPO with default hyperparameters collects for the policy updates. Hence,
  this is a realistic setting for estimating the subspace during training.
  Figure 2 shows the value of the gradient subspace fraction Sfrac (Pk , g) for PPO and SAC on four
  different tasks, divided into the three training phases. Note that for an uninformed random pro-
  jection, the gradient subspace fraction would be k/n in expectation, i.e., the ratio of the original


                                                                6
                               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Initial phase                        Training phase                                   Convergence phase
                                                             Precise gradient, precise Hessian    Mini-batch gradient, precise Hessian             Mini-batch gradient, mini-batch Hessian

                               Gradient subspace fraction   1.0
                                                            0.8
                                                            0.6
                                                            0.4
                                                            0.2
                                                            0.0       PPO            SAC         PPO                 SAC            PPO           SAC           PPO              SAC
                                                                              Ant                      Finger-spin                LunarLanderContinuous               Walker2D

                                                                                                                     (a) Actor
      SAC     PPO              SAC 1.0
                               Gradient subspace fraction


rContinuous         Walker2D
                                                            0.8
                                                            0.6
                                                            0.4
                                                            0.2
                                                            0.0       PPO            SAC         PPO                 SAC            PPO           SAC           PPO              SAC
                                                                              Ant                      Finger-spin                LunarLanderContinuous               Walker2D

                                                                                                                     (b) Critic

                               Figure 2: The fraction Sfrac of the gradient that lies within the high-curvature subspace spanned by
                               the 100 largest Hessian eigenvectors. Results are displayed for the actor (top) and critic (bottom) of
                               PPO and SAC on the Ant, Finger-spin, LunarLanderContinuous, and Walker2D tasks. The results
                               demonstrate that a significant fraction of the gradient lies within the high-curvature subspace, but
                               the extent to which the gradient is contained in the subspace depends on the algorithm, task, and
                               training phase. For both algorithms, the gradient subspace fraction is significantly higher for the
                               critic than for the actor. Furthermore, the quantity is also often larger for SAC’s actor than for PPO’s,
                               particularly in the early stages of the training. Even with mini-batch estimates for the gradient and
                               Hessian, the gradient subspace fraction is considerable.


                               and subspace dimensionalities (0.02 for PPO and 0.0014 for SAC’s actor and 0.0007 for its critic).
                               The results in Figure 2 show a significantly higher gradient subspace fraction, which means that
                               the gradients computed by PPO and SAC lie to a large extent in the high-curvature subspace. We
                               observe that the fraction of the gradient in the subspace is considerably higher for the critic than for
                               the actor. Furthermore, the gradient subspace fraction is also often higher for SAC’s actor than for
                               PPO’s. This finding is particularly significant since the subspace size corresponds to a significantly
                               lower percentage of the parameter dimensionality for SAC than for PPO. We hypothesize that the
                               effect is caused by the off-policy nature of SAC. In the off-policy setting, the training distribution
                               for the networks changes slowly since the optimization reuses previous data. In this regard, SAC
                               is closer than PPO to the supervised learning setting, where the data distribution is fixed and for
                               which Gur-Ari et al. (2018) report high gradient subspace fractions. Still, the subspace fraction for
                               PPO is significant, considering that the dimensionality of the subspace is merely 2% of the origi-
                               nal parameter space. Furthermore, for PPO, the subspace fraction often improves after the initial
                               phase. Similarly, Gur-Ari et al. (2018) report for the supervised learning setting that the gradient
                               starts evolving in the subspace only after some initial steps. However, for the SAC actor, this trend
                               appears to be reversed, with the gradient subspace fraction being highest in the initial steps.
                               Moreover, the precise gradient, computed with a large number of samples, tends to lie better in
                               the subspace than the mini-batch gradient. The noise resulting from the low-sample approximation
                               seems to perturb the gradient out of the subspace. However, since the difference is typically small,
                               the gradient subspace is still valid for the low-sample gradient estimates used during RL training.
                               Lastly, even the subspace identified with the mini-batch Hessian captures the gradient to a significant
                               extent. This property is crucial since it implies that we do not need access to the precise Hessian,
                               which is costly to compute and might require additional data. Instead, we can already obtain a
                               reasonable gradient subspace from the mini-batch Hessian.


                                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 PPO, actor                            PPO, critic             SAC, actor        SAC, critic
                   1.0                                           1.0                                   1.0                    1.0
Subspace overlap
                   1.0

                   0.8
                   0.8                                           0.8                                   0.8                    0.8
                   0.6
                   0.6
                               t
                              t1 1
                                                                 0.6              t1                   0.6     t1             0.6     t1
                   0.4
                   0.4                                           0.4                                   0.4                    0.4
                   0.2
                   0.2                                           0.2                                   0.2                    0.2
                   0.0 0       1                         4 5   5 0.0                                   0.0                    0.0
                              1.0 1 2 t2 3 4×105
                                         2       3            1 2 3 4 5
                                                                     0                 1 2 3 4 55    5     0                5     0
                   0.0
                         0    1      2       3       4     5
                                         t2 2t       ×10 ×10
                                                           5
                                                                   t2    ×10                 t2    ×10



                                                               Subspace overlap
           (a) Ant            0.8 (b) Finger-spin        (c) LunarLanderCont.         (d) Walker2D

Figure 3: Evolution of the0.6  overlap tbetween
                                         1
                                                    the high-curvature subspace identified at an early
timestep t1 = 100,000 and0.4   later timesteps for the actor and critic of PPO and SAC. While the
overlap between the subspaces degrades as the networks are updated, it remains considerable even
                              0.2 that the subspace remains similar, even under significant changes
after 400,000 timesteps, indicating
in the network parameters and 0.0the data distribution. This finding implies that information about the
                                  0 1can be2 reused
gradient subspace at earlier timesteps                3 at later
                                                           4 timesteps.
                                                                 5
                                                  t2         ×105

4.3                          T HE HIGH - CURVATURE SUBSPACE CHANGES SLOWLY THROUGHOUT THE TRAINING

So far, we have verified that the gradients of the actor and critic losses optimized by PPO and SAC
lie to a large extent in the subspace spanned by the top eigenvectors of the Hessian with respect to
the current parameters. However, even though there are relatively efficient methods for computing
the top Hessian eigenvectors without explicitly constructing the Hessian matrix, calculating these
eigenvectors at every step would be computationally expensive. Ideally, we would like to identify
a subspace once that remains constant throughout the training. In practice, however, the gradient
subspace will not stay exactly the same during the training, but if it changes slowly, it is possible to
reuse knowledge from earlier timesteps and update the subspace at a lower frequency. To that end,
we investigate condition iii) by calculating the subspace overlap, defined by Gur-Ari et al. (2018).
The subspace overlap between timesteps t1 and t2 is defined as
                                                                                           1X k              2
                                                                             (t )   (t )           (t ) (t )
                                                                   Soverlap Pk 1 , Pk 2 =        P k 1 vi 2    ,                               (8)
                                                                                           k i=1
                                                                                  T
        (t)                                                (t)       (t)     (t)
where vi is the ith largest eigenvector at timestep t. Pk = v1 , . . . , vk          denotes the pro-
jection matrix from the full parameter space to the high-curvature subspace, identified at timestep t.
Similar to Equation (5), the criterion measures how much of the original vector is preserved during
the projection into the subspace. For the subspace overlap, however, we use the projection matrix
at timestep t1 not to project the gradient but rather project the Hessian eigenvectors that span the
high-curvature subspace identified at a later timestep t2 of the training. This criterion, thus, mea-
sures how much the gradient subspace changes between these timesteps. Note that we assume the
               (t)
eigenvectors vi to be normalized to one and therefore do not normalize by their length.
Gur-Ari et al. (2018) showed in the supervised setting that the gradient subspace stabilizes only
after some initial update steps. Therefore, we choose the timestep t1 at which we initially identify
the subspace as t1 = 100,000 since this is still relatively early in the training, but the gradient
subspace should already have stabilized reasonably well. We evaluate the subspace overlap criterion
every 10,000 timesteps until timestep 500,000. This interval covers a significant portion of the
training and showcases the extent to which the subspace changes under significant differences in the
network parameters and the data distribution. For the sake of completeness and to further highlight
the influence of the data distribution on the subspace, we showcase the subspace overlap over the
entire duration of the training in Appendix E. As in Section 4.2, we use k = 100 as subspace
dimensionality and refer to Appendix B for the evaluation of different subspace sizes. The analysis
results in Figure 3 show that the subspace overlap reduces the further apart the two timesteps t1
and t2 are, but in all cases, the subspace overlap remains significantly above zero, implying that
information of previous subspaces can be reused at later timesteps. If the two timesteps are close to
each other, the overlap is considerable. Similar to the gradient subspace fraction in Section 4.2, the
subspace overlap is often more pronounced for the critic than the actor, particularly for SAC.

                                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we showed that findings from the SL literature about gradient subspaces transfer to the
RL setting. Despite the continuously changing data distribution inherent to RL, the gradients of the
actor and critic networks of PPO and SAC lie in a low-dimensional, slowly-changing subspace of
high curvature. We demonstrated that this property holds for both on-policy and off-policy learning,
even though the distribution shift in the training data is particularly severe in the on-policy setting.

5.1   H IGH - CURVATURE SUBSPACES EXPLAIN CLIFFS IN REWARD LANDSCAPES

Sullivan et al. (2022) investigate visualizations of the reward landscapes around policies optimized
by PPO. Reward landscapes describe the resulting cumulative rewards over the space of policy pa-
rameters. They observe empirically that these landscapes feature “cliffs” in policy gradient direction.
When changing the parameters in this direction, the cumulative reward increases for small steps but
drops sharply beyond this increase. In random directions, these cliffs do not seem to occur.
The results from Section 4.2 constitute a likely explanation of this phenomenon. The cliffs that the
authors describe can be interpreted as signs of large curvature in the reward landscape. Our analysis
demonstrates that the policy gradient is prone to lie in a high-curvature direction of the policy loss.
Sullivan et al. investigate the cumulative reward, which is different from the policy loss that we
analyze in this work. However, one of the fundamental assumptions of policy gradient methods
is that there is a strong link between the policy loss and the cumulative reward. Therefore, high
curvature in the loss likely also manifests in the cumulative reward. There is no such influence for
random directions, so the curvature in gradient direction is larger than in random directions.

5.2   P OTENTIAL OF GRADIENT SUBSPACES IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Leveraging properties of gradient subspaces has proven beneficial in numerous works in SL, e.g.,
(Li et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022; Gauch et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022b). The
analyses in this paper demonstrate that similar subspaces can be found in popular policy gradient
algorithms. In the following, we outline two opportunities for harnessing the properties of gradient
subspaces and bringing the discussed benefits to RL.
Optimization in the subspace While the network architectures used in reinforcement learning are
often small compared to the models used in other fields of machine learning, the dimensionality of
the optimization problem is still considerable. Popular optimizers, like Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014),
typically rely only on gradient information, as computing the Hessian at every timestep would be
computationally very demanding in high dimensions. However, in Section 4.1, we have seen that the
optimization problem is ill-conditioned. Second-order methods, like Newton’s method, are known
to be well-suited for ill-conditioned problems (Nocedal & Wright, 1999). With the insights of this
paper, it seems feasible to reduce the dimensionality of the optimization problems in RL algorithms
by optimizing in the low-dimensional subspace instead of the original parameter space. The low
dimensionality of the resulting optimization problems would enable computing and inverting the
Hessian matrix efficiently and make second-order optimization methods feasible.
Guiding parameter-space exploration The quality of the exploration actions significantly im-
pacts the performance of RL algorithms (Amin et al., 2021). Most RL algorithms explore by ap-
plying uncorrelated noise to the actions produced by the policy. However, this often leads to ineffi-
cient exploration, particularly in over-actuated systems, where correlated actuation is crucial (Schu-
macher et al., 2022). A viable alternative is to apply exploration noise to the policy parameters
instead (Rückstiess et al., 2010; Plappert et al., 2018b). This approach results in a more directed
exploration and can be viewed as exploring strategies similar to the current policy.
In Section 4, we observed that the gradients utilized by policy gradient methods predominantly lie
within a small subspace of all parameter-space directions. As typical parameter-space exploration
does not consider the properties of the training gradient when inducing parameter noise, only a small
fraction of it might actually push the policy parameters along directions that are relevant to the task.
Considering that the optimization mostly occurs in a restricted subspace, it might be advantageous to
limit exploration to these directions. Sampling parameter noise only in the high-curvature subspace
constitutes one possible way of focusing exploration on informative parameter-space directions.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY

We applied our analyses to proven and publicly available implementations of the RL algorithms
from Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021) on well-known, publicly available benchmark tasks
from (Brockman et al., 2016; Plappert et al., 2018b; Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020). Further exper-
imental details like the learning curves of the algorithms and the fine-grained analysis results for
the entire training are displayed in Appendices A and B, respectively. To facilitate reproducing our
results, we make our code, as well as the raw analysis data, including hyperparmeter settings and
model checkpoints, publically available on the project website.

R EFERENCES

Armen Aghajanyan, Sonal Gupta, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the ef-
  fectiveness of language model fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-
  ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7319–7328, 2021.
Susan Amin, Maziar Gomrokchi, Harsh Satija, Herke van Hoof, and Doina Precup. A survey of
  exploration methods in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00157, 2021.
Yunke Ao, Le Chen, Florian Tschopp, Michel Breyer, Roland Siegwart, and Andrei Cramariuc. Uni-
  fied data collection for visual-inertial calibration via deep reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1646–1652. IEEE, 2022.
Johan Bjorck, Carla P Gomes, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Is high variance unavoidable in RL? A case
  study in continuous control. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Xuxi Chen, Tianlong Chen, Yu Cheng, Weizhu Chen, Ahmed Awadallah, and Zhangyang Wang.
  Scalable learning to optimize: A learned optimizer can train big models. In European Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 389–405. Springer, 2022.
Xuxin Cheng, Kexin Shi, Ananye Agarwal, and Deepak Pathak. Extreme parkour with legged
  robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14341, 2023.
Michael Everett, Yu Fan Chen, and Jonathan P How. Motion planning among dynamic, decision-
 making agents with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Intelligent
 Robots and Systems, pp. 3052–3059. IEEE, 2018.
Martin Gauch, Maximilian Beck, Thomas Adler, Dmytro Kotsur, Stefan Fiel, Hamid Eghbal-zadeh,
 Johannes Brandstetter, Johannes Kofler, Markus Holzleitner, Werner Zellinger, et al. Few-shot
 learning by dimensionality reduction in gradient space. In Conference on Lifelong Learning
 Agents, pp. 1043–1064. PMLR, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Laure Soulier, and Ludovic Denoyer. Learning a subspace of policies for online
  adaptation in reinforcement learning. In International Conference of Learning Representations,
  2022.
Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Thang Doan, Lucas Caccia, Laure Soulier, Ludovic Denoyer, and Roberta
  Raileanu. Building a subspace of policies for scalable continual learning. In International Con-
  ference of Learning Representations, 2023.
Frithjof Gressmann, Zach Eaton-Rosen, and Carlo Luschi. Improving neural network training in
  low dimensional random bases. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12140–
  12150, 2020.
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning
  for robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, pp. 3389–3396. IEEE, 2017.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guy Gur-Ari, Daniel A Roberts, and Ethan Dyer. Gradient descent happens in a tiny subspace. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.04754, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. A closer look at deep policy gradients. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274, 2002.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. QT-Opt: Scalable deep
 reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10293,
 2018.
Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and
  Davide Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
  620:982–987, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Brett W Larsen, Stanislav Fort, Nic Becker, and Surya Ganguli. How many degrees of freedom do
  we need to train deep networks: A loss landscape perspective. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Charline Le Lan, Joshua Greaves, Jesse Farebrother, Mark Rowland, Fabian Pedregosa, Rishabh
  Agarwal, and Marc G Bellemare. A novel stochastic gradient descent algorithm for learning
  principal subspaces. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1703–1718. PMLR, 2023.
Richard B Lehoucq, Danny C Sorensen, and Chao Yang. ARPACK users’ guide: Solution of large-
  scale eigenvalue problems with implicitly restarted Arnoldi methods. SIAM, 1998.
Chunyuan Li, Heerad Farkhoor, Rosanne Liu, and Jason Yosinski. Measuring the intrinsic dimension
  of objective landscapes. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Tao Li, Lei Tan, Zhehao Huang, Qinghua Tao, Yipeng Liu, and Xiaolin Huang. Low dimensional
  trajectory hypothesis is true: DNNs can be trained in tiny subspaces. Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(3):3411–3420, 2022a.
Tao Li, Yingwen Wu, Sizhe Chen, Kun Fang, and Xiaolin Huang. Subspace adversarial training. In
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13409–13418, 2022b.
Niru Maheswaranathan, Luke Metz, George Tucker, Dami Choi, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Guided
  evolutionary strategies: Augmenting random search with surrogate gradients. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4264–4273. PMLR, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J Wright. Numerical optimization. Springer, 1999.
Supratik Paul, Vitaly Kurin, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast efficient hyperparameter tuning for policy
  gradient methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients. Neural
  networks, 21(4):682–697, 2008.
Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Pow-
 ell, Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforce-
 ment learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1802.09464, 2018a.
Matthias Plappert, Rein Houthooft, Prafulla Dhariwal, Szymon Sidor, Richard Y Chen, Xi Chen,
 Tamim Asfour, Pieter Abbeel, and Marcin Andrychowicz. Parameter space noise for exploration.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b.
Antonin Raffin.   RL Baselines3                Zoo.        https://github.com/DLR-RM/
  rl-baselines3-zoo, 2020.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-Baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. The Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(1):12348–12355, 2021.
Thomas Rückstiess, Frank Sehnke, Tom Schaul, Daan Wierstra, Yi Sun, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Exploring parameter space in reinforcement learning. Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics,
  1:14–24, 2010.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a
  scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Pierre Schumacher, Daniel Haeufle, Dieter Büchler, Syn Schmitt, and Georg Martius. DEP-RL:
  Embodied exploration for reinforcement learning in overactuated and musculoskeletal systems.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Fast large-scale optimization by unifying
  stochastic gradient and quasi-Newton methods. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 604–612. PMLR, 2014.
Ryan Sullivan, Jordan K Terry, Benjamin Black, and John P Dickerson. Cliff diving: Exploring
  reward surfaces in reinforcement learning environments. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 20744–20776. PMLR, 2022.
Hongyao Tang, Min Zhang, and Jianye Hao. The ladder in chaos: A simple and effective im-
  provement to general DRL algorithms by policy path trimming and boosting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.01391, 2023.
Mark Tuddenham, Adam Prügel-Bennett, and Jonathan Hare. Quasi-Newton’s method in the class
 gradient defined high-curvature subspace. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01938, 2020.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom
  Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and tasks for
  continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.
Yingxue Zhou, Steven Wu, and Arindam Banerjee. Bypassing the ambient dimension: Private SGD
  with gradient subspace identification. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.


                                                12
                                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      A                    L EARNING CURVES

                                                                                                     PPO               SAC
                                                          60000                                                                    400
                                      Cumulative reward


                                                                                              1000
                                                           500
                                                          4000                                                                     200
                                                          1000                                 500
                                                          2000                                                                       0
                                                          1500                                   0
                                                             0
                                                              0.0 0.5 0.1
                                                              0.0     1.0 1.5 0.2
                                                                              2.0 2.5 0.3
                                                                                       3.0       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00             0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                                                                        (a) Ant                      (b) Ball in cup                     (c) BipedalWalker

                                                             00                               1000                               15000
                                      Cumulative reward


                                                           500
                    1000                                    20                                 500
                                                                                                                                 10000
                                                          1000
Cumulative reward


                                                            40                                                                    5000
                    750                                   1500
                                                                                                 0                                   0
                                                              0.0 0.10.10.2 0.3
                                                              0.0            0.2 0.4 0.3
                                                                                      0.5        0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00            0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                    500                                              (d) FetchReach                  (e) Finger-spin                      (f) HalfCheetah

                    250                                   40000                                                                      0
                                      Cumulative reward


                                                                                               250
                                                           500                                                                     500
                      0                                   2000
                                                          1000                                   0                                1000
                                                          1500                                 250                                1500
                       0.0   0.2 0.4             0.8       0.600.0
                                                         1.0
                                Environment steps 0.1   0.2
                                                  0.5 ×10 6
                                                        1.0    0.0
                                                             0.3
                                                              1.5                                0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00            0.0      0.1    0.2     0.3
                                                                      (g) Hopper              (h) LunarLanderContinuous                    (i) Pendulum
                                                              00                               400
                                      Cumulative reward


                                                          6000                                6000                                6000
                                                                                                                                  6000
                                                           500
                                                            20
                                                          4500                                4500                                4500
                                                                                               200                                4000
                                                          1000
                                                          3000
                                                            40                                3000                                3000
                                                          1500                                1500                                2000
                                                                                                                                  1500
                                                          1500
                                                            600                                  00                                  0
                                                               0.0 0.10.10.2 0.3
                                                               0.0             0.2     0.3
                                                               0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.4  0.5
                                                                                    2.5 3.0       0.0 0.5 1.0
                                                                                                  0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
                                                                                                              1.5 2.0
                                                                                                                  2.0 2.5
                                                                                                                      2.5 3.0
                                                                                                                           3.0       0.0 0.5 1.0
                                                                                                                                     0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
                                                                                                                                                 1.5 2.0
                                                                                                                                                     2.0 2.5
                                                                                                                                                         2.5 3.0
                                                                                                                                                              3.0
                                                               Environment steps (millions)       Environment steps (millions)       Environment steps (millions)
                                                                      (j) Reacher                     (k) Swimmer                          (l) Walker2D

                                      Figure 4: Learning curves for PPO and SAC on tasks from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016),
                                      Gym Robotics (Plappert et al., 2018a), and the DeepMind Control Suite (Tunyasuvunakool
                                      et al., 2020). We use the algorithm implementations of Stable Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021) with
                                      tuned hyperparameters from RL Baselines3 Zoo (Raffin, 2020) for the Gym tasks and hyperparam-
                                      eters tuned by random search over 50 configurations for the Gym Robotics and DeepMind Control
                                      Suite tasks. Results are averaged over ten random seeds; shaded areas represent the standard devia-
                                      tion across seeds.


                                                                                                           13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B                             D ETAILED ANALYSIS RESULTS FOR ALL TASKS

                                Precise gradient; 1 EV                                                      Precise gradient; 10 EVs                         Precise gradient; 100 EVs
                                Mini-batch gradient; 1 EV                                                   Mini-batch gradient; 10 EVs                      Mini-batch gradient; 100 EVs
                        1.0
                        1.0                          1.0                                                                        1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                          0.8                                                                        0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                          0.6                                                                        0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                          0.4                                                                        0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                     0.2                                                                        0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                     0.0                                                                        0.0                      0.0
                          0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                (a) Ant, actor1.0                                                 (b) Ant, critic                (c) Ball in cup, actor            (d) Ball in cup, critic
                                                  Gradient fraction in subspace


                         1.0                          1.0                                                                       1.0                      1.0
                                              0.8 0.8
                        1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                         0.8
                        0.8                                                                                                     0.8                      0.8
                         0.6
                        0.6                           0.6                                                                       0.6                      0.6
                         0.4
                        0.4
                                              0.6 0.4                                                                           0.4                      0.4
                         0.2
                        0.2
                                                      0.2                                                                       0.2                      0.2
                         0.0
                        0.0                   0.4 0.0                                                                           0.0                      0.0
                           0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                                           0.2
                          (e) Bip.Walker, actor                                            (f) Bip.Walker, critic                (g) FetchReach, actor             (h) FetchReach, critic
                         1.0
                        1.0                       1.0                                                                           1.0                          1.0
                                           0.0 0.8
 Grad. subspace frac.


                         0.8                                                                                                    0.8                          0.8
                                              0.0 0.6 0.2     0.4      0.6                                                      0.8       1.0
                        0.8


                         0.6                                                                                                    0.6 ×106                     0.6
                        0.6
                                                           Environment steps
                         0.4
                        0.4                       0.4                                                                           0.4                          0.4
                         0.2
                        0.2
                                                  0.2                                                                           0.2                          0.2
                         0.0
                        0.0
                                                  0.0                                                                           0.0                          0.0
                           0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          (i) Finger-spin, actor                                           (j) Finger-spin, critic              (k) HalfCheetah, actor             (l) HalfCheetah, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                                                1.0                                  1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                                                                0.8                                  0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                                                0.6                                  0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                                                0.4                                  0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                                                           0.2                                  0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                                                           0.0                                  0.0                      0.0
                          0.0
                          0.0   0.1
                                      0.5
                                      0.2   0.3
                                                           1.0
                                                            0.4                   0.5
                                                                                        1.5 0.0       0.5    1.0     1.5          0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                              (m) Hopper, actor                                              (n) Hopper, critic                 (o) LunarLander, actor (p) LunarLander, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                                                1.0                                  1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                                                                0.8                                  0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                                                0.6                                  0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                                                0.4                                  0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                                                           0.2                                  0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                                                           0.0                                  0.0                      0.0
                          0.0
                          0.0   0.1
                                      0.1
                                      0.2   0.3
                                                           0.2
                                                            0.4                   0.5
                                                                                        0.3 0.0       0.1    0.2     0.3          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                          (q) Pendulum, actor                                               (r) Pendulum, critic                   (s) Reacher, actor                 (t) Reacher, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                1.0                                                                  1.0                                1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        1.0
                        0.8
                        0.8
                                                           1.0
                                                           0.8                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                0.8                                1.0
                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                        0.8                                0.8                                                                  0.8                                0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                0.6                                                                  0.6                                0.6
                        0.6                                0.6                                                                  0.6                                0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                0.4                                                                  0.4                                0.4
                        0.4                                0.4                                                                  0.4                                0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                        0.2                                0.2
                                                           0.2                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                0.2                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                        0.00.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.0                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                0.00.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.0
                          0.0
                           0.0
                                0.1   0.2
                                    0.5
                                            0.3
                                             1.0             0.0 0.5 0.5
                                                            0.4
                                                        1.5 0.0       1.0 1.5 1.0
                                                                               2.0 2.5 1.5
                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                          3.0                                      0.0      0.5      1.0             0.0 0.5 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                1.5 0.0       1.0 1.5 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       2.0 2.5 1.53.0
                             Environment steps (millions)      Environment steps (millions)                                          Environment steps (millions)      Environment steps (millions)
                              (u) Swimmer, actor                                            (v) Swimmer, critic                  (w) Walker2D, actor                (x) Walker2D, critic

Figure 5: The evolution of the fraction of the gradient that lies within the high-curvature subspace
throughout the training for PPO on all tasks. Evaluation of gradient subspaces with different num-
bers of eigenvectors. Results for the actor and critic.



                                                                                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Precise gradient; 1 EV                                                      Precise gradient; 10 EVs                         Precise gradient; 100 EVs
                                Mini-batch gradient; 1 EV                                                   Mini-batch gradient; 10 EVs                      Mini-batch gradient; 100 EVs
                        1.0
                        1.0                          1.0                                                                        1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                          0.8                                                                        0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                          0.6                                                                        0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                          0.4                                                                        0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                     0.2                                                                        0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                     0.0                                                                        0.0                      0.0
                          0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                (a) Ant, actor1.0                                                 (b) Ant, critic                (c) Ball in cup, actor            (d) Ball in cup, critic
                                                  Gradient fraction in subspace

                         1.0                          1.0                                                                       1.0                      1.0
                                              0.8 0.8
                        1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                         0.8
                        0.8                                                                                                     0.8                      0.8
                         0.6
                        0.6                           0.6                                                                       0.6                      0.6
                         0.4
                        0.4
                                              0.6 0.4                                                                           0.4                      0.4
                         0.2
                        0.2
                                                      0.2                                                                       0.2                      0.2
                         0.0
                        0.0                   0.4 0.0                                                                           0.0                      0.0
                           0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                                           0.2
                          (e) Bip.Walker, actor                                            (f) Bip.Walker, critic                (g) FetchReach, actor             (h) FetchReach, critic
                         1.0
                        1.0                       1.0                                                                           1.0                          1.0
                                           0.0 0.8
 Grad. subspace frac.


                         0.8                                                                                                    0.8                          0.8
                                              0.0 0.6 0.2     0.4      0.6                                                      0.8       1.0
                        0.8


                         0.6                                                                                                    0.6 ×106                     0.6
                        0.6
                                                           Environment steps
                         0.4
                        0.4                       0.4                                                                           0.4                          0.4
                         0.2
                        0.2
                                                  0.2                                                                           0.2                          0.2
                         0.0
                        0.0
                                                  0.0                                                                           0.0                          0.0
                           0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                          0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3             0.4                   0.5
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          (i) Finger-spin, actor                                           (j) Finger-spin, critic              (k) HalfCheetah, actor             (l) HalfCheetah, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                                                1.0                                  1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                                                                0.8                                  0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                                                0.6                                  0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                                                0.4                                  0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                                                           0.2                                  0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                                                           0.0                                  0.0                      0.0
                          0.0
                          0.0   0.1
                                      0.5
                                      0.2   0.3
                                                           1.0
                                                            0.4                   0.5
                                                                                        1.5 0.0       0.5    1.0     1.5          0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                              (m) Hopper, actor                                              (n) Hopper, critic                 (o) LunarLander, actor (p) LunarLander, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                                                1.0                                  1.0                      1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        0.8
                        0.8                                                                0.8                                  0.8                      0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                                                0.6                                  0.6                      0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                                                0.4                                  0.4                      0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                                                                                           0.2                                  0.2                      0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                                                                                           0.0                                  0.0                      0.0
                          0.0
                          0.0   0.1
                                      0.1
                                      0.2   0.3
                                                           0.2
                                                            0.4                   0.5
                                                                                        0.3 0.0       0.1    0.2     0.3          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
                          (q) Pendulum, actor                                               (r) Pendulum, critic                   (s) Reacher, actor                 (t) Reacher, critic
                        1.0
                        1.0                                1.0                                                                  1.0                                1.0
 Grad. subspace frac.


                        1.0
                        0.8
                        0.8
                                                           1.0
                                                           0.8                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                0.8                                1.0
                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                        0.8                                0.8                                                                  0.8                                0.8
                        0.6
                        0.6                                0.6                                                                  0.6                                0.6
                        0.6                                0.6                                                                  0.6                                0.6
                        0.4
                        0.4                                0.4                                                                  0.4                                0.4
                        0.4                                0.4                                                                  0.4                                0.4
                        0.2
                        0.2
                        0.2                                0.2
                                                           0.2                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                0.2                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                        0.0
                        0.0
                        0.00.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.0                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                0.00.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.0
                          0.0
                           0.0
                                0.1   0.2
                                    0.5
                                            0.3
                                             1.0             0.0 0.5 0.5
                                                            0.4
                                                        1.5 0.0       1.0 1.5 1.0
                                                                               2.0 2.5 1.5
                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                          3.0                                      0.0      0.5      1.0             0.0 0.5 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                1.5 0.0       1.0 1.5 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       2.0 2.5 1.53.0
                             Environment steps (millions)      Environment steps (millions)                                          Environment steps (millions)      Environment steps (millions)
                              (u) Swimmer, actor                                            (v) Swimmer, critic                  (w) Walker2D, actor                (x) Walker2D, critic

Figure 6: The evolution of the fraction of the gradient that lies within the high-curvature subspace
throughout the training for SAC on all tasks. Evaluation of gradient subspaces with different num-
bers of eigenvectors. Results for the actor and critic.


                                                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   1 EV                    10 EVs                           100 EVs
 Subspace overlap
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0
                               1.03 4 55 0 1 2 3 4 55
                                 1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2       1.6   2.0
                                                                                    0.0                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                             0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0     1    2        3   4      5
                                        ×10                         ×10                                                                                                  ×105                                      ×105
                                    Subspace overlap
                                                                           6
                                                  t2              ×10



                         (a) Ant,0.8
                                  actor            (b) Ant, critic                                                                       (c) Ball in cup, actor                  (d) Ball in cup, critic
                    1.0        0.6            1.0                                                                                    1.0                                         1.0
                                     t1
                    1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8                       0.8                                                                                    0.8                                         0.8
                    0.8


                    0.6
                    0.6
                               0.4            0.6                                                                                    0.6                                         0.6
                           t1
                          t1                          t1                                                                                          t1                                        t1
                    0.4
                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2
                                0.2           0.4
                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                        0 1 20.00.0
                    0.0                       0.0                                                                                    0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                      0.0      0.4  3 4 0.2 55 0.4
                                          0.8     0 1 0.62 0.8
                                                       1.2    3 4 1.0
                                                                 1.6     5
                                                                       2.0                                                                   0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                        ×10                         ×105                                                                                                 ×105                                      ×105
                                                     t2          ×10   6
                                                                           6
                                                  t2              ×10



                     (e) Bip.Walker, actor     (f) Bip.Walker,  critic                                                                (g) FetchReach, actor                      (h) FetchReach, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                          1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8     2    1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                      (i) Finger-spin, actor                                           (j) Finger-spin, critic                       (k) HalfCheetah, actor                      (l) HalfCheetah, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                          (m) Hopper, actor                                               (n) Hopper, critic                         (o) LunarLander, actor (p) LunarLander, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                      (q) Pendulum, actor                                               (r) Pendulum, critic                                 (s) Reacher, actor                        (t) Reacher, critic
 1.0                                                                             1.0                                               1.0                                         1.0
   1.0              1.0                                                            1.0                                               1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


   0.8
 0.8
                    0.8                                                            0.8
                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                               0.8


   0.6
 0.6
                    0.6                                                            0.6
                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
        t                        t
                               t1 1                                                            t
                                                                                              t1 1                                                t
                                                                                                                                                 t1 1                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                           t1 1
   0.4                                                                             0.4                                               0.4                                         0.4
                           1
 0.4                0.4                                                          0.4                                               0.4                                         0.4


 0.20.2             0.2                                                          0.20.2                                            0.20.2                                      0.20.2
   0.0                                                                             0.0                                               0.0                                         0.0
 0.0    0           0.0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0       5
                                                                                 0.0    0       1    2         3   4       5       0.0       0     1    2        3   4         5 0
                                                                                                                                                                               0.0           1    2        3   4       5
                      0         1                2
                                                 t2          3 ×1064       ×10   5 05         1      2         3       ×10
                                                                                                                       4 5   5           0       1      2        3       ×10
                                                                                                                                                                         4     5 0
                                                                                                                                                                                 5         1      2        3       ×10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4 5   5
                                                       t2                                                 t2                                                t2                                        t2

                      (u) Swimmer, actor                                                (v) Swimmer, critic                              (w) Walker2D, actor                         (x) Walker2D, critic

Figure 7: The evolution of the overlap between the high-curvature subspace identified at timestep
t1 = 100,000 and later timesteps for PPO on all tasks. Evaluation of gradient subspaces with
different numbers of eigenvectors. Results for the actor and critic.


                                                                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   1 EV                    10 EVs                           100 EVs
 Subspace overlap
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0
                               1.03 4 55 0 1 2 3 4 55
                                 1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2       1.6   2.0
                                                                                    0.0                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                             0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0     1    2        3   4      5
                                        ×10                         ×10                                                                                                  ×105                                      ×105
                                    Subspace overlap
                                                                           6
                                                  t2              ×10



                         (a) Ant,0.8
                                  actor            (b) Ant, critic                                                                       (c) Ball in cup, actor                  (d) Ball in cup, critic
                    1.0        0.6            1.0                                                                                    1.0                                         1.0
                                     t1
                    1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8                       0.8                                                                                    0.8                                         0.8
                    0.8


                    0.6
                    0.6
                               0.4            0.6                                                                                    0.6                                         0.6
                           t1
                          t1                          t1                                                                                          t1                                        t1
                    0.4
                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2
                                0.2           0.4
                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                        0 1 20.00.0
                    0.0                       0.0                                                                                    0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                      0.0      0.4  3 4 0.2 55 0.4
                                          0.8     0 1 0.62 0.8
                                                       1.2    3 4 1.0
                                                                 1.6     5
                                                                       2.0                                                                   0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                        ×10                         ×105                                                                                                 ×105                                      ×105
                                                     t2          ×10   6
                                                                           6
                                                  t2              ×10



                     (e) Bip.Walker, actor     (f) Bip.Walker,  critic                                                                (g) FetchReach, actor                      (h) FetchReach, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                          1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8     2    1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                      (i) Finger-spin, actor                                           (j) Finger-spin, critic                       (k) HalfCheetah, actor                      (l) HalfCheetah, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                          (m) Hopper, actor                                               (n) Hopper, critic                         (o) LunarLander, actor (p) LunarLander, critic
                    1.0
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                              1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


                    0.8
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                              0.8                                         0.8
                    0.6
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                              0.6                                         0.6
                        t        t1                                                            t1                                                 t1                                        t1
                    0.4                                                             0.4                                              0.4                                         0.4
                           1

                    0.4


                    0.2
                    0.2                                                             0.2                                              0.2                                         0.2
                    0.0                                                             0.0                                              0.0                                         0.0
                    0.0
                        0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0    5           0     1    2         3   4      5                  0     1    2        3   4      5          0     1    2        3   4      5
                                                  t2              ×10      ×105
                                                                           6
                                                                                                                       ×105                                              ×105                                      ×105
                      (q) Pendulum, actor                                               (r) Pendulum, critic                                 (s) Reacher, actor                        (t) Reacher, critic
 1.0                                                                             1.0                                               1.0                                         1.0
   1.0              1.0                                                            1.0                                               1.0                                         1.0
 Subspace overlap


   0.8
 0.8
                    0.8                                                            0.8
                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                               0.8


   0.6
 0.6
                    0.6                                                            0.6
                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
        t                        t
                               t1 1                                                            t
                                                                                              t1 1                                                t
                                                                                                                                                 t1 1                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                           t1 1
   0.4                                                                             0.4                                               0.4                                         0.4
                           1
 0.4                0.4                                                          0.4                                               0.4                                         0.4


 0.20.2             0.2                                                          0.20.2                                            0.20.2                                      0.20.2
   0.0                                                                             0.0                                               0.0                                         0.0
 0.0    0           0.0
                      0.0        1
                               0.4        0.8    2     1.2   3   1.6   4
                                                                       2.0       5
                                                                                 0.0    0       1    2         3   4       5       0.0       0     1    2        3   4         5 0
                                                                                                                                                                               0.0           1    2        3   4       5
                      0         1                2
                                                 t2          3 ×1064       ×10   5 05         1      2         3       ×10
                                                                                                                       4 5   5           0       1      2        3       ×10
                                                                                                                                                                         4     5 0
                                                                                                                                                                                 5         1      2        3       ×10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4 5   5
                                                       t2                                                 t2                                                t2                                        t2

                      (u) Swimmer, actor                                                (v) Swimmer, critic                              (w) Walker2D, actor                         (x) Walker2D, critic

Figure 8: The evolution of the overlap between the high-curvature subspace identified at timestep
t1 = 100,000 and later timesteps for SAC on all tasks. Evaluation of gradient subspaces with
different numbers of eigenvectors. Results for the actor and critic.


                                                                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    I MPACT OF SUBOPTIMAL HYPERPARAMETERS

Hyperparameters typically have a significant impact on the learning performance of policy gradient
algorithms (Paul et al., 2019). In Section 4.2, we analyzed the gradient subspace for training runs
with tuned hyperparameter configurations. However, which hyperparameters work well for a given
problem is typically not known a priori. Finding good hyperparameters often involves running nu-
merous RL trainings, which might be infeasible when training on real-world tasks. For our insights
to be valuable for such real-world settings, it is crucial that suitable gradient subspaces can also be
identified for training runs with suboptimal hyperparameters. Therefore, in this section, we investi-
gate the robustness of the gradient subspace with respect to suboptimal hyperparameters. To get a
set of hyperparameters that are realistic but potentially suboptimal, we sample hyperparameter con-
figurations from the ranges that are found frequently in the tuned hyperparameters of RL Baselines3
Zoo (Raffin, 2020). Particularly, we draw the samples from the sets given in Table 1. Note that these
are also the bounds we use when sampling configurations for hyperparameter tuning.

     Algorithm         Hyperparameter                         Values                   Logscale
                      learning rate                        [10−5 , 10−1 ]                yes
                        batch size                      {32, 64, 128, 256}               no
                          n steps                 {256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096}           no
                         n epochs                           {5, 10, 20}                  no
        PPO                gamma                              [0.9, 1]                   no
                        gae lambda                            [0.9, 1]                   no
                        clip range                        {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}                no
                         ent coef                          [10−8 , 10−2 ]                yes
                         net arch               {(64, 64), (128, 128), (256, 256)}       no
                      learning rate                        [10−5 , 10−1 ]                yes
                        batch size                      {32, 64, 128, 256}               no
                        train freq                       {1, 4, 16, 32, 64}              no
        SAC                gamma                              [0.9, 1]                   no
                            tau                        {0.005, 0.01, 0.02}               no
                     learning starts                   {100, 1000, 10000}                no
                         net arch               {(64, 64), (128, 128), (256, 256)}       no

Table 1: Sets from which we draw random hyperparameter configurations for PPO and SAC. We
refer to each hyperparameter by its name in Stable Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). Logscale means
that we first transform the interval into logspace and draw the exponent uniformly from the trans-
formed range. All other hyperparameters are drawn uniformly. These sets reflect common hyperpa-
rameter choices from RL Baselines3 Zoo (Raffin, 2020).


We sampled a total of 100 hyperparameter configurations per algorithm and task. Figure 9 dis-
plays the distribution over the maximum cumulative reward that these hyperparameter configurations
achieve. As expected, the variance in the performance is large across the hyperparameter configura-
tions. While some configurations reach performance levels comparable to the tuned configuration,
most sampled configurations converge to suboptimal behaviors.
To display the values of the gradient subspace fraction and the subspace overlap compactly for all
configurations, we compress the results for each training run to a single scalar. For the gradient
subspace fraction, we compute the mean of the criterion over the timesteps. Regarding the subspace
overlap, we choose the early timestep t1 = 100,000 in accordance to the experiments in Section 4.3.
However, taking the mean over the remaining timesteps would not be faithful to how the subspace
would typically be utilized in downstream applications. Such methods would likely update the
gradient subspace after a given number of gradient steps instead of identifying it once and using it
for the rest of the training. The rate of this update would likely depend on the exact way that the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             1000                                                                    6000
                              800
     Maximum reward


                                                                                    Maximum reward
                              600                                                                    4000
                              400
                                                                                                     2000
                              200
                                   0                                                                   0

                                       Finger-spin (PPO)   Finger-spin (SAC)                                     Walker2D (PPO)    Walker2D (SAC)

Figure 9: Violin plot of the maximum cumulative rewards achieved by 100 agents trained with
random hyperparameters on Finger-spin (left) and Walker2D (right). The black dots mark the per-
formance of the individual random configurations, and the red cross signifies the performance of
the tuned hyperparameters averaged over 10 random seeds. The random hyperparameters result
in agents of vastly different maximum performance. While some of the random hyperparameters
achieve performance comparable to the tuned agents, the bulk of random hyperparameters stagnate
at suboptimal performance levels.


                             1.0
Gradient subspace fraction


                             0.8
                             0.6
                             0.4
                             0.2
                             0.0
                                       Finger-spin (PPO)      Finger-spin (SAC)                             Walker2D (PPO)        Walker2D (SAC)

                                                                               (a) Actor

                             1.0
Gradient subspace fraction


                             0.8
                             0.6
                             0.4
                             0.2
                             0.0
                                       Finger-spin (PPO)      Finger-spin (SAC)                             Walker2D (PPO)        Walker2D (SAC)

                                                                               (b) Critic

Figure 10: Violin plot of the mean gradient subspace fraction throughout the training of 100 agents
with random hyperparameters. The red cross marks the same quantity for the high-performing
hyperparameters used throughout the paper (averaged over 10 random seeds). For PPO’s actor, the
variance in the gradient subspace fraction is significantly higher than for SAC’s. The critic’s gradient
subspace fraction is very high across all hyperparameter configurations.


                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Subspace overlap (t2 t1 = 50,000)
                                    1.0
                                    0.8
                                    0.6
                                    0.4
                                    0.2
                                    0.0
                                          Finger-spin (PPO)   Finger-spin (SAC)          Walker2D (PPO)   Walker2D (SAC)

                                                                            (a) Actor
Subspace overlap (t2 t1 = 50,000)


                                    1.0
                                    0.8
                                    0.6
                                    0.4
                                    0.2
                                    0.0
                                          Finger-spin (PPO)   Finger-spin (SAC)          Walker2D (PPO)   Walker2D (SAC)

                                                                            (b) Critic

Figure 11: Violin plot of the mean subspace overlap for t1 = 100,000 and t2 = 150,000 of 50 agents
with random hyperparameters. The red cross marks the same quantity for the high-performing
hyperparameters used throughout the paper (averaged over 10 random seeds). For both tasks and
networks, the variance of the subspace overlap is large across the hyperparameter configurations.


subspace is utilized. For this analysis, we choose t2 = 150,000, so that the timestep difference of
t2 − t1 = 50,000 steps is significantly shorter than the total length of the training, but the number of
gradient steps is large enough that the subspace could change.
The results for the gradient subspace fraction and the subspace overlap for random hyperparam-
eters are visualized in Figure 10 and Figure 11, respectively. Figure 10a shows for SAC’s actor
that the gradient is well contained in the subspace for most random hyperparameter configurations.
For PPO’s actor, the spread in the gradient subspace fraction is significantly higher. As shown in
Figure 10b, the gradient subspace fraction for the critic is very high for all hyperparameter config-
urations. These results suggest that gradient subspaces can be utilized in SAC independently of the
hyperparameter configuration, while PPO’s actor might require more considerations.
Figure 11 shows that there is a significant spread in the subspace overlap for the random hyperpa-
rameter configurations, which indicates that potential downstream applications might need to update
the gradient subspace more frequently, depending on the hyperparameters.


                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    D ERIVATION OF THE GRADIENT SUBSPACE FRACTION OBJECTIVE

In this section, we derive Equation (6). Recall that Pk = (v1 , . . . , vk )T ∈ Rk×n is the matrix of
the k largest Hessian eigenvectors, which is semi-orthogonal. We use g̃ = Pk+ Pk g ∈ Rn to denote
the projection of the gradient g into the subspace and back to its original dimensionality. In the
following derivation, we drop the subscript k of matrix Pk for ease of notation.


                                          ||g̃ − g||2
                       Sfrac (P, g) = 1 −                                                          (9)
                                             ||g||2
                                          ||P + Pg − g||2
                                   =1−                                                            (10)
                                                  ||g||2
                                          ||P Pg − g||2
                                               T
                                   =1−                                                            (11)
                                                  ||g||2
                                          (P Pg − g)T (P T Pg − g)
                                               T
                                   =1−                                                            (12)
                                                           gT g
                                          (g P P − g T )(P T Pg − g)
                                             T T
                                   =1−                                                            (13)
                                                            gT g
                                          g P PP Pg − 2g T P T Pg + g T g
                                            T T          T
                                   =1−                                                            (14)
                                                                gT g
                                          g P Pg − 2g P Pg + g T g
                                            T T                T T
                                   =1−                                                            (15)
                                                             gT g
                                            T         T T
                                          g g − g P Pg
                                   =1−                                                            (16)
                                                    gT g
                                     g g − g g + g T P T Pg
                                       T         T
                                   =                                                              (17)
                                                   gT g
                                       T T
                                     g P Pg
                                   =                                                              (18)
                                         gT g
                                     (Pg)T Pg
                                   =                                                              (19)
                                         gT g
                                     ||Pg||2
                                   =                                                              (20)
                                      ||g||2

Note that we used the fact that the pseudo-inverse of a semi-orthogonal matrix P is equal to its
transpose P + = P T in step (11). Furthermore, we used the property PP T = I of semi-orthogonal
matrices in step (15).

E    S UBSPACE OVERLAP FOR THE ENTIRE TRAINING

In Section 4.3, we showed the subspace overlap for a range of 400,000 timesteps. Figure 12 visual-
izes the subspace overlap criterion with t1 = 100,000 for all future timesteps on tasks that require
training for 3 million steps. While in practical applications of gradient subspaces, the subspace
would likely be updated multiple times during training, this visualization highlights the influence of
the data distribution on the subspace. The plots show a small drop in the subspace overlap for SAC
at 1.1 million steps. Since the replay buffer has a size of 1 million samples, this marks the point at
which the original data from timestep t1 is completely replaced by new data collected by updated
policies. Since the networks’ training data is sampled from the replay buffer, this drop indicates that
this change in the data distribution has a negative effect on the subspace overlap. The effect is gen-
erally more pronounced for the critic than the actor because the actor’s subspace overlap degrades
faster and is already at a relatively low level at the mark of 1.1 million timesteps. For PPO, there is
no such drop in the subspace overlap since the algorithm does not use experience replay and instead
collects new data for every update.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                PPO, actor          PPO, critic      SAC, actor          SAC, critic
                           1.0
                          1.0                                     1.0
       Subspace overlap


                           0.8
                          0.8                                     0.8
                           0.6
                          0.6                                     0.6
                              t
                           0.4                                    0.4
                                1

                          0.4
                                             1.0
                           0.2                                    0.2
                                                Subspace overlap


                          0.2
                                             0.8
                           0.0               0.6 2.0 2.5 3.0      0.0
                             0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5                         0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0
                            0.0     0.5   1.0   1.5
                                                   t 1 ×106
                                                                   2.0   2.5   3.0
                                                                                               ×106
                                         t   0.4    2                    ×10
                                                                               6


                                             0.2
                                        (a) Ant                              (b) HalfCheetah

                           1.0               0.0                  1.0
                                                0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                          1.0
       Subspace overlap


                           0.8
                          0.8                                  t2 0.8×106
                           0.6
                          0.6                                     0.6
                              t
                           0.4                                    0.4
                                1

                          0.4


                           0.2
                          0.2                                     0.2
                           0.0                                    0.0
                             0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0             0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
                          0.0
                            0.0     0.5   1.0   1.5                2.0   2.5   3.0
                                         t t2       2  ×10  6            ×10
                                                                               6
                                                                                     t2        ×106
                                           (c) Swimmer                                    (d) Walker2D

Figure 12: Evolution of the subspace overlap between the early timestep t1 = 100,000 (marked by
the dashed gray line) and all future timesteps of the training. Results for the actor and critic of PPO
and SAC. For SAC, a small drop in the subspace overlap is visible in all plots at around 1.1 million
timesteps. This marks the timestep at which the data in the replay buffer is replaced completely by
new data, indicating that the data distribution affects the subspace overlap.


                                                                                     22
