Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING H IERARCHICAL I MAGE S EGMENTATION
F OR R ECOGNITION AND B Y R ECOGNITION
 Tsung-Wei Ke∗1                   Sangwoo Mo∗2                Stella X. Yu1,2
 1                                         2
   University of California, Berkeley        University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
 {twke,stellayu}@berkeley.edu {swmo,stellayu}@umich.edu



                                                      A BSTRACT

            Large vision and language models learned directly through image-text associations
            often lack detailed visual substantiation, whereas image segmentation tasks are
            treated separately from recognition, supervisedly learned without interconnections.
            Our key observation is that, while an image can be recognized in multiple ways,
            each has a consistent part-and-whole visual organization. Segmentation thus should
            be treated not as an end task to be mastered through supervised learning, but as an
            internal process that evolves with and supports the ultimate goal of recognition.
            We propose to integrate a hierarchical segmenter into the recognition process, train
            and adapt the entire model solely on image-level recognition objectives. We learn
            hierarchical segmentation for free alongside recognition, automatically uncovering
            part-to-whole relationships that not only underpin but also enhance recognition.
            Enhancing the Vision Transformer (ViT) with adaptive segment tokens and graph
            pooling, our model surpasses ViT in unsupervised part-whole discovery, semantic
            segmentation, image classification, and efficiency. Notably, our model (trained on
            unlabeled 1M ImageNet images) outperforms SAM (trained on 11M images and 1
            billion masks) by absolute 8% in mIoU on PartImageNet object segmentation.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Learning visual recognition through the association of images with textual descriptions, as demon-
strated by CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), has achieved significant
success. However, direct supervision that links images to semantics often fails to provide what-is-
where visual substantiation. For instance, a model might be trained to categorize the image in Fig. 1
as ink, girl, or woman without understanding how these categories differ in this image. Similarly,
visual segmentation can be trained using masks at multiple granularities (Kirillov et al., 2023), but
such models may not grasp how segments are related to each other and to overall image recognition!

                           segmentation recognition    Figure 1: Our insight is that image segmentation and
                                                       recognition form a visual parsing continuum, and
                                          ink          their consistency is more essential than individual
                                                       text labels for recognition. We may recognize this
                                                       image as ink, girl, or woman. While the foreground
                                                       (colored areas) may vary, it always has a consistent hier-
                                                       archical segmentation: three individual blobs when no
                                          girl         person is recognized, or parts (face, hair) of the person
                                                       recognized as girl or woman. Instead of treating segmen-
                                                       tation and recognition as separate tasks, we model them
                                                       concurrently by including segmentation in the loop for
                                                       recognition. With recognition objectives solely at the
                                          woman        image level, not only can hierarchical segmentation be
                                                       learned for free, but better and substantiated recognition
                                                       also arises from such internal part-to-whole consistency.
    *
        Equal contribution. Code available at https://github.com/twke18/CAST.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              image labels
                                             Classifier
                                               (ViT)                                         Corgi
                         patches
                                                              pixel class labels
           prior work                        Semantic
                                            Segmenter
                                            (Segmenter)
   image
                                            Boundary
                                                                                      ⋯
                                            Segmenter
                                              (SAM)           pixel boundary labels

                        superpixels


                                      Segmenter for Recognition
                                                                                             Corgi
           our work                            (CAST)



Figure 2: While prior work uses patches as visual units and treats segmentation and recognition
as separate, supervised tasks with distinct models and data, our work uses superpixels as visual
units and integrates hierarchical segmentation into the recognition process, learning it internally
from a single recognition objective. Classifiers like ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) learn recognition
from image-level labels. Semantic Segmenters such as Segmenter (Strudel et al., 2021) learn object
segments from pixel-level class labels but lack part-whole granularity. Boundary Segmenters like
SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) learns regions of multiple granualities from boundary labels without
hierarchical organization. In contrast, our Segmenter for Recognition (CAST) integrates a fine-
to-coarse segment hierarchy directly into the recognition process. By graph-pooling over segment
tokens, it effectively solves all three tasks concurrently within a visual parsing continuum.

Our first insight is that segmentation and recognition form a continuum of visual parsing, substanti-
ating concepts not primarily through textual labels, but through visual organization. For the image
in Fig. 1: 1) Recognition of ink is concurrent with organizing black pixels as three individual blobs
which form ink group; 2) Recognition of girl is concurrent with organizing profile face and black hair
which form girl’s head; 3) Recognition of woman is concurrent with organizing three-quarter face
and black hair which form woman’s head. Recognition of the whole is validated by its segmentation
into parts. There is always a part segmentation hierarchy consistent with the whole recognition, and
each varies in conjunction with the other. We cannot simultaneously recognize the image as girl and
the nose of the woman. In other words, the actual semantics of recognition may not be crucial, but
the concurrency and consistency between segmentation and recognition are.
In human vision, composition of distinctive parts could facilitate scene understanding (Biederman,
1987), whereas coarse recognition could help explain connected parts (Maurer et al., 2002). Informa-
tion flows both ways between parts and wholes, clarifying each other in a final consistent percept
(Tanaka & Farah, 1993; Tanaka & Simonyi, 2016; Tanaka et al., 2019).
In computer vision, prior works (Fig. 2 top) treat segmentation and recognition tasks separately,
each having its own dedicated model and annotated training data. 1) Recognition models are trained
using image-level labels that distinguish between categories (Deng et al., 2009) or instances (Wu
et al., 2018). Each image is encoded into a global feature vector (He et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), which typically emphasizes the most discriminative parts for recognition (Selvaraju et al.,
2017). 2) Segmentation models are trained using pixel-level labels (Long et al., 2015; Kirillov et al.,
2023), employing skip connections (Lin et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2021) to propagate information
across various spatial resolutions and coverage areas. 3) Due to their distinct architectural designs,
recognition models cannot be directly used for segmentation tasks. Instead, architectural modifications
and fine-tuning with segmentation labels are often required (Ahn & Kwak, 2018).
Our second insight is that, with segmentation and recognition on a visual parsing continuum,
segmentation should be treated not as an end task to be mastered through external supervised learning,
but an internal process that evolves with and supports the ultimate goal of recognition.
We propose to integrate hierarchical segmentation into the recognition process (Fig. 2 bottom),
to naturally ensure that our recognition model achieves the desired consistency and concurrency
between segmentation and recognition. Specifically, our model processes the input image through a
fine-to-coarse segmentation that correlates with part-to-whole relationships, culminating in a global
feature vector that encapsulates the entire image. This segmentation, internal to the recognition
process and not an end goal in itself, ultimately enhances recognition with visual spatial parsing.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           dog (54%)      Figure 3: Our model performs segmentation and
                                                          recognition simultaneously during test-time adapta-
                                                          tion: Initial predictions in a feedforward hierarchy
                                                          capture vision at a glance, whereas enhancements
                 feed-forward hierarchy                   in a reverse hierarchy captures vision with scrutiny.
                 vision at glance                         It processes an image of a dog, human, and car in a
              feedback reverse hierarchy    backprop      feed-forward hierarchy, initially recognizing the dog
                                            to solidify   with 54% activation based on only the back of the dog.
                                            recognition
                 feed-forward hierarchy                   After backpropagating to increase dog activation, the
                 vision with scrutiny                     model undergoes test-time adaptation in a reverse hi-
                                           dog (97%)      erarchy. This adjustment allows the next feed-forward
                                                          process to uncover the whole dog and boost dog acti-
                                                          vation to 97%! Our segmentation and recognition thus
                                                          mutually influence and enhance each other.

Consequently, our model can be directly optimize for recognition using the final global feature vector,
while developing hierarchical segmentation for free that spatially grounds recognition in the image.
Our concept can be encapsulated by the phrase: Segmentation Of Recognition, By Recognition,
and For Recognition. “Of” refers to looping segmentation in the process of recognition. “By”
indicates that the learning process of internal segmentation is driven by image-level recognition
objectives, without any segment-level supervision. “For” reflects that the outcomes of our model
automatically uncover part-to-whole relationships that not only ground but also enhance recognition.
We implement our concept by innovating Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
on two aspects. 1) We use arbitrarily-shaped superpixels instead of square patches on a regular
grid as the visual units for ViT tokens. 2) We use graph-pooling to group these segment tokens
successively towards recognition, forming a fine-to-coarse segmentation hierarchy that reflects part-
to-whole relationships. The entire model is learned solely from image recognition objectives, either
unsupervised (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020) or supervised (Touvron et al., 2021). Our model
is abbreviated as CAST, signifying that it Concurrently learns segmentation and recognition using
Adaptive Segment Tokens. Unlike the traditional text-inspired Vision Transformer, which utilizes
regular patches as visual words, our vision-inspired CAST employs superpixels that adhere to visual
contours as visual words. In this sense, our CAST embodies a true vision transformer model.
By looping hierarchical segmentation into recognition, CAST delivers four major results. 1) CAST
derives a hierarchical segmentation by grouping segment tokens from fine to coarse. SAM (Kirillov
et al., 2023), trained with 11 million images and 1 billion masks for multi-scale segmentations,
fails to grasp part-to-whole relationships and produce hierarchical segmentation. 2) CAST learns
segmentation for free directly from an image recognition objective. During training, our model adapts
internal segmentation to optimize the final image recognition. During testing, it processes images in a
feed-forward hierarchy, making initial predictions that capture vision at a glance (Ahissar et al., 2009).
For uncertain recognition, our model can continue test-time adaptation (TTA) (Sun et al., 2020)
to solidify recognition. With targeted feedback backpropagating in a reverse hierarchy, it refines
internal part-to-whole segmentation alongside improvements in final recognition, capturing vision
with scrutiny (Fig. 3 and Appx. C). 3) CAST simultaneously performs segmentation and recognition,
matching or surpassing previous methods like HSG (Ke et al., 2022) for hierarchical segmentation and
Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021) for classification. While these methods require specially designed
architectures for each task, CAST efficiently manages both using a single unified model. 4) CAST
represents a natural evolution in vision transformer design, utilizing superpixels instead of square
patches as visual units. This approach allows our model to achieve more accurate segmentation
compared to patch-based ViT. It excels across multiple tasks, including both unsupervised and
supervised semantic segmentation as well as attention-based figure-ground segmentation.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Concurrent segmentation and recognition was explored before the advent of deep learning. Previ-
ously, models simultaneously performed recognition by grouping compatible patches and segmenta-
tion by grouping visually similar pixels through detected pixel-patch relations. This approach resulted
in object-specific (Yu et al., 2002; Yu & Shi, 2003b) and figure-ground segmentation (Maire, 2010;
Maire et al., 2011). However, these methods relied on manually crafted features and pre-trained
object part detectors. In contrast, our model is entirely data-driven and trained from scratch.


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vision transformers have undergone significant advancements (Han et al., 2022) since the intro-
duction of ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Two primary strategies exist for enhancing efficiency:
One reduces the number of tokens through spatial pooling, leveraging principles from hierarchical
convolution (Liu et al., 2021; Heo et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023), and the other
assesses token significance to selectively prune tokens (Goyal et al., 2020; Rao et al., 2021; Marin
et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022; Bolya et al., 2023). Our approach diverges from these methods in
two fundamental ways: 1) Our token pooling is designed to support a segmentation-recognition
continuum within a visual parsing hierarchy; efficiency emerges only as a beneficial byproduct. 2)
Unlike any other ViT model, our model produces a consistent hierarchical segmentation.
Hierarchical image segmentation aims to group pixels consistently across multiple granularities.
A representative approach is agglomerative clustering (Sharon et al., 2006; Arbelaez et al., 2010),
which starts by extracting pixel features, initializing clusters, and then merging them based on feature
similarity. Recent works often adopt a supervised approach that uses top-down decomposition to
detect coarse semantic instances and break them down into finer semantic parts (de Geus et al., 2021;
Wei et al., 2024; Li et al., 2022b;a). To circumvent part annotations, self-supervised learning is used
to enhance part segmentation for novel categories through cross-image pixel correspondence (Sun
et al., 2023) or feature clustering (Pan et al., 2023). Another line of approaches predicts part- and
object-level segmentations separately (Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024), which
often leads to misaligned segmentation across granularities. In contrast, our work modernizes the
agglomerative approach by integrating 1) representation learning, 2) hierarchical segmentation, and
3) image recognition within a transformer architecture.
Additional related works on superpixels and clustering methods can be found in Appx. D.

3      O UR H IERARCHICAL S EGMENTER AND R ECOGNIZER ON A C ONTINUUM
Our goal is to integrate hierarchical segmentation and recognition into a continuous visual parsing
framework, where the segmenter is internal to and supports the recognition process (Fig. 2). During
training, the segmenter is developed with the recognizer, both guided solely by the image-level
recognition objective. During testing, optimizing the recognizer by maximizing its winning activations
results in backpropagation that refines the segmenter (Fig. 3). In our concurrent segmentation and
recognition framework called CAST, segmentation not only substantiates recognition but is also
directed by it, ensuring that both processes mutually enhance each other.
We begin by utilizing the widely adopted ViT for recognition tasks and identify two major challenges
in adapting it for hierarchical segmentation (Fig. 4): 1) The use of fixed-shape patches leads to
poor characterization of complex visual contours (Bolya et al., 2022); 2) The absence of explicit
segmentation makes it difficult to enforce consistent pixel grouping across granularities.



                                                                                                                                                    self-supervised
                                                                                                                                               (instance discrimination)

                                                                                                                                                     Recognition
                                  𝑆#                                                𝑆!                                              𝑆"               Objectives
                              superpixels                                      fine segments                                 coarse segments
                                                                       feature
    Superpixel
                                                                    𝑃! assignment                                      𝑃"
    Partioning                  features                               probability
                                  𝑍#
                                                                                   𝑍!
                                                                                                                                   𝑍"
                                                                                                                                                                           Corgi
                 Conv Embed


                                            ViT Block

                                                        ViT Block


                                                                                               ViT Block

                                                                                                           ViT Block
                                                                     Pooling


                                                                                                                        Pooling
                                                                     Graph


                                                                                                                        Graph



                                                                                                                                    …
                                                                                    …


                                                                                                                                                     supervised
                                   …


                                                                                                                                                                                            spider
                                                                                                                                                (image classification)
                                                                                                                                  [CLASS]                                          parrot
                                                                                  [CLASS]                                                                                                        monkey ⋯
                                [CLASS]



Figure 4: Our model implements our concept of concurrency and consistency in visual parsing
by innovating ViT with adaptive segment tokens and progressive graph pooling. It starts with
superpixels instead of square patches, and applies graph pooling to merge fine segments Sl−1 into
coarse segments Sl . Both segment transition probability Pl and segment feature Zl are learned to
optimize an image-level recognition objective, which could be self-supervised instance discrimination
or supervised image classification. Without any external supervision, we uncover object wholes (dog)
along with small details (ears) and thin structures (legs), validating the effectiveness of our concept.
                                                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our solution is 1) to replace fixed-shape patches with adaptive segments that adhere to visual contours,
and 2) to employ graph pooling over segments to progressively construct a parsing hierarchy. In
Fig. 4, our model utilizes segments as visual units and alternates between transformer encoder blocks
that extract segment features and graph pooling modules that merge finer segments into coarser ones.
We describe adaptive segments and graph pooling below, and list our algorithm in Appx. E.1.

3.1   A DAPTIVE S EGMENT T OKENS FROM S UPERPIXELS
Segments consist of arbitrary groups of pixels. For effective hierarchical segmentation, we require
representations for both the pixel groupings of segments, labeled S0 , S1 , S2 , . . ., and the segment
features, labeled Z0 , Z1 , Z2 , . . ., across levels from fine to coarse.
Our initial segmentation, S0 , uses superpixels that match the low-level features within areas and align
with visual contours. We achieve this using SEEDS (Bergh et al., 2012), which breaks the image into
color-consistent, locally connected regions. Discussions on the choice of superpixel methods can be
found in Appx A.2. We then combine these superpixels into larger segments, forming a segmentation
hierarchy with precisely outlined contours, as shown in Fig. 4 top.
Our initial segment feature, Z0 , uses both visual and spatial features. We first apply convolutional
layers to the input image to generate pixel-level features, labeled Xcnn . The visual feature for each
superpixel, Xs , is the average of pixel features Xcnn within that superpixel. Similarly, the positional
encoding for each superpixel, Epos , is the average of pixel positional encodings, which are set at the
same resolution as Xcnn , within that superpixel. The initial segment feature, Z0 , is the sum of these
two superpixel features appended with the usual class token Xclass for ViT: Z0 = [Xs + Epos ; Xclass ].
Starting from superpixels in S0 , we group these finest segment tokens Z0 into L levels of coarser
segment tokens (Z1 , . . . , ZL ) to progressively capture more global visual contexts. These adaptive
segment tokens enable direct derivation of image segmentation, (S1 , . . . , SL ), from the segment
index of each pixel, eliminating the need for post-processing. Our approach contrasts with previous
methods such as SegSort (Hwang et al., 2019) and HSG (Ke et al., 2022), which maintain separation
between image segmentation and feature extraction across their entire models.

3.2   G RAPH P OOLING FOR H IERARCHICAL S EGMENTATION
We construct a hierarchical segmentation by applying graph pooling to adaptive segment tokens,
progressively aggregating them from fine to coarse levels. The aggregation process utilizes a soft
assignment probability, Pl , which maps a fine segment a at level l − 1 to a coarser segment c at level
l. We initialize coarse segments Zl , dimensioned by segment and feature channel counts, by sampling
centroids of fine segment tokens Zl−1 . The closer segment a is to segment c in the feature space, as
measured by feature similarity function sim, the larger the probability Pl of assigning a to c:
                             Pl = Prob(a → c) ∝ sim(Zl−1 [a], Zl [c]).                               (1)
Representing initial segmentation S0 in a binary partition matrix, dimensioned by pixel and segment
counts, we derive a segmentation hierarchy based on progressive segment membership transitions:
                                 Sl = Sl−1 × Pl ,       l = 1, 2, . . . , L.                         (2)
While Sl−1 is binary, Sl is a soft segmentation that can be hardened through a common winner-take-
all strategy. Segment tokens Zl are updated according to Sl by averaging Zl−1 using Pl and adding
them with an MLP head to the previously initialized values: with ./ denoting element-wise division,
                                 Zl ⇐ Zl + MLP(Pl⊤ Zl−1 ./Pl⊤ 1).                                    (3)
To demonstrate how our superpixels and hierarchical segmenter enhance recognition, we compare
our CAST to ViT, which uses patches and maintains the same number of tokens throughout the
model. For the sake of comparisons, we also derive a hierarchical segmentation from the already
trained ViT tokens by applying K-means clustering in a consistent fine-to-coarse manner (details
in Appx. E.5). Fig.5 demonstrates that not only the use of superpixels allows our segmentation to
follow visual contours more closely, but enforcing segmentation consistency across granularities also
enables CAST to preserve small details and thin structures in coarse segmentation. Consequently,
while ViT and CAST are trained on identical unlabeled data, CAST significantly excels in uncovering
whole objects without any supervision, validating the benefits of our superpixels and token pooling.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    image     patches     ViT: 32,16,8-way segmentation   superpixels CAST: 32,16,8-way segmentation


Figure 5: CAST uncovers objects with complex contours, due to the use of not only superpixels
but also progressive token pooling. We train ViT and CAST on unlabeled ImageNet data using the
MoCo objective (He et al., 2020). For the ImageNet image in Column 1 of each row, Columns 2-9
show respectively its square patches used by ViT, 32,16,8-way segmentations derived from ViT tokens
via fine-to-coarse K-means clustering, superpixels used by CAST, and 32,16,8-way segmentations
generated by CAST. Our color scheme has coarse-to-fine consistency: Colors in 8-way segmentations
are matched between ViT and CAST, while colors in 16(32)-way segmentations have the same hues
as 8-way but vary in saturation(value) to reflect finer details. Our results more closely follow visual
contours and successfully uncover entire objects with details like neck, thin legs, and long ears.

Our model also offers flexibility in segmentation granularity during inference, unlike GroupViT (Xu
et al., 2022) and HSG (Ke et al., 2022), which rely on a fixed number of learnable queries for
next-level segments that cannot be altered post-training. In our approach, the number of clustering
centroids, which can differ from the training configuration, determines segmentation granularity.
Specifically, we employ the Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) (Qi et al., 2017) to select a subset of token
features as initial centroids. This strategy ensures maximal coverage of the feature space without bias
towards dominant features, leading to more robust segmentation (Appx. F).
Architecture and Training. CAST can be integrated into any existing ViT architecture by replacing
its patch encoder with our segment encoder and by inserting our graph pooling module within the ViT
blocks. We use SEEDS to extract superpixels and apply convolutional layers from (Xiao et al., 2021)
to obtain initial segment features, ensuring a fair comparison with ViT. Following the original ViT
architecture, we name our models CAST-(S/B), corresponding to ViT-(S/B). Segmentation granularity
is set to 64, 32, 16, 8 after 3, 3, 3, 2 encoder blocks, respectively. The segments are referred to as
level-1, 2, 3, 4 segments, starting with 196 superpixels at level-0. CAST can be trained by supervised
learning as in DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021) and Segmenter (Strudel et al., 2021), or by self-supervised
learning as in MoCo (He et al., 2020) on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and COCO (Lin et al., 2014).

4     E XPERIMENTS ON H IERARCHICAL /F LAT S EGMENTATION & R ECOGNITION
Our model has an internal hierarchical segmenter for recognition and can be trained solely using
image recognition objectives. We study its performance and benefits in three tasks: 1) unsupervised
hierarchical segmentation and part-whole discovery, 2) flat semantic segmentation, 3) recognition.
Additional ablation, results, experimental details, and visualizations can be found in the Appendix.

4.1   U NSUPERVISED H IERARCHICAL S EGMENTATION AND PART-W HOLE D ISCOVERY
We consider three interesting baselines for CAST: ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), HSG (Ke et al.,
2022), and SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). 1) CAST, ViT, and HSG can all be trained on the same
unlabeled data. In contrast, SAM has been pre-trained on large-scale, pixel-wise labeled images
and can be used directly. As a boundary segmenter, SAM only knows where but not what segments
are in the image. 2) ViT does not produce a hierarchical segmentation. We construct a hierarchy
by applying fine-to-coarse K-means clustering of its final-layer tokens, trained without multiscale
parsing and shown to be effective for detection (Li et al., 2022c) and segmentation (Kirillov et al.,
2023). 3) Both HSG and CAST produce a consistent hierarchical segmentation based on superpixels.
However, HSG is designed for segmentation, whereas CAST is designed for recognition. As HSG
uses ResNet50, we compare HSG with similarly sized CAST-S. 4) SAM outputs segmentations at
multiple granularities, but it does not enforce consistency among them. We report on both SAM-H,
the largest model, and SAM-B, the smallest model which matches ViT-B and CAST-B in size.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      image        class labels    SAM-H              ViT-B            CAST-B          Ground Truth
                         Fish


                    Fish Head
                    Fish Body
                      Fish Fin


                  ← SAM-H
                  Segments


Figure 6: CAST enhances recognition with a hierarchical segmentation that groups parts into
wholes without supervision, whereas both ViT and SAM perform poorly: They lack superpixels
to capture visual details and a hierarchical segmenter to simplify recognition. SAM is pretrained
on 11M images and 1B masks, while ViT and CAST are self-supervised on 1M ImageNet images, all
producing segmentations on PartImageNet without semantics. We name each segment using OVSeg
(Liang et al., 2023) for evaluation. For SAM-H output in Column 1 Row 2, we first name segments in
descending size using the object vocabulary and then name parts based on identified objects. For ViT,
we derive a hierarchical segmentation by applying fine-to-coarse K-means clustering of its last-layer
tokens. For ViT and CAST, we use the object vocabulary to name 8-way segmentations and the part
vocabulary for 16-way segmentations. Here the fish has distinct head and fin continuing onto the
body, and its contrast with the background varies along the body. SAM struggles to parse the fish into
parts, while ViT fails to separate them from the background, misleading recognition. In contrast, our
unsupervised CAST accurately uncovers the whole fish with its distinct parts: head, body, and fin.
  image       HSG: 32, 16, 8 segments      CAST: 32, 16, 8 segments Ground-truth: 14, 4, 1 labels


Figure 7: Unsupervised hierarchical segmentation aligns more closely with semantics in CAST
than in HSG. We compare 32, 16, 8-way segmentation against fine, coarse, and whole person parsing
respectively. To visualize a consistent hierarchy in color, we first match the 8-way segmentation to
the 1-label ground truth in hue, then vary saturation for 16-way and value for 32-way. Overall, CAST
is better than HSG on DensePose at separating human bodies from their backgrounds at all levels.

Fig. 5 has shown that CAST outperforms ViT at uncovering objects with complex contours and fine
details. We now compare unsupervised CAST to SAM and ViT on PartImageNet for deformable and
rigid object parsing (Fig. 6), and to HSG on DensePose for human body parsing (Fig. 7).
PartImageNet (He et al., 2022) is a subset of ImageNet additionally annotated with 11 objects
(e.g., Biped) and 40 parts (e.g., Biped Head) (details in Appx. B.1). We benchmark SAM (as is),
ViT and CAST (trained self-supervisedly on ImageNet) on PartImageNet. Since they all produce
segmentations without class labels, for the sake of evaluation, we name each segment using an
open-vocabulary segment classifier, OVSeg (Liang et al., 2023). For SAM, we use the default setting
to produce a series of binary masks that may overlap. Since larger segments are more likely whole
objects and smaller segments parts, we name segments in one pass using the PartImageNet object
vocabulary. We name each mask starting with the largest, adjusting the smaller ones to remove any
overlap with it. In a second pass, we name each identified segment using the PartImageNet part
vocabulary. For ViT and CAST, we first name objects in a coarse (8-way) segmentation and then
name parts within each object in a fine (16-way) segmentation. See Appx E.3 for more details.
Fig. 6 shows that unsupervised CAST groups visual details into larger wholes that separate objects
from the background, enabling accurate segment naming. Neither SAM nor ViT maintains segmenta-
tion consistency across granularities during training, resulting in coarse and fine segmentations that
are error-prone and compete rather than simplify for recognition at the end.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Unsupervised CAST surpasses SAM and Table 2: CAST surpasses HSG in unsuper-
ViT in accuracy and efficiency for segmenting vised hierarchical semantic segmentation on
object parts and wholes on PartImageNet. We DensePose, despite its focus on recognition
measure region mIoU and boundary F-score, at first instead of segmentation. Training CAST-S
object and then part levels. SAM, pretrained on large- and HSG on unlabeled COCO data, we evalu-
scale high-resolution images with pixel-wise labels, ate 32,16,8-way segmentations on ground-truth
excels at delineating boundaries: At the object(part) 14,4,1-label human body parsing respectively
level, SAM is 10(5)% over CAST, CAST is 11(1)% on DensePose. We measure precision (P), recall
over ViT. However, on region accuracy, CAST out- (R), and F-score (F) on between segmentation
performs SAM (ViT) by 8(4)% for objects and 1(1)% and ground-truth human body. CAST consis-
for parts, with only 4(72)% of their GFLOPS.           tently excels, especially in whole body recall.
      model GFLOPS region mIoU boundary F-score          PRF      14 labels      4 labels          1 label
  SAM-B         677 18.03 10.15        20.71     7.25    HSG 20.7 18.6 19.6 24.1 30.6 26.9 20.5 36.1 26.2
  SAM-H        3166 21.97 12.07        32.66    11.82
                                                         CAST 21.1 24.1 22.5 24.8 33.2 28.4 26.3 44.9 33.2
   ViT-B         18 25.34 11.74        10.92     4.64
  CAST-B         13 29.66 13.20        22.32     6.52    gain   0.4 5.5 2.9 0.7 2.6 1.5 5.8 8.8 7.0


Table 1 shows that our unsupervisedly trained CAST outperforms not only ViT by 4% (in mIoU), but
also SAM by 8% on object segmentation, which is supervisedly trained on SA-1B and 243× larger in
GLFOPS! While SAM can produce a high-quality segmentation, it does not organize these segments
and simplify them for recognition, especially as PartImageNet only annotates a single prominent
object in an image. The human segment in Fig. 6, with boundaries shaped as the occluding fish, is
mistaken by OVSeg as Category fish instead of biped. Such interference from border-ownerships
has long been acknowledged in human perception research, exemplified by Bregman’s scrambled B
illusion (Bregman, 1981). In addition, CAST is also significantly more efficient. SAM requires 1) an
additional mask decoder to predict pixel-segment assignments in a high-dimensional feature space,
and 2) multiple inferences guided by various point prompts. CAST produces a hierarchy of segments
starting from color features in a single inference pass, with only 4% of SAM-H’s GFLOPS!
DensePose (Alp Güler et al., 2018) has complex multi-person scenes, each individual annotated with
14 body parts. We group these labels into 4 categories: (head, torso, upper limb, and lower limb.
We train HSG and CAST-S self-supervisedly on COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and compare their 32, 16,
8-way segmentations on DensePose against fine (14 labels), coarse (4 labels), and whole person (1
label) parsing respectively (Fig 7). Table 2 shows that CAST surpasses HSG in both precision and
recall at every level. While HSG optimizes feature distinction across segments at all levels, CAST
concentrates this optimization at the final image level only. Therefore, approaching hierarchical
segmentation not as a standalone goal but as integral to recognition in fact enhances segmentation!

4.2    S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION

Now we can learn image segmentation without pixel-wise labeling, but with only an image-level
recognition objective. We compare CAST with ViT on utilizing such a segmenter for downstream
semantic segmentation tasks (Table 3). 1) We first train both models on unlabeled COCO data, and
then evaluate their segmentation before and after fine-tuning on PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al.,
2010). 2) We first train both models on labeled ImageNet data, then fine-tune with Segmenter (Strudel
et al., 2021) and test on ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2019) and PASCAL Context (Mottaghi et al., 2014).

Table 3: CAST outperforms ViT with superpixels and token pooling on flat semantic segmenta-
tion by unsupervised or supervised learning. We report both region mIoU and boundary F-score
to benchmark CAST-S and ViT-S: a) on PASCAL-VOC after training on unlabeled COCO, and b)
on ADE20K and PASCAL-Context following training on labeled ImageNet with subsequent tuning.
We explore ViT variants with superpixels replacing traditional patches and graph pooling for token
reduction. CAST consistently outperforms, validating the efficacy of both modifications.
                 a) self-supervised on COCO                        b) supervised on ImageNet, tuned for
 test on PASCAL-VOC             before tuning    after tuning                  ADE20K       P-Context
 ViT-S                          30.9     16.1    65.8    40.7       ViT-S     41.7   33.9   48.3      42.0
 ViT-S but with superpixels     32.2     21.2    66.5    46.7           -      -      -      -         -
 ViT-S but with token pooling   34.5     19.8    67.2    41.9           -      -      -      -         -
 CAST-S                         38.4     27.0    67.6    48.1     CAST-S      43.1   36.5   49.1      44.1

                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               ADE20K               ViT-S           CAST-S     Ground-truth       P-Context   ViT-S     CAST-S     Ground-truth


Figure 8: CAST pretrained for recognition generalizes better than ViT to semantic segmen-
tation. Both ViT-S and CAST-S are pre-trained on labeled ImageNet and fine-tuned for semantic
segmentation on ADE20K or PASCAL-Context. Unlike ViT, CAST can not only recognize and
segment large wholes (house, floors), but also closely adhere to visual contours of small ones (dog).

We follow SegSort (Hwang et al., 2019) on segment retrieval for unsupervised evaluation, and
fine-tune the model alongside a pixel-wise softmax classifier for supervised evaluation.
Table 3 shows that CAST consistently outperforms ViT, and both our components, superpixels and
token pooling, contribute to performance gains, most notably increasing 8% in region mIoU and 11%
in boundary F-score before fine-tuning. Fig. 8 shows that CAST retains these benefits even after
supervised training and fine tuning, recognizing both wholes and details more accurately.

4.3                                     R ECOGNITION AND R EFINEMENT OF S EGMENTATION THROUGH F EEDBACK
We now study CAST’s performance on recognition and its feedback connection to segmentation.
Classification. We compare CAST-S to ViT-S and Swin-T from Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021),
both designed solely for recognition and with similar GFLOPS. All three models are self-supervised
on IN-1K and tested on IN-1K and IN-100 using linear probing. Table 4 shows that, with hierarchical
token pooling, CAST outperforms ViT and Swin with 30% fewer GFLOPS. Notably, only CAST can
directly output a hierarchical segmentation, with a stronger object-centric attention (Appx. A.5).

                               Model         GFLOPS           IN-100        IN-1K Table 4: CAST outperforms ViT and Swin on Ima-
                                                                                   geNet classification with higher efficiency. We report
  ViT-S                                          4.7            78.1        67.9   the top-1 linear probing accuracy of ViT, Swin, and CAST,
 Swin-T                                          4.5            78.3        63.0
CAST-S                                           3.4            79.9        68.1
                                                                                   self-supervised on IN-1K and tested on IN-100/1K. CAST
                                                                                   achieves higher accuracies using about 30% fewer GFLOPS.

Test-time adaptation. CAST not only learns an internal segmenter in a feed-forward hierarchy
towards recognition, but can also revise the segmenter in a feedback reverse hierarchy, concurrently
enhancing both segmentation and recognition (Fig. 3). Fig. 9 shows that ambiguous recognition can
be solidified by maximizing the winning activation, modifying segmentation and in turn enhancing
both segmentation and recognition concurrently. See more details in Appx. C.
                                1
                                                                             Figure 9: CAST can be adapted during test time to solidify
                                                                             ambiguous recognition and refine segmentation. For the binary
region mIoU after adaptation


                               0.9
                                                                             dog classification task on PartImageNet shown in Fig. 3, We assess
                               0.8
                                                                             region mIoU on PartImageNet for CAST’s 8-way segmentation
                               0.7                                           against the ground-truth dog mask before and after adaptation
                                                                             (Fig. 3). When the mIoU is initially lower than threshold 0.8
                               0.6
                                                                             (vertical line), it has a large and positive gain mostly (red dots
                               0.5                                           above the diagonal line). The average gain (black line) is large
                                                                             (zero) with poor initial segmentation when adaptation is most (not)
                               0.4
                                  0.4          0.6         0.8          1    needed. Our concurrent segmentation and recognition enhances
                                        region mIoU before adaptation        each other in this adaptation process.

Summary. We propose to include segmentation as part of recognition, to learn it by image recognition
objectives, and to infer it concurrently with and for recognition. We develop our model, CAST, by
utilizing superpixels and token pooling. It uncoveres parts and wholes, surpassing SAM, HSG, and
ViT in both accuracy and efficiency on various segmentation and recognition tasks.


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported, in part, by US NSF 2131111, NSF 2215542, NSF 2313151, and Bosch gift
funds to S. Yu at UC Berkeley and the University of Michigan. We thank Jyh-Jing Hwang for earlier
insightful discussions that led to this work.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Our CAST provides a fine-grained understanding of part-to-whole structures, unlocking new possibil-
ities while also carrying the potential for misuse. For instance, detailed structures like human poses
could be used to enhance the quality of DeepFake videos (Masood et al., 2023). However, it’s crucial
to emphasize that technology itself is not the issue; the responsibility falls on those who wield it. We
aspire for our CAST to bring about more benefits than these potential risks.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide method and experimental details in Appx. E and Appx. F, and our code on GitHub.

R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, Sabine Süsstrunk,
  et al. Slic superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. PAMI, 2012.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Merav Ahissar, Mor Nahum, Israel Nelken, and Shaul Hochstein. Reverse hierarchies and sensory
 learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1515):
 285–299, 2009. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0253.
Jiwoon Ahn and Suha Kwak. Learning pixel-level semantic affinity with image-level supervision for
  weakly supervised semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4981–4990, 2018.
Rıza Alp Güler, Natalia Neverova, and Iasonas Kokkinos. Densepose: Dense human pose estimation
  in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 7297–7306, 2018.
Pablo Arbelaez, Michael Maire, Charless Fowlkes, and Jitendra Malik. Contour detection and
  hierarchical image segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
  33(5):898–916, 2010.
Arindam Banerjee, Inderjit S Dhillon, Joydeep Ghosh, and Suvrit Sra. Clustering on the unit
  hypersphere using von mises-fisher distributions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(Sep):
  1345–1382, 2005.
Michael Van den Bergh, Xavier Boix, Gemma Roig, Benjamin de Capitani, and Luc Van Gool. Seeds:
 Superpixels extracted via energy-driven sampling. In European conference on computer vision, pp.
 13–26. Springer, 2012.
Irving Biederman. Recognition-by-components: a theory of human image understanding. Psycholog-
   ical review, 94(2):115, 1987.
Daniel Bolya, Cheng-Yang Fu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Judy
  Hoffman. Token merging: Your vit but faster. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09461, 2022.
Daniel Bolya, Cheng-Yang Fu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Judy
  Hoffman. Token merging: Your vit but faster. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Albert S. Bregman. Asking the "what for" question in auditory perception. In Michael Kubovy and
  James R. Pomerantz (eds.), Perceptual Organization, pp. 99–118. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1981.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille.
  Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully
  connected crfs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00915, 2016.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  9640–9649, 2021.
Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G. Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. arXiv, 2021.
Dorin Comaniciu and Peter Meer. Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis.
 PAMI, 2002.
Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Randaugment: Practical automated
  data augmentation with a reduced search space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 702–703, 2020.
Daan de Geus, Panagiotis Meletis, Chenyang Lu, Xiaoxiao Wen, and Gijs Dubbelman. Part-aware
  panoptic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5485–5494, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Xiaoyi Dong, Jianmin Bao, Dongdong Chen, Weiming Zhang, Nenghai Yu, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen, and
  Baining Guo. Cswin transformer: A general vision transformer backbone with cross-shaped win-
  dows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 12124–12134, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. The
 pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. IJCV, 2010.
Pedro F Felzenszwalb and Daniel P Huttenlocher. Efficient graph-based image segmentation. IJCV,
  2004.
Brian Fulkerson, Andrea Vedaldi, and Stefano Soatto. Class segmentation and object localization
  with superpixel neighborhoods. In 2009 IEEE 12th international conference on computer vision,
  pp. 670–677. IEEE, 2009.
Raghudeep Gadde, Varun Jampani, Martin Kiefel, Daniel Kappler, and Peter V Gehler. Superpixel
  convolutional networks using bilateral inceptions. In ECCV, 2016.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen Gould, Jim Rodgers, David Cohen, Gal Elidan, and Daphne Koller. Multi-class segmentation
  with relative location prior. International journal of computer vision, 80(3):300–316, 2008.
Saurabh Goyal, Anamitra Roy Choudhury, Saurabh Raje, Venkatesan Chakaravarthy, Yogish Sab-
  harwal, and Ashish Verma. Power-bert: Accelerating bert inference via progressive word-vector
  elimination. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3690–3699. PMLR, 2020.
Kai Han, Yunhe Wang, Hanting Chen, Xinghao Chen, Jianyuan Guo, Zhenhua Liu, Yehui Tang,
  An Xiao, Chunjing Xu, Yixing Xu, et al. A survey on vision transformer. IEEE transactions on
  pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 45(1):87–110, 2022.
Bharath Hariharan, Pablo Arbeláez, Lubomir Bourdev, Subhransu Maji, and Jitendra Malik. Semantic
  contours from inverse detectors. In 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  991–998. IEEE, 2011.
Bharath Hariharan, Pablo Arbeláez, Ross Girshick, and Jitendra Malik. Hypercolumns for object
  segmentation and fine-grained localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 447–456, 2015.
Ju He, Shuo Yang, Shaokang Yang, Adam Kortylewski, Xiaoding Yuan, Jie-Neng Chen, Shuai Liu,
  Cheng Yang, Qihang Yu, and Alan Yuille. Partimagenet: A large, high-quality dataset of parts. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 128–145, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Byeongho Heo, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Seong Joon
  Oh. Rethinking spatial dimensions of vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 11936–11945, 2021.
Jyh-Jing Hwang and Tyng-Luh Liu. Pixel-wise deep learning for contour detection. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.01989, 2015.
Jyh-Jing Hwang, Stella X Yu, Jianbo Shi, Maxwell D Collins, Tien-Ju Yang, Xiao Zhang, and
  Liang-Chieh Chen. Segsort: Segmentation by discriminative sorting of segments. In ICCV, 2019.
Xu Ji, Joao F Henriques, and Andrea Vedaldi. Invariant information clustering for unsupervised
  image classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 9865–9874, 2019.
Armand Joulin, Francis Bach, and Jean Ponce. Discriminative clustering for image co-segmentation.
  In CVPR, pp. 1943–1950. IEEE, 2010.
Hyunwoo Kang, Sangwoo Mo, and Jinwoo Shin. Oamixer: Object-aware mixing layer for vision
  transformers. CVPR Transformers for Vision Workshop, 2022.
Tsung-Wei Ke, Jyh-Jing Hwang, Yunhui Guo, Xudong Wang, and Stella X Yu. Unsupervised
  hierarchical semantic segmentation with multiview cosegmentation and clustering transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2571–2581, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Peize Sun, Xueyan Zou, Shilong Liu, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Lei Zhang,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Semantic-sam: Segment and recognize anything at any granularity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.04767, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liulei Li, Tianfei Zhou, Wenguan Wang, Jianwu Li, and Yi Yang. Deep hierarchical semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1246–1257, 2022a.

Xiangtai Li, Shilin Xu, Yibo Yang, Guangliang Cheng, Yunhai Tong, and Dacheng Tao. Panoptic-
  partformer: Learning a unified model for panoptic part segmentation. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 729–747. Springer, 2022b.

Yanghao Li, Hanzi Mao, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Exploring plain vision transformer
  backbones for object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 280–296.
  Springer, 2022c.

Feng Liang, Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Kunpeng Li, Yinan Zhao, Hang Zhang, Peizhao Zhang, Peter
  Vajda, and Diana Marculescu. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted clip.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  7061–7070, 2023.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2117–2125, 2017.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.

Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.

Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 3431–3440, 2015.

Xu Ma, Yuqian Zhou, Huan Wang, Can Qin, Bin Sun, Chang Liu, and Yun Fu. Image as set of points.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Michael Maire. Simultaneous segmentation and figure/ground organization using angular embedding.
 In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 450–464. Springer, 2010.

Michael Maire, Stella X. Yu, and Pietro Perona. Object detection and segmentation from joint
 embedding of parts and pixels. In 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2142–
 2149. IEEE, 2011.

Jitendra Malik, Serge Belongie, Thomas Leung, and Jianbo Shi. Contour and texture analysis for
   image segmentation. IJCV, 2001.

Dmitrii Marin, Jen-Hao Rick Chang, Anurag Ranjan, Anish Prabhu, Mohammad Rastegari, and
 Oncel Tuzel. Token pooling in vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03860, 2021.

Momina Masood, Mariam Nawaz, Khalid Mahmood Malik, Ali Javed, Aun Irtaza, and Hafiz Malik.
 Deepfakes generation and detection: State-of-the-art, open challenges, countermeasures, and way
 forward. Applied intelligence, 53(4):3974–4026, 2023.

Daphne Maurer, Richard Le Grand, and Catherine J Mondloch. The many faces of configural
  processing. Trends in cognitive sciences, 6(6):255–260, 2002.

Sangwoo Mo, Minsu Cho, and Jinwoo Shin. Instagan: Instance-aware image-to-image translation.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sangwoo Mo, Hyunwoo Kang, Kihyuk Sohn, Chun-Liang Li, and Jinwoo Shin. Object-aware
  contrastive learning for debiased scene representation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:12251–12264, 2021.
Greg Mori, Xiaofeng Ren, Alexei A Efros, and Jitendra Malik. Recovering human body configu-
  rations: Combining segmentation and recognition. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Computer
  Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004., volume 2,
  pp. II–II. IEEE, 2004.
Roozbeh Mottaghi, Xianjie Chen, Xiaobai Liu, Nam-Gyu Cho, Seong-Whan Lee, Sanja Fidler, Raquel
  Urtasun, and Alan Yuille. The role of context for object detection and semantic segmentation in
  the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  891–898, 2014.
Yassine Ouali, Celine Hudelot, and Myriam Tami. Autoregressive unsupervised image segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), August 2020.
Tai-Yu Pan, Qing Liu, Wei-Lun Chao, and Brian Price. Towards open-world segmentation of parts.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  15392–15401, 2023.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature
  learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Lu Qi, Jason Kuen, Weidong Guo, Jiuxiang Gu, Zhe Lin, Bo Du, Yu Xu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
  Aims: All-inclusive multi-level segmentation for anything. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Benlin Liu, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Dynamicvit:
  Efficient vision transformers with dynamic token sparsification. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34, 2021.
Xiaofeng Ren and Jitendra Malik. Learning a classification model for segmentation. In Computer
  Vision, IEEE International Conference on, volume 2, pp. 10–10. IEEE Computer Society, 2003.
Zhixiang Ren, Shenghua Gao, Liang-Tien Chia, and Ivor Wai-Hung Tsang. Region-based saliency
  detection and its application in object recognition. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
  Video Technology, 24(5):769–779, 2013.
Saquib Sarfraz, Vivek Sharma, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Efficient parameter-free clustering using first
  neighbor relations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 8934–8943, 2019.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Karan Desai, Justin Johnson, and Nikhil Naik. Casting your model:
  Learning to localize improves self-supervised representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11058–11067, 2021.
Abhishek Sharma, Oncel Tuzel, and Ming-Yu Liu. Recursive context propagation network for
  semantic scene labeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Eitan Sharon, Meirav Galun, Dahlia Sharon, Ronen Basri, and Achi Brandt. Hierarchy and adaptivity
  in segmenting visual scenes. Nature, 442(7104):810–813, 2006.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baifeng Shi, Trevor Darrell, and Xin Wang. Top-down visual attention from analysis by synthesis.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2102–2112, 2023.

Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
   pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.

Robin Strudel, Ricardo Garcia, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Segmenter: Transformer for
  semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 7262–7272, 2021.

Peize Sun, Shoufa Chen, Chenchen Zhu, Fanyi Xiao, Ping Luo, Saining Xie, and Zhicheng Yan. Going
  denser with open-vocabulary part segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15453–15465, 2023.

Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time training
  with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 9229–9248. PMLR, 2020.

Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking
  the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.

James W Tanaka and Martha J Farah. Parts and wholes in face recognition. The Quarterly Journal of
  Experimental Psychology Section A, 46(2):225–245, 1993.

James W Tanaka and Diana Simonyi. The “parts and wholes” of face recognition: A review of the
  literature. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69(10):1876–1889, 2016.

James W Tanaka, Bonnie Heptonstall, and Alison Campbell. Part and whole face representations in
  immediate and long-term memory. Vision Research, 164:53–61, 2019.

Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 776–794. Springer, 2020.

Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and Hervé
  Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.

Wouter Van Gansbeke, Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, and Luc Van Gool. Revis-
 iting contrastive methods for unsupervised learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2106.05967, 2021.

Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully test-
  time adaptation by entropy minimization. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021a.

Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3024–3033, 2021b.

Xudong Wang, Ziwei Liu, and Stella X Yu. Unsupervised feature learning by cross-level instance-
  group discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 12586–12595, 2021c.

Xudong Wang, Shufan Li, Konstantinos Kallidromitis, Yusuke Kato, Kazuki Kozuka, and Trevor Dar-
  rell. Hierarchical open-vocabulary universal image segmentation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Meng Wei, Xiaoyu Yue, Wenwei Zhang, Shu Kong, Xihui Liu, and Jiangmiao Pang. Ov-parts:
 Towards open-vocabulary part segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 36, 2024.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xing Wei, Qingxiong Yang, Yihong Gong, Narendra Ahuja, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Superpixel
  hierarchy. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 27(10):4838–4849, 2018.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
  parametric instance-level discrimination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.01978, 2018.
Tete Xiao, Piotr Dollar, Mannat Singh, Eric Mintun, Trevor Darrell, and Ross Girshick. Early
  convolutions help transformers see better. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
  2021.
Saining Xie and Zhuowen Tu. Holistically-nested edge detection. In ICCV, 2015.
Jiarui Xu, Shalini De Mello, Sifei Liu, Wonmin Byeon, Thomas Breuel, Jan Kautz, and Xiaolong
   Wang. Groupvit: Semantic segmentation emerges from text supervision. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18134–18144, 2022.
Stella X. Yu and Jianbo Shi. Multiclass spectral clustering. In ICCV, 2003a.
Stella X. Yu and Jianbo Shi. Object-specific figure-ground segregation. In 2003 IEEE Computer
  Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2003. Proceedings., volume 2,
  pp. II–39. IEEE, 2003b.
Stella X Yu and Jianbo Shi. Segmentation given partial grouping constraints. PAMI, 2004.
Stella X. Yu, Ralph Gross, and Jianbo Shi. Concurrent object recognition and segmentation by graph
  partitioning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 15, 2002.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 6023–6032, 2019.
Wang Zeng, Sheng Jin, Wentao Liu, Chen Qian, Ping Luo, Wanli Ouyang, and Xiaogang Wang. Not
 all tokens are equal: Human-centric visual analysis via token clustering transformer. In Proceedings
 of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11101–11111,
 2022.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
Xiao Zhang and Michael Maire. Self-supervised visual representation learning from hierarchical
  grouping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Yifan Zhang, Bo Pang, and Cewu Lu. Semantic segmentation by early region proxy. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1258–1268, 2022.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba.
  Semantic understanding of scenes through the ade20k dataset. International Journal of Computer
  Vision, 127:302–321, 2019.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A Ablation Studies and Analyses                                                                  18
   A.1 Ablation Study on Design Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
   A.2 Ablation Study on Superpixel Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
   A.3 Limitations of Superpixels and Failure Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
   A.4 Ablation Study on Inference Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
   A.5 Visualization of Attention Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21

B Additional Part-to-whole Results                                                               22
   B.1 Examples for PartImageNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
   B.2 Class-wise Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23

C Extension to Test-time Adaptation                                                              25
   C.1 Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
   C.2 Visual Examples Before and After TTA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26

D Additional Related Works                                                                       27

E Additional Method Details                                                                      28
   E.1 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
   E.2 Comparison with ViT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
   E.3 Open-vocabulary Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30
   E.4 Comparison with Hierarchical Segment Grouping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
   E.5 Generating Segments from ViT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
   E.6 Token Pooling Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31

F Additional Experimental Details                                                                32
   F.1   Summary of Models Used in Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
   F.2   Classification and Segmentation Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32
   F.3   Image Resolution and Number of Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
   F.4   Hyper-parameters for Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
   F.5   Inference and Evaluation on ImageNet and VOC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34

G Additional Visualizations                                                                      36
   G.1 Visual Results on Hierarchical Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
   G.2 Visual Results on Semantic Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       37
   G.3 Visual Results on Figure-ground Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38
   G.4 Visual Results on Multi-head Attention Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       39


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A BLATION S TUDIES AND A NALYSES
A.1    A BLATION S TUDY ON D ESIGN C HOICES

Table 5 presents ablation studies on design choices in our framework. (a) We explore various token
pooling methods, with our GraphPool module excelling. Notably, FINCH (Sarfraz et al., 2019) lags
in performance, showcasing the challenge of adaptive pooling. (b) We examine different centroid
initialization methods, with Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) significantly outperforming others. FPS
not only samples informative tokens but also enhances discriminative token selection, preserving
fine-grained visual information. (c) We investigate optimal segment granularities, fixed for both
training and inference, to achieve a balance between model efficiency and task performance. (d) We
showcase that our model can adapt to varying segment granularities during inference.


Table 5: We compare the design choices for (a) token pooling, (b) cluster centroid initialization, (c)
token granularities applied to both training and testing, and (d) token granularities of a trained model
varied during testing. We report the linear probing accuracy of MoCo-trained CAST-S on IN-100. †
indicates that the methods have been re-implemented.

    (a) Pooling                           Acc.   (c) Token granularity (Train=Test)    GFLOPS   Acc.
    Graph Pooling                         79.9   196, 32, 16, 8                         3.0     78.8
    Random Sampling                       55.8   196, 64, 32, 16                        3.4     79.9
    K-Means                               73.9   196, 128, 64, 32                       4.3     79.9
    K-Medoids                             72.3   324, 64, 32, 16                        4.6     79.8
    FINCH† (Sarfraz et al., 2019)         63.3   324, 128, 64, 32                       5.4     80.4
    Token Pooling† (Marin et al., 2021)   75.8
    CTM† (Zeng et al., 2022)              72.2
                                                 (d) Token granularity (Train̸=Test)   GFLOPS   Acc.
    ToMe† (Bolya et al., 2023)            78.1
                                                 Train: 196, 64, 32, 16                  3.4    79.9
    (b) Centroids initialization          Acc.
                                                 Test: 196, 32, 16, 8                    3.0    79.2
    Farthest Point Sampling               79.9   Test: 196, 128, 64, 32                  4.3    79.5
    Random Sampling                       71.2   Test: 324, 64, 32, 16                   4.6    78.8
    PoWER-BERT (Goyal et al., 2020)       71.6   Test: 324, 128, 64, 32                  5.4    79.3


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   A BLATION S TUDY ON S UPERPIXEL M ETHODS

We test the robustness of CAST using superpixels generated by different algorithms. In particular,
we compare SEEDS (Bergh et al., 2012) against SLIC (Achanta et al., 2012) on classification and
semantic segmentation. We train CAST with self-supervised learning on IN-1K and COCO for
classification and segmentation. As shown in Table 6, we report the linear probing accuracy on
ImageNet-1K and mIoU before (left) and after (right) fine-tuning on VOC. Our method is robust to
different choices of superpixel algorithms, while, SEEDS achieves better performance than SLIC.


Table 6: SEEDS outperforms SLIC on classification and semantic segmentation. We report top-1
accuracy and mIoU for classification on IN-1K and segmentation before / after fine-tuning on VOC.
Our CAST achieves better performance using superpixels generated by SEEDS.

                                       Classification Segmentation
                             SEEDS          68.1         38.4/67.6
                              SLIC          65.6         37.7/65.7



Figure 10 illustrates the superpixels obtained using SEEDS and SLIC. SEEDS superpixels exhibit
superior alignment with object boundaries, particularly for small objects, compared to SLIC. This
improvement stems from SEEDS being a boundary refinement algorithm, iteractively updating
superpixels to better capture edges. In contrast, SLIC relies on K-Means clustering based on colors
and connected-component constraints, which may be less effective in capturing the boundaries.
Consequently, we can conclude that SEEDS superpixels, with their superior shape information,
produce more compelling hierarchical segmentation for CAST.


                    SEEDS                                              SLIC
Figure 10: From left to right, we show the superpixels (white contours) generated by SEEDS and SLIC
algorithm, overlaid on the the original images along with the ground-truth semantic segmentation
(colored regions). Superpixels generated by SEEDS are more precisely aligned with object boundaries,
especially for small objects, than those generated by SLIC. Learning to generate superpixels along
with feature learning would enable more precise superpixel partitioning and improve segmentation.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   L IMITATIONS OF S UPERPIXELS AND FAILURE C ASES

Our method underperforms ViT baselines on Cityscapes dataset. The results show the limitation of
using off-the-shelf superpixel algorithms. ViT-S achieves 74.6%, whereas, CAST-S and CAST-SD
achieve 72.1% and 74.2% on the benchmark. As shown in Fig. 11, we observe that existing superpixel
methods cannot pick out thin structures such as light poles and steel pipes from the scene. One
possible reason is that such methods are only developed and tested on object-centric dataset (BSDS).
Replacing these superpixel algorithms with learnable approaches could help to address such an issue.


Figure 11: From left to right, we show the image and corresponding superpixels (white contours).
Street scenes have many thin structures such as light poles and steel pipes, which superpixel algorithms
often fail to pick out. Learning to generate superpixels could help solving such issues.



A.4   A BLATION S TUDY ON I NFERENCE L ATENCY

The computational cost of superpixel generation and graph pooling can be reduced by the decreased
number of tokens required for computing self-attention. This advantage becomes more pronounced
when using larger models, where self-attention blocks dominate the entire cost.
To validate this, we analyze the latency of model inference and superpixel generation. Our system
comprises a 32GB Nvidia Titan V GPU card and two Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2630 v4 processors,
totaling 20 CPU cores. We utilize the PyTorch machine learning framework with 24 workers, a batch
size of 64, and an image resolution set to 224x224.
In our system, CAST-B achieves a lower average inference latency of 217 ms compared to ViT-B with
273 ms. SEEDS takes 73 ms to generate superpixels from the batch of images. However, we remark
that the current SEEDS implementation is not fully optimized. Employing GPU implementation or
parallelizing the process with more CPU cores can alleviate the bottleneck in superpixel generation.
Furthermore, the cost of superpixel generation becomes less significant with larger models, which are
commonly used in practice.
In addition, we demonstrate that the cost of self-attention and graph pooling decreases as the number
of tokens is reduced. Table 7 presents the computational cost of our graph pooling across layers,
showing a significant reduction in cost as the number of tokens per layer decreases.


Table 7: FPS in our graph pool module requires additional computation. We report the inference time
(ms) of each module with 384 channel dimensions and 256 batch sizes on IN-100. Optimizing the
token sampling technique to increase model efficiency is our future work.

                        #. of Tokens    Encoder Blocks      GraphPool (FPS)
                             196              86.43           63.02 (37.64)
                              64               25.4             18.2 (9.7)
                              32               12.9              9.6 (3.0)
                              16                5                6.1 (1.5)


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   V ISUALIZATION OF ATTENTION M APS

CAST provides more object-centric attention than ViT. We compare models self-supervised on
IN-1K and evaluate them on Pascal VOC. We follow Joulin et al. (2010) to generate figure-ground
segmentation from multi-head attention and measure mIoU between true segmentations. Fig. 12
visualizes an example of an attention map and the mIoU of each model.


             (a) ViT-S (mIoU: 45.8)                        (b) CAST-S (mIoU: 48.0)

Figure 12: CAST attention is more object-centric than ViT. We visualize figure-grounded attention
maps of ViT and CAST. The bracket denotes the mIoU between attention and true segmentations.
The CAST attention map covers the entire sheep, while ViT only captures a part of them.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A DDITIONAL PART- TO - WHOLE R ESULTS
B.1    E XAMPLES FOR PART I MAGE N ET

We present the annotation lists and visual examples of PartImageNet. It contains 11 object classes
from 2 categories (animals vs. things), and each object class contains multiple part classes, resulting
in a total of 40 parts. Part segments are constrained to be subregions of object segments.


Table 8: PartImageNet contains 11 objects and 40 parts annotations. Each object segment is
partitioned into part segments. For example, a quadruped segment consists of quadruped head,
quadruped body, quadruped foot, and quadruped tail segments. In our experiments, we first predict
the object labels, and then predict part labels conditioned on the object to enforce consistent prediction;
the subregion of a quadruped should be one of head, body, foot, or tail.

                      Category     Object         Part
                                   Quadruped      Head, Body, Foot, Tail
                                   Biped          Head, Body, Hand, Foot, Tail
                                   Fish           Head, Body, Fin, Tail
                      Animal
                                   Bird           Head, Body, Wing, Foot, Tail
                                   Snake          Head, Body
                                   Reptile        Head, Body, Foot, Tail
                                   Car            Body, Tire, Side Mirror
                                   Bicycle        Head, Body, Seat, Tire
                      Things       Boat           Body, Sail
                                   Aeroplane      Head, Body, Wing, Engine, Tail
                                   Bottle         Body, Mouth


Figure 13: Example image from PartImageNet. Copied Figure 1 from the original paper (He et al.,
2022). The quadruped (dog) segment consists of head, body, foot, and tail part segments.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   C LASS - WISE P ERFORMANCE

We present the class-wise performance of part-to-whole recognition on PartImageNet in Table 9.
CAST outperforms SAM and ViT in most classes, except for reptile and bottle. To further investigate
this, we illustrate visual examples where 1) CAST performs well (quadruped), 2) ViT performs well
(reptile), and 3) SAM performs well (bottle) in Fig. 14.


Table 9: CAST outperforms SAM and ViT in most classes. We report the region mIoU on object
annotations of SAM, ViT, and CAST for each class in PartImageNet, as well as the average across
classes in each Animal or Things category. Bold denotes the best value among the methods. The
Aeroplane class shows ‘-’ for all methods since it is not contained in the validation set.

                                                      Animal
                        Quadruped    Biped     Fish     Bird        Snake      Reptile      Avg.
              SAM-B        18.18     14.98    16.09     24.55       19.87      14.78     18.08
              SAM-H        29.00     17.25    19.97     21.35       20.57      13.05     20.20
              ViT-B        29.61     15.17    24.34     30.02       22.97      20.60     23.79
              CAST-B       37.47     20.94    29.32     36.97       23.72      20.34     28.13

                                                      Things
                             Car    Bicycle    Boat      Aeroplane      Bottle       Avg.
                  SAM-B     15.89    15.16     12.14            -           31.30   18.62
                  SAM-H     29.09    14.20      9.34            -           35.50   22.03
                  ViT-B     32.15    18.33     20.19            -           31.59   25.57
                  CAST-B    36.39    20.26     22.61            -           27.36   26.66


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      image         class labels      SAM-H           ViT-B            CAST-B          Ground Truth
                      Quadruped


                  Quadruped Head
                  Quadruped Body
                  Quadruped Foot
                   Quadruped Tail



                 ← SAM-H
                 Segments

      image         class labels      SAM-H           ViT-B            CAST-B          Ground Truth
                            Reptile


                     Reptile Head
                     Reptile Body
                      Reptile Foot
                       Reptile Tail



                 ← SAM-H
                 Segments

      image         class labels      SAM-H           ViT-B            CAST-B          Ground Truth
                             Bottle


                     Bottle Mouth
                      Bottle Body


                 ← SAM-H
                 Segments


Figure 14: Visual examples of object and part segmentations on PartImageNet using SAM, ViT, and
CAST. We demonstrate three cases where each model excels. 1) CAST excels for quadrupeds. Here,
CAST succeeds in capturing the parts properly, such as the head, body, and feet. SAM could capture
the dog, but fails to partition the parts such as the head. 2) ViT excels for reptiles. SAM failed to
capture the reptile due to camouflage. CAST captured the body but missed the feet. In contrast, ViT
does not provide detailed boundaries; it covers the whole body of the reptile, giving a better region
mIoU than others. 3) SAM excels for bottles. Here, SAM clearly describes the boundaries of the
bottle. However, CAST mistakenly clusters the mouse with the bottle.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XTENSION TO T EST- TIME A DAPTATION
CAST only considers the top-down pathway during training, guided by the recognition objectives.
This knowledge is encoded in the model and reflects the bottom-up pathway during inference. While
this enables the model to learn the general top-down elements, the segmentations will not change
based on what the top layers predict at inference time.
To extend CAST by incorporating the top-down pathway during inference, we employ test-time
adaptation (TTA) (Sun et al., 2020), specifically TENT (Wang et al., 2021a), with the classifier trained
on top of the CAST backbones. We apply TENT to each sample to adapt the model and maximize its
prediction confidence. As a result, CAST refines its object segments to align with its initial belief: If
this image depicts the predicted class, which parts contribute to this prediction?

C.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use the CAST model pretrained on ImageNet with the MoCo objective as our base model. We
trained a dog vs. non-dog classifier on PartImageNet training data and evaluate it on the validation
split. The classifier is defined as the average of normalized embeddings of training data that belong
to the class. In other words, we define a class vector as the center of training data for each class. To
infer the class, we compute the cosine similarity between the test embedding and class vectors and
apply a temperature of 0.07 to the softmax classifier, using these cosine similarities as logits.
For each sample, we calculate the prediction entropy loss and update the model using a single
SGD with lr=1.0. We only update the normalization layers while keeping other parameters frozen,
following the practice of TTA. Note that no label or batch information is used in this process, and the
model is updated solely based on the inference of a single instance.
We evaluate the evolution of segmentation before and after TTA. To this end, we compute the object
segmentation mask by assigning a label to each segment. We define this segment label as the majority
of the pixel labels, using the ground-truth segmentation masks. We chose this strategy for simplicity,
but one can also predict the segment labels using OVSeg, as we discussed previously. We measure
the average of mIoU for the foreground (dog) and background, treating them as two classes.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2    V ISUAL E XAMPLES B EFORE AND A FTER TTA

Fig. 15 illustrates how TTA improves CAST segmentation by more accurately capturing object shapes
and minimizing attention on irrelevant details. This improvement is especially notable for challenging
samples where the original CAST performs poorly. To validate this, we present both successful cases
where the mIoU significantly increases before and after TTA (rows 1-3) and failure cases where the
mIoU decreases (rows 4-5). In the failure cases, TTA mistakenly forces CAST to cluster parts of
dogs with the background, solely focusing on the most distinct part of the dog.

      Image         GT mask                  Before TTA                          After TTA


Figure 15: Visual examples of learned clusters (left) and predicted object segmentation for dogs
(right) using CAST models before and after applying test-time-adaptation (TTA). The segmentation
is given by assigning labels for each segment by majority vote using GT pixel labels. We showcase
both successful cases (rows 1-3) and failure cases (rows 4-5). TTA enhances CAST segmentation
by improving object shape capture, such as avoiding missed legs in rows 1-3, while also reducing
attention to unnecessary details, like window frames in row 3. However, in the failure cases, CAST
focuses solely on the distinct part and merges other parts with the background after TTA.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
Image segmentation partitions an image into coherent regions. Classic methods consist of two steps:
extracting local features and clustering based on criteria like mode-finding (Comaniciu & Meer, 2002;
Banerjee et al., 2005) or graph partitioning (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004; Shi & Malik, 2000;
Malik et al., 2001; Yu & Shi, 2003a; 2004). They often output hierarchical segmentation for human
perception comparison (Arbelaez et al., 2010). To prevent object boundary ambiguities, common
approaches rely on contour detection (Hwang & Liu, 2015; Xie & Tu, 2015), iteractively removing
contours for multi-scale segmentations (Arbelaez et al., 2010). In contrast, our work operates directly
on segments, providing proper boundaries without using contour proxies.
Self-supervised segmentation and representation learning aims to learn how to segment images,
often with corresponding features, solely from images and without human-annotated segmentations.
Recent works can be categorized into three camps: 1) Leveraging self-supervised image recognition,
models are transferred to segmentation by increasing location sensitivity (Wu et al., 2018; He et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021c), implementing contrastive loss across views (Wang et al.,
2021b), or applying stronger augmentation and constrained cropping (Selvaraju et al., 2021; Mo et al.,
2021). 2) Learning a pixel-wise cluster predictor maximizes mutual information between cluster
predictions on augmented views of the same instance at corresponding pixels (Ji et al., 2019; Ouali
et al., 2020). 3) Learning a pixel-level feature encoder maximizes discrimination between pixels
based on contour-induced segments (Hwang et al., 2019), pre-computed region hierarchies (Zhang
& Maire, 2020), or feature-induced hierarchical groupings (Ke et al., 2022), deriving segmentation
from pixel feature similarities. Our work unifies the first and third approaches, training CAST with a
self-supervised image recognition framework but obtains hierarchical segmentation for free.
Object-centric learning aims to learn a structured representation of images that disentangles objects
from the background (Eslami et al., 2016; Mo et al., 2019). Several prior works have attempted to
incorporate this concept into the attention mechanism, such as combining it with vision transform-
ers (Locatello et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023). This approach not only
discovers object segmentations but also improves robustness against distribution shifts. However,
most prior works only focus on the object level. Our framework extends object-centric learning in a
more fine-grained manner, discovering the continuum of part-to-whole relationships.
Superpixels are sets of locally connected pixels that encapsulate coherent structures, such as col-
ors (Ren & Malik, 2003). They have found applications in various densely labeling tasks, including
part parsing (Mori et al., 2004), saliency detection (Ren et al., 2013), and image segmentation (Gould
et al., 2008; Fulkerson et al., 2009; Sharma et al., 2014; Gadde et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2018). More
recently, Zhang et al. (2022) addressed semantic segmentation by replacing patches with superpixel
tokens in ViT architectures. Our model takes a step further by constructing a segment hierarchy and
simultaneously performing both segmentation and classification.
Token pooling aims to merge or prune tokens of (vision) transformers. Numerous methods have
been proposed, but their primary goal was to improve efficiency, and they used square patches as
usual (Sarfraz et al., 2019; Marin et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022). In contrast, our CAST employs
superpixels as visual units, which provide a unique benefit of producing hierarchical segmentation
for free. Additionally, our ablation study demonstrates that our proposed graph pooling outperforms
the state-of-the-art token pooling methods like ToMe (Bolya et al., 2023) for our purpose.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     A DDITIONAL M ETHOD D ETAILS
E.1   A LGORITHM

We present the pseudo code of the Graph Pooling module and our CAST framework.


Algorithm 1: GraphPool                           Algorithm 2: Overall framework
 Input: Feature Z and number of clusters N           Input: Input image I, CNN features Xcnn , class
 Output: Coarse feature Y and assignments P          token Xclass , position encoding Epos , # of
 Centroid indices C ← FPS(Z, N )                     segments Nl at level l
 Refined feature U ← MSA(Z) + Z                      Output: Feature fclass or fseg
 Normalized feature                                  Input segmentation S0 ←       PSuperpixel(I, N0 )
                                                                                1
  U ← U − mean(U ) + bias                            Input tokens Xs ← { |a|         i∈a Xcnn [i]|a ∈ S0 }
 Centroid feature V ← {U [c]|c ∈ C}                  for l = 0 . . . L do
                    V⊤
 P ← softmax(κ ∥UU∥∥V  ∥
                         )                                if l = 0 then
                 ′                                               Initial segment features
 Project feature Z ← MLP(Z)                                        Z0 ← [Xs + Epos ; Xclass ]
                          ′       ′
 Average pooled feature Z ← P ⊤ Z ./P ⊤ 1                 else
 New centroid feature Y ← {Z[c]|c ∈ C}                           Coarsened segment features and
                                    ′
 Updated centroid feature Y ← Y + Z                                clustering assignments
                                                                   Zl , Pl ← GraphPool(Zl−1 , Nl )
                                                                 Coarsened segmentation
FPS: Farthest Point Sampling.                                      Sl ← Sl−1 × Pl
MSA: Multi-headed Self-Attention.                         end
MLP: MultiLayer Perceptron                                Zl ← ViT_Encoders(Zl )
FC: Fully Connected Layer.                           end
⊕: Concatenation operator.                           Class token fclass ← ZL [0]
                                                     Multi-level segment tokens fseg ← FC(⊕(Z0 [1 :
                                                       N0 ], . . . , Unpool(ZL [1 : NL ])))



To obtain multi-level segment tokens, we unpool coarse tokens to the corresponding fine segments,
concatenate the unpooled features with the fine tokens. The segment tokens Zl are scattered to the
affiliated fine segments:
                            unpool
                           Zl−1    [a] = Zl [c], c = argmaxc∈C Pl [a, c].                                    (4)


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2   C OMPARISON WITH V I T

We highlight the technical differences between our CAST and prior works, including CNN, ViT, and
Token Pooling in Fig. 16 and in Fig. 17.


                              Old: ViT
                                                                                 Corgi


                                           …


                                                                           …
                                                           …
                 patches

                              New: CAST

                                                                                 Corgi


                                                                           …
                                                           …
                                           …
               superpixels


                                          hierarchical segmentation (for free)

Figure 16: ViT takes patch tokens as inputs and maintains the same large number of tokens through
all encoder blocks, whereas our CAST takes segment tokens as inputs and hierarchically coarsens
them into fewer and larger region tokens. These segment tokens adapt to the image and vary in shape.


Figure 17: We compare different models based on what they operate on and how they extract local-to-
global information. CNN computes features on a grid and handles global information through spatial
downsampling. ViT takes regularly shaped patches as inputs and updates features using attention.
Token Pooling subsamples tokens based on their significance scores. Our CAST takes segment tokens
as inputs and coarsens them into larger region tokens, which adapt to the image.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3   O PEN - VOCABULARY S EGMENTATION

We use the open-vocabulary segmentation method OVSeg (Liang et al., 2023) to derive part-to-whole
predictions from provided segments. OVSeg employs the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) classifier
on a masked image containing only the segment of interest, with other areas masked in gray. An
additional “Background” class is introduced alongside the given foreground labels. For instance,
PartImageNet (He et al., 2022) consists of 11 objects (e.g., Biped) and 40 parts (e.g., Biped Head),
necessitating 12-way and 41-way classification, respectively. We predict category and object from the
coarse segments and parts from fine segments. We use the ViT-B-16 model with pretrained weights
released by OpenAI and do not fine-tune it with masked images.
CAST and ViT segments inherently have a hierarchy, so we restrict the part recognition vocabulary
based on the object class of the parent segment. In contrast, SAM segments lack this hierarchy,
necessitating a workaround to constrain their parent class. The specific procedures for each case are
explained below. We applied GaussianBlur with kernel size 7×7 to smooth the segmentations.
CAST (and ViT). CAST progressively clusters segments as the layers advance, resulting in multiple
levels of segments. In this context, we utilize the highest level (level 4) with 8 segments for object
recognition and its child (level 3) with 16 segments for part recognition. We employ the same strategy
for ViT, where the segments are generated using K-means clustering over embeddings at the same
level. Thus, both CAST and ViT segments enforce a consistent hierarchy.
SAM. Segment Anything (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) provides segments at different levels but
does not consider their hierarchy. Specifically, SAM generates 64 segments with varying levels to
parse the original image when no conditions are given. Here, we begin by sorting the segments in
descending order of area, implying that the former ones tend to represent objects, while the latter
ones tend to represent parts. We start with an empty semantic mask and iteractively fill the mask by
processing the sorted segments to obtain the semantic segmentation.
While following the same procedure, an important distinction arises between object and part recogni-
tion. In object recognition, we skip updating the pixel if it is already filled since the earlier object
segment has assigned it. Conversely, for part recognition, we override the pixel with the new part
segment, enabling OVSeg to consider the fine-grained segments generated by SAM. We tested various
approaches, and this strategy yielded the best results.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4     C OMPARISON WITH H IERARCHICAL S EGMENT G ROUPING

Hierarchical Segment Grouping (HSG) (Ke et al., 2022) is an unsupervised hierarchical semantic
segmentation framework that induces grouping hierarchy based on pixel feature similarity. Our CAST
is similar to HSG in the sense of inferring hierarchical groupings in terms of merging segments
progressively. Both methods predict soft assigned probabilities to map a fine-grained segment to
a coarse-grained region at the next level. Multi-scale image segmentation is induced by chaining
segment assignments across all levels.
However, our CAST differs from HSG in several aspects. 1) HSG is designed specifically for
unsupervised semantic segmentation. In stark contrast, our CAST is a general backbone architecture
for different downstream tasks, e.g. classification, image segmentation, and detection. In addition, our
model can be trained both supervisedly and unsupervisedly. 2) Our hierarchical image segmentation
is directly involved in multi-scale feature extraction. From the early stage of our model, every
token features correspond to an image segment at different scales. In contrast, HSG builds atop
CNN backbones, segmentations are only inferred at the final stage of the model. 3) Our CAST
demonstrates superior model efficiency by involving hierarchical segmentation and image recognition
jointly. Segmentation is induced directly from the model architecture. HSG requires additional
transformer modules to infer image segmentation.

E.5     G ENERATING S EGMENTS FROM V I T

We generate segments from ViT by applying K-Means clustering to the final output tokens. We
bilinearly upscale the feature map and then apply K-Means to the pixel-level features to align the
segments with the input image resolution. Similar to CAST, we cross-reference clustering assignments
across different levels to achieve hierarchical image segmentation. To maintain a consistent cluster
hierarchy, we iteratively run K-Means, reducing the number of clusters by grouping the clusters from
the previous iteration into coarser clusters.

E.6     T OKEN P OOLING M ETHODS

We re-implemented previous token pooling methods: FINCH (Sarfraz et al., 2019), Token Pool-
ing (Marin et al., 2021), CTM (Zeng et al., 2022), and ToMe (Bolya et al., 2023), for comparison with
our proposed Graph Pooling. We use superpixel tokens for all methods, only modifying the token
pooling layers. For FINCH and Token Pooling, we implemented their clustering algorithms. For
TCFormer, we adapted Clustering-based Token Merge (CTM) module from the official codebase1 ,
removing the convolutional layer to apply it to our superpixel tokens. For ToMe, we used the official
codebase2 and reduced the tokens per layer to 16 to match the latency of other methods.


   1
       https://github.com/zengwang430521/TCFormer
   2
       https://github.com/facebookresearch/ToMe


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
F.1   S UMMARY OF M ODELS U SED IN E XPERIMENTS

We pre-train our CAST model self-supervisedly and supervisedly on ImageNet and COCO dataset.
Our experiments use different model architectures and pre-training objectives. For clarification, we
summarize the backbone models used in each experiment in Table 10.


                 Table 10: Pre-trained backbone models used in each experiment.

Experiment                                                       Pre-training objective     Model
Hierarchical segmentation: ImageNet (Fig. 5)                    self-supervised: IN-1K     CAST-S
Hierarchical segmentation: PartImageNet (Fig. 6 & Table 1)      self-supervised: IN-1K     CAST-B
Hierarchical segmentation: DensePose (Fig. 7 & Table 2)         self-supervised: COCO      CAST-S
Semantic segmentation: VOC (Table 3 a)                          self-supervised: COCO      CAST-S
Semantic segmentation: ADE20K (Table 3 b)                          supervised: IN-1K       CAST-S
Semantic segmentation: Pascal Context (Table 3 b)                  supervised: IN-1K       CAST-S
Classification: ImageNet (Table 4)                              self-supervised: IN-1K     CAST-S
Test-time adaptation: PartImageNet (Fig. 9 & Fig. 15)           self-supervised: IN-1K     CAST-B
Object-centric attention: VOC (Fig. 12)                         self-supervised: IN-1K     CAST-S



F.2   C LASSIFICATION AND S EGMENTATION DATASETS

Classification Datasets. ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) is a generic image classification dataset,
annotated with 1, 000 object categories (IN-1K). The training and validation set includes 1.28M and
50K images, respectively. We follow Tian et al. (2020) to subsample 100 object categories to create
IN-100. The subset consists of 127K and 5K images for training and testing.
Segmentation Datasets. 1) Pascal VOC 2012 (Everingham et al., 2010) is an object-centric semantic
segmentation dataset that contains 20 object categories and a background class. We use the augmented
training set (Hariharan et al., 2011) with 10, 582 images and the validation set with 1, 449 images.
2) MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) is a generic scene dataset with complex contexts and include more
objects in each image (7.3 vs. 2.3) than VOC. Following Van Gansbeke et al. (2021), we train on
118, 287 images of train2017 split and test on the VOC validation set. 3) ADE20K Zhou et al. (2019)
is a complex scene dataset, annotated with 150 object categories. The dataset includes 20, 210 and
2, 000 images for training and validation. 4) Pascal Context is also a scene dataset with 4, 996 and
5, 104 images for training and validation, labelled with 59 object categories and a background class.

F.3   I MAGE R ESOLUTION AND N UMBER OF T OKENS

We closely follow (Chen et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Van Gansbeke et al., 2021; Caron et al.,
2021) to set up image resolution for classification and segmentation. For ViT baselines, on ImageNet,
we set crop_size to 224, resulting in 196 input patch tokens. On VOC, we use 512 × 512 input
images with corresponding 1024 patch tokens for semantic segmentation. We follow the same setup
as (Strudel et al., 2021) for experiments on ADE20K and Pascal Context. On ADE20K, we use a
512 × 512 sliding window and set the stride to 512. On Pascal Context, we use 480 × 480 sliding
window and set the stride to 320. For our CAST, we adopt the same image resolution settings and
adjust the granularity of superpixels to match the number of input tokens as ViT baselines.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4   H YPER - PARAMETERS FOR T RAINING

We list the hyper-parameters for training using MoCo and DeiT framework in Table 11 and Table 12.
We mostly follow the default hyper-parameters used in each framework. We set the same batch_size
and total_epochs as our CAST and ViT baselines. All the experiments are conducted with either
eight TitanX (12 GB) or two A100 (45 GB) Nvidia graphic cards.


Table 11: Hyper-parameters for training our CAST, ViT, and Swin on IN-100, IN-1K, and COCO
dataset. Due to computating limitations, we adapt batch_size and total_epoch in our experiments.
Otherwise, we follow mostly the same set up as MoCo (Chen et al., 2021).

          Parameter                              IN-100                IN-1K            COCO
          batch_size                               256                 256               256
          crop_size                                224                 224               224
          learning_rate                          1.5e−4              1.5e−4            1.5e−4
          weight_decay                             0.1                 0.1               0.1
          momentum                                 0.9                 0.9               0.9
          total_epochs                             200                 100               400
          warmup_epochs                             20                  10                40
          optimizer                               Adam                Adam              Adam
          learning_rate_policy                 Cosine decay        Cosine decay      Cosine decay
          MOCO : temperature                          0.2               0.2               0.2
          MOCO : output_dimension                     256               256               256
          MOCO : momentum_coefficients               0.99              0.99              0.99
          MOCO : MLP hidden dimension                4096              4096              4096
          ViT: # Tokens                                            [196]×11
          CAST-S/B: # Tokens                           [196]×3 , [64]×3 , [32]×3 , [16]×2


Table 12: Hyper-parameters for training our CAST and ViT on IN-1K dataset. We follow mostly the
same set up as DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021).

            Parameter                                                    IN-1K
            batch_size                                              1024
            crop_size                                                224
            learning_rate                                           5e−4
            weight_decay                                             0.05
            momentum                                                 0.9
            total_epochs                                             300
            warmup_epochs                                              5
            warmup_learning_rate                                    1e−6
            optimizer                                               Adam
            learning_rate_policy                                Cosine decay
            augmentation                              RandAug(9, 0.5) (Cubuk et al., 2020)
            label_smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016)                    0.1
            mixup (Zhang et al., 2017)                               0.8
            cutmix (Yun et al., 2019)                                1.0
            ViT: # Tokens                                               [196]×11
            CAST-S: # Tokens                                [196]×3 , [64]×3 , [32]×3 , [16]×2


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.5   I NFERENCE AND E VALUATION ON I MAGE N ET AND VOC

For image classification on ImageNet (Fig. 18), we apply the linear probing procedure for evaluation.
For semantic segmentation on VOC (Fig. 19), we use the segment retrieval and transfer learning
procedure to evaluate model performance.
Image classification: linear probing. For unsupervised classification, we follow MoCo-v3 (Chen
et al., 2021) to evaluate image-wise discrimination model performance using a linear probing protocol.
We freeze the trained model weights and replace the 3-layer MLP head with a randomly initialized
linear projection layer as classifier. We train the linear classifier with ground-truth labels and report
the top-1 accuracy. Following Chen et al. (2021), we train the linear classifier with 90 epochs on
ImageNet dataset. We set momentum to 0.9 and weight_decay to 0 for all experiments. On IN-1K,
we set batch_size to 1024, learning_rate to 30; on IN-100, we set batch_size to 256, learning_rate
to 0.8. SGD is used as the optimizer.
Semantic segmentation: segment retrieval. We follow Hwang et al. (2019); Van Gansbeke et al.
(2021); Ke et al. (2022) to evaluate semantic segmentation using segment retrieval. We partition
an image into several segments and conduct nearest neighbor search to predict the label for each
segment. We assign the majority labels from the 20 retrieved segments.
For ViT baselines, we apply the MLP head on each token to generate unit-length output features
and upsample the feature maps to the original resolution of the input image. Followed by spherical
K-Means clustering algorithm, we partition the image into 40 segments using the output features.
Our CAST does not require additional upsampling and K-Means clustering. For segmentation, our
model follows Hypercolumn design (Hariharan et al., 2015) to unpool and fuse multi-level segment
tokens. Our model generates the same number of output tokens as the superpixels. We gather pixel
features from output tokens based on the superpixel index. Without the need for spherical K-Means
clustering, our CAST predicts an image segmentation using the graph pooling modules. We compute
normalized segment features according to such image segmentation.
Semantic segmentation: transfer learning. We follow Van Gansbeke et al. (2021) to evaluate model
performance using transfer learning protocol. All models are unsupervisedly trained on MSCOCO,
and supervisedly fine-tuned on Pascal VOC. We replace the 3-layer MLP head with 2-layer 1 × 1
convolutional layers. For training ViT baselines, we upscale patch tokens back to the input image
resolution using bilinear interpolation. For training our CAST, we scatter segment tokens to per-pixel
features using superpixel indices. We use per-pixel ground-truth labels for training both methods.
We set the training steps to 30K, learning_rate to 0.003, weight_decay to 0.0001, batch_size to 16,
crop_size to 512. Following Chen et al. (2016), we adopt poly learning rate policy by multiplying
                              iter  0.9
base learning rate by 1 − max_iter      . We adopt the SGD optimizer. We use only a single-scale image
for inference.


Figure 18: Detailed model architecture for classification. Our CAST aggregates segment tokens by
average pooling convolutional features within each superpixel, contextualize segment tokens with
transoformer encoder blocks, and coarsen them into fewer region tokens with Graph Pooling module.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  (a) our CAST during training


                   (b) our CAST during inference for nearest segment retrievals
Figure 19: Detailed model architecture for semantic segmentation. Our CAST aggregates segment
tokens by average pooling convolutional features within each superpixel, contextualize segment
tokens with transoformer encoder blocks, and coarsen them into fewer region tokens with Graph
Pooling module. (a) Our CAST-S during training. (b) Our CAST-S during inference for segment
retrievals. We unpool coarsened segment tokens based on the grouping index w.r.t input superpix-
els. We concatenate (⊕) unpooled segment tokens across multiple scales and fuse them using a
fully_connected layer, followed by the 3-layer MLP head. For transfer learning, we replace the
3-layer MLP head with 2-layer 1 × 1 convolutional layers atop the fused tokens. We also remove the
final average pooling layer. For segment retrievals, we learn an additional Graph Pooling module to
predict coarse segmentations and average pool tokens as outputs for nearest-neighbor retrievals.


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATIONS
G.1    V ISUAL R ESULTS ON H IERARCHICAL S EGMENTATION

We present additional visualizations of hierarchical segmentations induced by ViT and our CAST
(Fig. 20). CAST captures image boundaries and semantics more precisely.


    image     patches    ViT: 32,16,8-way segmentation   superpixels CAST: 32,16,8-way segmentation


Figure 20: Additional visual results on hierarchical segmentation show that our model captures better
contours and the wholes segmentation than ViT.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2   V ISUAL R ESULTS ON S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION

We present more visualization results of before and after fine-tuned semantic segmentation on VOC
(Fig. 21). Compared to ViT baselines, our model produces more accurate segmentations. Remarkably,
our results align with object contours precisely without the need of additional CRF post-processing.


                  image                        ViT                        CAST


Figure 21: Our model induce much more precise segmentation than patch tokens. Segmentations are
predicted based on segment-wise nearest neighbor retrievals (row 1 images) and fine-tuned models
(row 2 images). Using segment, not patch, tokens improves our predicted segmentations by a large
margin. Notably, our method explicitly produces segmentations without the need of additional
K-Means clustering for segment retrievals.


                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3   V ISUAL R ESULTS ON F IGURE - GROUND S EGMENTATION

We present more visual results of figure-ground segmentations generated from multi-head atten-
tion maps on VOC. Our CAST attends to foreground semantics more precisely than ViT, and the
segmentations preserve object boundaries more accurately. See Fig. 22.


                                CAST (top) vs. ViT (bottom)


Figure 22: Our CAST (top row) attends to foreground semantics more precisely than ViT (bottom
row) and DINO (Caron et al., 2021) on VOC. We adopt the same procedure as DINO to generate
foreground segmentation masks from latent multi-head attention maps. All models are trained on
IN-1K dataset from scratch. Our CAST and ViT are trained based on MoCo-v3 (Chen et al., 2021).


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.4   V ISUAL R ESULTS ON M ULTI - HEAD ATTENTION M APS

We visualize the multi-head attention maps of the [CLASS] token to all the other segment tokens
in our vision transformer. As the [CLASS] token is optimized for image-wise discrimination,
such attention maps indicate the most informative groupings of segments that will induce the most
discriminative image-wise representations. We visualize the same attention maps used to generate
the figure-ground segmentation, which are the ones in the 9th transformer encoder block. The layer
takes 32 coarsened segment tokens as inputs, resulting in 12 heads of 32 × 32 attention maps. We
follow the same procedure as DINO (Caron et al., 2021) to display the binarized attention maps. The
threshold is adjusted to keep 60% of the mass. See Caron et al. (2021) for more details.
As shown in Fig. 23, our attention maps reveal parts-of-the-whole information of the image. We
observe that the same object parts are together attended in the same attention head, e.g. face vs. ears
vs. nose of the dog. It indicates that image-wise recognition requires parts-of-the-whole information.
Additionally, our model carries segment, not patch, tokens through the layers, resulting in attention
maps better aligned with object boundaries.


Figure 23: Our multi-head attention maps reveal parts-of-the-whole information of the image on
IN-100. From left to right: input images and corresponding 12 heads of attention maps of the
[CLASS] token to all the other segments. We follow DINO (Caron et al., 2021) to binarize attention
maps. We show that the same object parts are together attended in the same head, e.g. face vs. ears
vs. nose of the dog. Our model takes segment tokens, resulting in attention maps better aligned with
object boundaries.


                                                  39
