Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S EGMENT A NYTHING M EETS U NIVERSAL A DVERSAR -
IAL P ERTURBATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         As Segment Anything Model (SAM) becomes a popular foundation model in
         computer vision, its adversarial robustness has become a concern that cannot be
         ignored. This works investigates whether it is possible to attack SAM with image-
         agnostic Universal Adversarial Perturbation (UAP). In other words, we seek a
         single perturbation that can fool the SAM to predict invalid masks for most (if
         not all) images. We demonstrate convetional image-centric attack framework is
         effective for image-independent attacks but fails for universal adversarial attack.
         To this end, we propose a novel perturbation-centric framework that results in a
         UAP generation method based on self-supervised contrastive learning (CL), where
         the UAP is set to the anchor sample and the positive sample is augmented from
         the UAP. The representations of negative samples are obtained from the image
         encoder in advance and saved in a memory bank. The effectiveness of our proposed
         CL-based UAP generation method is validated by both quantitative and qualitative
         results. On top of the ablation study to understand various components in our
         proposed method, we shed light on the roles of positive and negative samples in
         making the generated UAP effective for attacking SAM.


1   I NTRODUCTION

With an increasingly important role in driving groundbreaking innovations in AI, deep learning
has gradually transitioned from training models for specific tasks to a general-purpose foundation
model Bommasani et al. (2021). For language foundation models like BERT Devlin et al. (2018)
and GPT Radford et al. (2018; 2019), have made significant breakthroughs in the natural language
processing (NLP) area and contributed to the development of various generative AI Zhang et al.
(2023a), including the text generation (ChatGPT Zhang et al. (2023b)), text-to-image Zhang et al.
(2023c) and text-to-speech Zhang et al. (2023d), text-to-3D Li et al. (2023), etc. On top of the
early successful attempts like masked encoder Zhang et al. (2022a), Meta research team has recently
proposed a vision foundation model called Segment Anything Model (SAM) Kirillov et al. (2023),
which mimics GPT to control the output with prompts. Such a prompt-guided approach alleviates the
need for finetuning and thus has impressive zero-shot transfer performance.
After the release of Segment Anything project, SAM has been widely used in various applications, such
as image editing Kevmo (2023) and object tracking Adamdad (2023); Chen (2023), etc. Therefore,
it is critical to understand its robustness in various contexts. Early works Qiao et al. (2023) have
examined its generalization capabilities beyond natural images to medical images Zhang et al. (2023e)
and camouflaged images Tang et al. (2023). Follow-up works have further evaluated its robustness
under style transfer, common corruptions, patch occlusion and adversarial perturbation. Attack-SAM
is a pioneering work to study how to attack SAM with adversarial examples, but it mainly focuses on
image-independent attacks Zhang et al. (2023f). In other words, the generated perturbation can only
be used for attacking the model for a specific image, which requires generating a new perturbation
when the image changes. By contrast, a universal adversarial attack seeks a single perturbation
(termed UAP) that causes the adversarial effect to all images and leads to wrong label predictions
for most images Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a) in the context of image classification. With the
image-agnostic property, the UAP can be generated beforehand and applied to any image for the
attack purpose and thus is relatively more practical but also more challenging. Therefore, our work is
devoted to studying whether it is possible to attack SAM with a UAP.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Classical adversarial attack methods like DeepFool Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2016) and PGD Madry
et al. (2018) optimize the perturbation to make the output of the adversarial image different from
that of the original clean image. The classical UAP algorithm introduced in Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.
(2017a) is based on DeepFool and thus follows such an image-centric approach. This requires access
to the original training data and thus FFF Mopuri et al. (2017a) studies PGD-based approaches for
generating data-free UAP Mopuri et al. (2017a) with a relatively weaker attack performance. Prior
works Qiao et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023f) show that such an image-centric approach is also
effective for attacking SAM, but the investigation is limited to image-independent attacks. A major
difference in generating UAP lies in changing the to-be-attacked training image in every iteration
to avoid over-fitting to any specific image. We follow this practice to extend Attack-SAM from
image-independent attacks to universal attacks, however, such a preliminary investigation leads to
unsatisfactory performance. This is attributed to the change of optimization target from one image to
another in the image-centric approach. To this end, this work proposes a new perturbation-centric
attack method, by shifting the goal from directly attacking images to seeking augmentation-invariant
property of UAP. Specifically, we optimize the UAP in the CL method where the UAP is chosen as
the anchor sample. The positive sample is chosen by augmenting the anchor sample, while random
natural images are chosen as the negative samples.
For the proposed CL-based UAP generation method, we experiment with various forms of augmen-
tations to generate a positive sample and find that augmenting the UAP by adding natural images
yields the most effective UAP for universal adversarial attack. Beyond quantitative verification, we
also show visualize the attack performance of the generated UAP under both both point and box
prompts. We have an intriguing observation that the predicted mask gets invalid under both types of
prompts: getting smaller under point prompts and getting larger under box prompts. Moreover, we
present a discussion to shed light on why our generated UAP is effective by analyzing different pairs
of inputs for the encoded feature representations. It helps us understand the roles of positive samples
and negative samples in our CL-based UAP method for crafting an effective UAP to attack SAM.


2    R ELATED WORKS

Segment Anything Model (SAM). SAM is a recent advancement in the field of computer vision
that has garnered significant attention Ma and Wang (2023); Zhang et al. (2023e); Tang et al. (2023);
Han et al. (2023); Shen et al. (2023); Kang et al. (2022). Unlike traditional deep learning recognition
models focusing solely on label prediction, SAM performs mask prediction tasks using prompts. This
innovative approach allows SAM to generate object masks for a wide range of objects, showcasing
its remarkable zero-shot transition performance. Researchers have explored the reliability of SAM by
investigating its susceptibility to adversarial attacks and manipulating label predictions. Furthermore,
SAM has been extensively utilized in various applications, including medical imaging Ma and
Wang (2023); Zhang et al. (2023e), and camouflaged object detection Tang et al. (2023). It has
also been combined with other models and techniques to enhance its utility, such as combining
with Grounding DINO for text-based object detection and segmentation IDEA-Research (2023) and
integrating with BLIP or CLIP for label prediction Chen et al. (2023); Park (2023); Li et al. (2022);
Radford et al. (2021). SAM has found applications in image editing Rombach et al. (2022), inpainting
Yu et al. (2023), and object tracking in videos Yang et al. (2023); Zxyang (2023). More recently,
MobileSAM Zhang et al. (2023g), which is significantly smaller and faster than the original SAM,
realizes lightweight SAM on mobile devices by decoupled knowledge distillation. With the advent
of MobileSAM, it is expected more and more SAM-related applications will emerge, especially in
the computation-constrained edge devices. This yields a need to understand how SAM works, for
which zhang Zhang et al. (2023h) performs a pioneering study and shows that SAM is biased towards
texture rather than shape. Moreover, multiple works Qiao et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023i) have
shown that SAM is vulnerable to the attack of adversarial examples. Our work also investigates the
adversarial robustness of SAM, but differentiates by focusing on universal adversarial attack.
Universal Adversarial Attack. Universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) has been first introduced
in Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a) to fool the deep classification model by making wrong label
predictions for most images. Unlike the vanilla universal attack by the projected algorithm to
generate the perturbations, the SV-UAP Khrulkov and Oseledets (2018) adopts singular vectors
to craft UAPs, where the method is data-efficient with only 64 images used to iteratively craft
the perturbations. Inspired by the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), NAG Mopuri et al.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2018a) and GAP Perolat et al. (2018) focus on obtaining the distribution of UAPs. To compute
the UAPs, these approaches use a subset of the training dataset, however, the attacker might be
limited in accessing the training data. Therefore, multiple works explore data-free to generate UAPs.
FFF Mopuri et al. (2017b) is pioneering to propose a data-independent approach to generate the
UAPs, adopting fooling the features learned at multiple layers. GD-UAP Mopuri et al. (2018b) can
generate universal perturbations and transfer to multiple vision tasks. Class-discriminative UAP has
been investigated in Zhang et al. (2020a); Benz et al. (2020) to fool the model for a subsect of classes
while minimizing the adversarial effect on other classes of images. They opt to train the UAP with
Adam Optimizer Kingma and Ba (2015) instead of adopting sign-based PGD algorithms Goodfellow
et al. (2015); Madry et al. (2018), and such a practice has also been adopted in Zhang et al. (2020b;
2021). In contrast to prior works adopting image-centric DeepFool or PGD to optimize the UAP,
our work proposes a perturbation-centric framework with a new UAP generation method based on
contrastive learning.
Self-supervised Contrastive Learning (CL). With the goal of learning augmentation-invariant
representation, for which CL is a miltstone development of unsupervised learning Schroff et al.
(2015); Wang and Gupta (2015); Sohn (2016); Misra et al. (2016); Federici et al. (2020). CL consists
of positive pair and negative pairs. Unlike the negative pairs, the positive pair are obtained from the
same image but differ in augmentation to ensure they have similar semantic information. Earlu works
on CL have adopted margin-based contrastive losses Hadsell et al. (2006); Wang and Gupta (2015);
Hermans et al. (2017), and NCE-like lossWu et al. (2018); Oord et al. (2018) has later emerged to
become the de facto standard loss in CL. For example, classical CL methods like SimCLR Chen
et al. (2020a) and MoCo families He et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2020b) adopt the InfoNCE loss which
combines mutual information and NCE. Specifically, it maximizes the mutual information between
the representation of different views in the same scene.


3     BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

3.1   P ROMPT- GUIDED I MAGE S EGMENTATION

Segment Anything Model (SAM) consists of three components: an image encoder, a prompt encoder,
and a lightweight mask decoder. The image encoder adopts the MAE He et al. (2022) pre-trained
Vision Transformer (ViT), which generates the image representation in the latent space. The prompt
encoder utilizes positional embeddings to represent the prompt (like points and boxes). The decoder
takes the outputs of image and prompt encoders as the inputs and predicts a valid mask to segment
the object of interest. In contrast to classical semantic segmentation performing pixel-wise label
prediction, the SAM generates a label-free mask. With x and p denoting the image and prompt,
respectively, we formalize the mask prediction of SAM as follows:


                                         y = SAM (x, p; θ),                                         (1)
                                                                   H×W ×C                        H×W
where θ represents the parameter of SAM. Given a image x ∈ R             , the shape of y is R    .
We set the xij as the pixel values at the image x with the coordinates i and j. xij belongs to the
masked area if the pixel value yij is larger than the threshold of zero.

3.2   U NIVERSAL A DVERSARIAL ATTACK ON SAM

Here, we formalize the task of universal adversarial attack on SAM. Let µ denote the distribution
of images in RH×W ×C . In the image recognition tasks, the adversary goal is to fool the model to
predict wrong labels. Universal adversarial attack, under the assumption that the predicted labels of
clean images are the correct ones, seeks a single perturbation vector v ∈ RH×W ×C termed UAP
to cause label changes for most images Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a). In other words, it aims to
maximize the adversarial effect of the UAP in terms of the fooling rate, the ratio of images whose
predicted label changes after adding the UAP Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a). In the context of
SAM, the predicted outputs are masks instead of labels and thus the attack goal is to cause mask
changes. We follow Attack-SAM to adopt the widely used Intersection over Union (IoU) in image
segmentation to evaluate such mask changes. The mIoU calculates the mean IoU for N pairs of clean
mask M askclean and adversarial mask M askadv shown in Equation 2.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 N
                                            1 X             (n)          (n)
                                 mIoU =           IoU (M askclean , M askadv ),                          (2)
                                            N n=1
where all the adversarial masks M askadv are generated for all N images by a single UAP. The goal
of universal adversarial attack on SAM is to seek such a single perturbation v to decrease the mIoU
defined in Eq. 2 as much as possible. The UAP v is bounded by a lp norm, which is set to l∞ norm
conventions in prior works on SAM Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a;b).

Implementation details. Considering the image-agnostic property, N in Eq. 2 needs to be larger
than 1 and is set to 100 in this work. For the prompts, we randomly choose point prompts unless
specified otherwise. Specifically, we randomly select 100 test images from the SA-1B dataset Kirillov
et al. (2023) for evaluating the generated UAP. Note that the test images cannot be used for generating
the UAP. Following the existing works on the universal adversarial attacks in computer vision, we
use 10/255 as the maximum limit for the perturbation. In other words, the allowed maximum change
on each pixel can be no bigger than 10/255.

4       M ETHOD
4.1       E XISTING I MAGE -C ENTRIC ATTACK F RAMEWORK

For the task of adversarial attack, the goal is to make the deep model predict invalid output after
adding a small perturbation on the input image. Therefore, numerous attack methods, including
classical DeepFool Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2016) and PGD Madry et al. (2018), optimize such
an adversarial perturbation to make the output of adversarial image different from that of its clean
image. Such an image-centric approach consists of two steps. First, it predicts the output of clean
image yclean and saves it as the ground-truth1 . Second, the perturbation in the adversarial image is
optimized to make yadv different from the ground-truth yclean .
Universal adversarial attack requires the perturbation to be effective at random unseen images.
Therefore, the to-be-attacked training image needs to be changed in every iteration of the optimization
process to avoid over-fitting on any single training image. Such an image-centric approach has been
adopted in Zhang et al. (2023i) to demonstrate successful image-independent attacks, and we have
adapted it to image-agnostic, universal adversarial attacks. The results in Table 1 show that the
generated UAP performs much better than random uniform noise sampled between −10/255 and
10/255. Nonetheless, the value of mIoU (59.50%) is still quite high, demonstrating that the UAP
is not sufficiently effective for causing mask changes. We also experiment with not changing the
to-be-attacked image, which fixes the same optimization goal and results in a successful image-
dependent attack with a mIoU of 0.0%. This suggests that a successful attack in SAM requires a
consistent optimization target (like attacking a single image). However, such success is limited to
image-dependent attacks due to overfitting and cannot be generalized to unseen test images.

Table 1: mIoU (%) results of Image-centric attack by uniform noise and adversarial examples.
Image-agnostic indicates the universal setup to attack unseen images.

                           Input                     Image-dependent      Image-agnostic
                           Uniform noise                  86.97                86.97
                           Adversarial attack              0.0                 59.50


4.2       P ROPOSED P ERTURBATION -C ENTRIC ATTACK F RAMEWORK

The above image-centric method is suitable for image-independent attack on SAM but fails for
universal attack. The image-centric method is in essence a supervised approach where yclean plays
the role of ground-truth and the added perturbation is optimized to make yadv far from yclean . Such a
supervised approach inevitably causes a dramatic change to the optimization goal when the training
    1
        the ground-truth output might be given at first in some cases, where this step can be skipped.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image is changed at every iteration. In other words, the failure of image-centric approach for universal
attack is conjectured to be the inconsistent optimization goal caused by the change of training image
at every iteration. Therefore, we shift the perspective from image to perturbation, which results in
our proposed perturbation-centric method. Specifically, in contrast to the predicted masks of the
clean and adversarial images, we focus on the independent features of the UAP, which is motivated
by perceiving the UAP as an independent input considering its image-agnostic property. How to
optimize the UAP in such a perturbation-centric approach, however, is a non-trivial task. It cannot be
straightforwardly optimized in a supervised manner as in the image-centric method. To this end, we
turn to a widely used self-supervised approach known as Contrastive Learning (CL). The difference
between image-centric and perturbation-centric framework is summarized in Figure 1.


Figure 1: Difference between image-centric (left) and perturbation-centric (right) attack frameworks.

CL-based UAP Genration Method. Outperforming its supervised counterpart, self-supervised
learning has become a dominant approach for pre-training an backbone encoder, where CL is a
widely adopted method. In the classical CL , there are three types of samples: anchor sample, positive
sample, and negative sample. The anchor sample is the sample of interest, while the positive sample
is augmented from the anchor sample. Other random images are chosen as the negative samples,
and we adopt the same practice in our CL-based UAP generation method. What makes it different
from the classical CL method lies in the choice of anchor sample. Specifically, the UAP (v) is chosen
as the anchor sample because it is the input of interest in this context. For the positive sample, we
obtain it by augmenting the anchor sample UAP, which will be discussed in detail. The NCE-like loss
(often termed InfoNCE loss) has been independently introduced in multiple works and constitutes as
the de-facto standard loss for CL. Following He et al. (2020), we denote the encoded features of the
anchor sample, positive sample, and negative sample with q, k+ and k− , respectively. Note that the
encoded features are often L2 normalized to remove scale ambiguity, based on which the InfoNCE
loss adopted in the CL-based UAP generation method is shown as follows:
                                                     exp(q · k+ /τ )
                      Linf once = −log                    PK                   ,                     (3)
                                                                        i /τ )
                                         exp(q · k+ /τ ) + i=1 exp(q · k−
where τ represents the temperature controlling the hardness-aware property and thus has an implicit
influence on the size of negative samples Wang and Liu (2021); Zhang et al. (2022b). A large negative
sample size is required to better sample the high-dimensional visual space He et al. (2020). We follow
prior works to save the encoded features of negative samples in a list termed as memory bank Wu
et al. (2018) or dictionary He et al. (2020). Since the to-be-attacked SAM encoder does not change
during the optimization of UAP, the list does not need to be updated as in classical CL method Wu
et al. (2018); He et al. (2020). In other words, the k − in Eq 3 can be generated once and then saved
for sampling during the optimization of UAP.
In the classical CL method, augmentation is applied to ensure augmentation-invariant property for
the encoder learning meaningful representations. In our CL-based UAP method, augmentation is also
essential for making the generated UAP cause augmentation-invariant feature response on the encoder.
This yields two intertwined questions: (1) how should we choose such augmentation for making the
UAP effective? (2) why does such augmentation-invariant property makes the UAP effective? The
following section performs an empirical study to shed insight on these two intertwined questions.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

5.1   T OWARDS F INDING E FFECTIVE AUGMENTATION

Preliminary investigation. In the classical CL method, there are mainly two types of augmenta-
tions Chen et al. (2020a). The first type involves spatial transformation like crop/resize and cutout.
The second type involves no spatial transformation but causes appearance change by adding low-
frequency content (like color shift) or high-frequency content (like noise). We experiment with both
types of augmentation and the results are shown in Table 2. We observe that the mIoU values with
augmentation crop/resize and cutout consistently remain high, at 85.11% and 75.48%, respectively. It
suggests that the spatial transformation is not an effective augmentation type in our UAP generation
method. For the second type of adding content, adding uniform noise is also not effective with a
mIoU value of 81.14%. By contrast, the augmentation of color shift yields a mIoU of 61.64%, which
is comparable to that of the image-centric method (see 59.5% in Table 1).

Table 2: Comparison of different augmentations. The Crop size is 200×200 out of 1024×1024,
cutout size is 200×200. The uniform noise and color shift are ranged from 0 to 255. Adding natural
images achieves significantly better performance than other augmentations.

                                  Augmentation type           mIoU (↓)
                                  Crop/Resize                   85.11
                                  Cutout                        75.48
                                  Uniform noise                 81.14
                                  Color shift                   61.64
                                  Adding natural images         15.01


From color shift to natural images. Our preliminary investigation suggests that color shift is the
most effective augmentation among those we investigate. We believe that this might be connected to
how the generated UAP is applied to attack the model in practice. Since UAP is directly added to the
images without spatial transformation, which explains why spatial transformation is less effective.
Moreover, natural images have the property of being locally smooth and thus mainly contain low-
frequency content, which justifies why the color shift is relatively more effective than adding noise.
Motivated by the above interpretations, we conjecture that replacing the color shift images with
random natural images for additive augmentation is beneficial for higher attack performance, which is
supported by the results in Table 2. Here, for simplicity, the weight of the augmented natural images
is set to 1. However, it can be set to values different from 1 (see the ablation study results in Figure 4).


5.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

It is worth highlighting that our generated UAP has one hidden merit it can generalize to all prompts
because the UAP is optimized only on the SAM encoder. In other words, it is truly universal in the
sense of being both image-agnostic and prompt-agnostic. In the above, we only report the quantitative
results under random point prompts. Here, for qualitative results, we visualize the attack performance
under both point prompts and box prompts, with results shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively.
We find that the single UAP causes the model to produce invalid masks for both types of prompts
but with an intriguing distinction. Specifically, under the point prompts, the predicted mask region
gets smaller with a boundary close to the chosen point prompt. Under the box prompt, however, the
predicted mask gets larger than the original mask. We have no clear explanation for this intriguing
phenomenon. A possible explanation is that the UAP tends to cause the predicted output to have
similar values, i.e. causing confusion between the original masked regions and unmasked regions.
For the point prompt, the unmasked region tends to be much larger than that of the masked region and
thus the predicted mask gets smaller after UAP. By contrast, the box prompts tends to predict a mask
inside the box, and thus tends to make the predicted mask boundary get larger and vauge. Note that
we can still observe the glass mask in the third row of Figure 3, but the mask boundary gets blurred.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              (a) xclean            (b) xadv           (c) maskclean         (d) maskadv

Figure 2: Qualitative results under point prompts. Column (a) and (b) shows the clean and adversarial
images with the point prompt marked in a green star, with their predicted masks shown in column (c)
and (d), respectively. The UAP makes the mask invalid by removing it (or making it smaller).


              (a) xclean            (b) xadv           (c) maskclean         (d) maskadv

Figure 3: Qualitative results under box prompts. Column (a) and (b) refers to the clean and adversarial
images with the box prompt marked with green lines, with their predicted masks shown in column (c)
and (d), respectively. The UAP makes the mask invalid by making it larger and blurry.



                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Weight of Augmented Images. Here, we first conduct an ablation study on the weight of the
augmented images. The results are shown in Figure 4. We observe that the mIoU value decreases first
increases and then decreases when the weight value is increased from 0.2 to 2 with an interval of 0.1.
The strongest attack performance with the mIoU value of 14.21 appears when the weight is set to 1.2.
Overall the mIoU value stays low for a relatively wide range of augmentation weight, suggesting our
proposed method is moderately sensitive to the choice of augmentaiton weight.


           Figure 4: The mIoU (%) results for different weights of the augmented images.


Size of Negative Sample. For negative samples in contrastive learning, unlike the positive samples
that aim to attract the anchor, our objective is to create a repelling effect on the anchor. This enables the
anchor to more effectively foucs on independent features by being drawn towards the positive samples.
To accomplish this, it is essential to incorporate a diverse set of negative sample representations, thus
avoiding repetitive generation. Therefore, we implement the memory bank mechanism, as do in prior
work. We use various sample numbers ( 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100) as our memory bank. As shown in
Table 3, we observe a significant increase in universal attack performance as the number of samples
increases. This indicates that augmenting diverse negative sample representations through the memory
bank is beneficial for UAP training. To further augment diverse negative sample representations,

                    Table 3: The mIoU (%) results on different negative samples N .

                N               1        2        5        10        20       50       100
                mIoU (↓)     38.91     30.71    24.83     19.88    17.63    15.92     15.01


Temperature. Temperature is widely known to have a large influence on the performance of CL
method Wang and Liu (2021); Zhang et al. (2022b). The influence of temperature in our CL-based
UAP method is shown in Table 4. By default, the temperature is set to 0.1 in this work. We observe
that the temperature significantly decreases when the temperature is set to a large value. The reason is
that a smaller temperature causes more weight on spent on those hard negative samples Wang and Liu
(2021); Zhang et al. (2022b). As revealed in Zhang et al. (2022b), a small temperature is equivalent
to choosing a small negative sample size. Therefore, it is well expected that the attack performance
decreases when the temperature is set to a sufficiently small value because the a relatively large
negative sample size is required for CL. Unlike classical CL, a relatively large temperature does not
cause a performance drop.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 4: The mIoU (%) results on different InfoNCE temperatures.

                   Temperature     0.005     0.01        0.05     0.1     0.5           1
                   mIoU (↓)        64.61     60.58       22.78   15.01   13.28     13.48



5.4   D ISCUSSION

To shed more light on why the generated UAP is effective in attacking unseen images, we analyze the
cosine similarity of different pairs of inputs for the encoded feature representations, and the results
are shown in Table 5. The positive sample pairs have a much higher cosine similarity than that of the
negative sample pairs, which aligns with our training objective in Eq 3. The cosine similarity between
pairs of adversarial images and its clean images is higher than that of the negative sample pairs, which
is excepted because the adversarial image consists of a random natural image and the UAP. The fact
that the cosine similarity between positive sample pairs is very high (0.87) suggests that the UAP has
independent features and it can be robust against the augmentation of image addition, which aligns
with the finding in Zhang et al. (2020b). This partly explains why the cosine similarity between pairs
of clean images and adversarial images is relatively low (0.40), causing a successful universal attack.
In other words, how the generated UAP attacks the model does not intend to identify the vulnerable
spots in the clean images to fool the model as suggested in Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2017a;b), but
instead form its own augmentation-invariant features.
For the role of negative samples in Eq 3, we find that it is can be at least partially attributed to the the
existence of common feature representations regardless of the image inputs for the image encoder,
which is supported by a Cosine similarity value of 0.55 higher than zero for pairs of random images.
With a list of negative samples in Eq 3, the UAP is expected to be optimized to offset such common
features, thus causing adversarial effects. This interpretation is partially supported by the comparison
between 0.40 and 0.55 in Table 5.
Overall, the success of Eq 3 for generating an effective UAP can be interpreted as follows: the
role of the positive sample is to make the UAP have independent features that are robust against
the disturbance of natural image, while the role of negative images facilitates the UAP to find
more effective directions to cause adversarial effects by partially canceling out the common feature
representations in the image encoder. We leave further detailed analysis to future works.

                  Table 5: Cosine similarity analysis with different pairs of inputs.

                Input pairs                                              Cosine similarity
                Positive sample pairs (UAP and augmented UAP)                    0.87
                Negative sample pairs (UAP and random image)                     0.34
                Pairs of adversarial image and its clean image                   0.40
                Pairs of two random images                                       0.55



6     C ONCLUSION

Our work is the first to study how to perform adversarial attack SAM with a single UAP. We
demonstrate that existing image-centric attack framework is effective for image-dependent attacks but
fails to achieve satisfactory performance for universal adversarial attacks. We propose a perturbation-
centric attack framework resulting in a new generation method based on contrastive learning, where
the UAP is set to the anchor sample. We experiment with various forms of augmentations and
find that augmenting the UAP by adding a natural image yields the most effective UAP among all
augmentations we have explored. The effectiveness of our proposed method has been verified with
both qualitative and quantitative results. Moreover, we have presented and analyzed different pairs of
inputs for the encoded feature representations, which shed light on the roles of positive samples and
negative samples in our CL-based UAP method for crafting an effective UAP to attack SAM.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
  ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.

Chaoning Zhang, Sheng Zheng, Chenghao Li, Yu Qiao, Taegoo Kang, Xinru Shan, Chenshuang
  Zhang, Caiyan Qin, Francois Rameau, Sung-Ho Bae, et al. Asurvey on segment anything model
  (sam): Vision foundation model meets prompt engineering. 2023a.

Chaoning Zhang, Chenshuang Zhang, Chenghao Li, Yu Qiao, Sheng Zheng, Sumit Kumar Dam,
  Mengchun Zhang, Jung Uk Kim, Seong Tae Kim, Jinwoo Choi, et al. One small step for
  generative ai, one giant leap for agi: A complete survey on chatgpt in aigc era. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.06488, 2023b.

Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Mengchun Zhang, and In So Kweon. Text-to-image diffusion
  models in generative ai: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07909, 2023c.

Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Sheng Zheng, Mengchun Zhang, Maryam Qamar, Sung-Ho
  Bae, and In So Kweon. A survey on audio diffusion models: Text to speech synthesis and
  enhancement in generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13336, 2023d.

Chenghao Li, Chaoning Zhang, Atish Waghwase, Lik-Hang Lee, Francois Rameau, Yang Yang,
  Sung-Ho Bae, and Choong Seon Hong. Generative ai meets 3d: A survey on text-to-3d in aigc era.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06131, 2023.

Chaoning Zhang, Chenshuang Zhang, Junha Song, John Seon Keun Yi, Kang Zhang, and In So
  Kweon. A survey on masked autoencoder for self-supervised learning in vision and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.00173, 2022a.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.

Kevmo. magic-copy, 2023. URL https://github.com/kevmo314/magic-copy. GitHub
  repository.

Adamdad. Anything 3d, 2023. URL https://github.com/Anything-of-anything/
 Anything-3D. GitHub repository.

Yukang Chen.  3d box segment anything, 2023. URL https://github.com/
  dvlab-research/3D-Box-Segment-Anything. GitHub repository.

Yu Qiao, Chaoning Zhang, Taegoo Kang, Donghun Kim, Shehbaz Tariq, Chenshuang Zhang, and
  Choong Seon Hong. Robustness of sam: Segment anything under corruptions and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.07713, 2023.

Yizhe Zhang, Tao Zhou, Peixian Liang, and Danny Z Chen. Input augmentation with sam:
  Boosting medical image segmentation with segmentation foundation model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11332, 2023e.

Lv Tang, Haoke Xiao, and Bo Li. Can sam segment anything? when sam meets camouflaged object
  detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04709, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Taegoo Kang, Donghun Kim, Sung-Ho Bae, and In So Kweon.
  Attack-sam: Towards evaluating adversarial robustness of segment anything model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.00866, 2023f.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal
  adversarial perturbations. In CVPR, 2017a.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Deepfool: a simple and
  accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In CVPR, 2016.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2018.
Konda Reddy Mopuri, Utsav Garg, and R. Venkatesh Babu. Fast feature fool: A data independent
  approach to universal adversarial perturbations. In BMVC, 2017a.
Jun Ma and Bo Wang. Segment anything in medical images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12306, 2023.
Dongsheng Han, Chaoning Zhang, Yu Qiao, Maryam Qamar, Yuna Jung, SeungKyu Lee, Sung-Ho
  Bae, and Choong Seon Hong. Segment anything model (sam) meets glass: Mirror and transparent
  objects cannot be easily detected. arXiv preprint, 2023.
Qiuhong Shen, Xingyi Yang, and Xinchao Wang. Anything-3d: Towards single-view anything
  reconstruction in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10261, 2023.
Minki Kang, Dongchan Min, and Sung Ju Hwang. Any-speaker adaptive text-to-speech synthesis
 with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09383, 2022.
IDEA-Research. Grounded segment anything, 2023. URL https://github.com/
  IDEA-Research/Grounded-Segment-Anything. GitHub repository.
Jiaqi Chen, Zeyu Yang, and Li Zhang. Semantic-segment-anything, 2023. URL https://github.
   com/fudan-zvg/Semantic-Segment-Anything. GitHub repository.
Curt Park. segment anything with clip, 2023. URL https://github.com/Curt-Park/
  segment-anything-with-clip. GitHub repository.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, pages 12888–12900.
  PMLR, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
Tao Yu, Runseng Feng, Ruoyu Feng, Jinming Liu, Xin Jin, Wenjun Zeng, and Zhibo Chen. Inpaint
  anything: Segment anything meets image inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06790, 2023.
Jinyu Yang, Mingqi Gao, Zhe Li, Shang Gao, Fangjing Wang, and Feng Zheng. Track anything:
   Segment anything meets videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11968, 2023.
Zxyang. Segment and track anything, 2023. URL https://github.com/z-x-yang/
  Segment-and-Track-Anything. GitHub repository.
Chaoning Zhang, Dongshen Han, Yu Qiao, Jung Uk Kim, Sung Ho Bae, Seungkyu Lee, and
  Choong Seon Hong. Faster segment anything: Towards lightweight sam for mobile applications.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14289, 2023g.
Chaoning Zhang, Yu Qiao, Shehbaz Tariq, Sheng Zheng, Chenshuang Zhang, Chenghao Li, Hyun-
  dong Shin, and Choong Seon Hong. Understanding segment anything model: Sam is biased
  towards texture rather than shape. 2023h.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Taegoo Kang, Donghun Kim, Sung-Ho Bae, and In So Kweon.
  Attack-sam: Towards evaluating adversarial robustness of segment anything model. arXiv preprint,
  2023i.
Valentin Khrulkov and Ivan Oseledets. Art of singular vectors and universal adversarial perturbations.
  In CVPR, 2018.
Konda Reddy Mopuri, Utkarsh Ojha, Utsav Garg, and R. Venkatesh Babu. Nag: Network for
  adversary generation. In CVPR, 2018a.
Julien Perolat, Mateusz Malinowski, Bilal Piot, and Olivier Pietquin. Playing the game of universal
  adversarial perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.07802, 2018.
Konda Reddy Mopuri, Utsav Garg, and R Venkatesh Babu. Fast feature fool: A data independent
  approach to universal adversarial perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05572, 2017b.
Konda Reddy Mopuri, Aditya Ganeshan, and Venkatesh Babu Radhakrishnan. Generalizable data-free
  objective for crafting universal adversarial perturbations. TPAMI, 2018b.
Chaoning Zhang, Philipp Benz, Tooba Imtiaz, and In-So Kweon. Cd-uap: Class discriminative
  universal adversarial perturbation. In AAAI, 2020a.
Philipp Benz, Chaoning Zhang, Tooba Imtiaz, and In So Kweon. Double targeted universal adversarial
  perturbations. In ACCV, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2015.
Chaoning Zhang, Philipp Benz, Tooba Imtiaz, and In-So Kweon. Understanding adversarial examples
  from the mutual influence of images and perturbations. In CVPR, 2020b.
Chaoning Zhang, Philipp Benz, Adil Karjauv, and In So Kweon. Data-free universal adversarial
  perturbation and black-box attack. In ICCV, 2021.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2015.
Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos.
  In ICCV, 2015.
Kihyuk Sohn. Improved deep metric learning with multi-class n-pair loss objective. In NeurIPS,
  2016.
Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Martial Hebert. Shuffle and learn: unsupervised learning using
   temporal order verification. In ECCV, 2016.
Marco Federici, Anjan Dutta, Patrick Forré, Nate Kushman, and Zeynep Akata. Learning ro-
 bust representations via multi-view information bottleneck. In ICLR, 2020. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=B1xwcyHFDr.
Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant
  mapping. In CVPR, 2006.
Alexander Hermans, Lucas Beyer, and Bastian Leibe. In defense of the triplet loss for person
  re-identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07737, 2017.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via
  non-parametric instance discrimination. In CVPR, 2018.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020a.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, Pascal Frossard, and Stefano
  Soatto. Analysis of universal adversarial perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09554, 2017b.
Feng Wang and Huaping Liu. Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss. In CVPR, 2021.
Chaoning Zhang, Kang Zhang, Trung X. Pham, Changdong Yoo, and In-So Kweon. Dual temperature
  helps contrastive learning without many negative samples: Towards understanding and simplifying
  moco. In CVPR, 2022b.


                                               13
