Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO VISUAL ECOLOGY
             WITH DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Animal vision is thought to optimize various objectives from metabolic efficiency
         to discrimination performance, yet its ultimate objective is to facilitate the sur-
         vival of the animal within its ecological niche. However, modeling animal be-
         havior in complex environments has been challenging. To study how environ-
         ments shape and constrain visual processing, we developed a deep reinforcement
         learning framework in which an agent moves through a 3-d environment that it
         perceives through a vision model, where its only goal is to survive. Within this
         framework we developed a foraging task where the agent must gather food that
         sustains it, and avoid food that harms it. We first established that the complex-
         ity of the vision model required for survival on this task scaled with the variety
         and visual complexity of the food in the environment. Moreover, we showed that
         a recurrent network architecture was necessary to fully exploit complex vision
         models on the most visually demanding tasks. Finally, we showed how different
         network architectures learned distinct representations of the environment and task,
         and lead the agent to exhibit distinct behavioural strategies. In summary, this pa-
         per lays the foundation for a computational approach to visual ecology, provides
         extensive benchmarks for future work, and demonstrates how representations and
         behaviour emerge from an agent’s drive for survival.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Successful theories of sensory neural circuits often begin with a careful choice of objective func-
tion. For example, efficient coding posits that sensory systems minimize the redundancy of the
neural code, and explains how sensory circuits maximize information capacity at minimal metabolic
cost (Barlow, 1961; Olshausen & Field, 2004). Predictive coding and the Bayesian brain hypothesis
assume that neural systems aim to approximate optimal Bayesian inference, and explain phenom-
ena ranging from sensory circuit organization up to decision making and behaviour (Rao & Ballard,
1999; Beck et al., 2012; Pouget et al., 2013; Millidge et al., 2022). Finally, objective functions such
as natural image classification lead artificial neural networks to exhibit similar patterns of activity as
sensory neural circuits (Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016; Richards et al., 2019).
However, the ultimate objective of any neural circuit is to facilitate the survival of an animal within
its ecological niche. Although the aforementioned objective functions provide invaluable perspec-
tives on sensory coding, we cannot develop a complete understanding of animal sensory processing
without accounting for the niche in which they evolve, and the behavioural strategies this niche re-
quires (Baden et al., 2020). This, of course, is easier said than done, as we lack computational tools
for effectively modelling the incredible complexity of an ecological niche.
To address this need, we developed a deep reinforcement learning (RL) framework for studying
visual and sensory ecology. In our framework we reduced the reward function to the survival of the
agent, and avoided further fine tuning of the reward. We then studied the average lifespan of agents,
as well as the representations and behaviours that result from particular combinations of vision
model, overall “brain” model, and environment. A key advantage of our deep RL approach is that the
vision and brain models of the agent take the form of conventional artificial neural networks (ANN).
As such, established ANN models of neural circuits can easily be imported into our framework.
We used the RL environment to model a foraging task, where the agent had to gather food that
sustained it and avoid food that harmed it. We then characterized how the complexity of the vision


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model scaled with the visual complexity of the food that the agent had to recognize to ensure its
survival. We established that a linear vision model is sufficient for survival when there are only two
visually distinct food sources, but that as we increased the visual complexity of the food sources —
up to each food source being visualized by a class of CIFAR-10 images — more complex vision
models were required to maximize agent survival.
We then compared various architectures of brain model of the agent, including feedforward and re-
current models, and models that received readouts of the metabolic state of the agent. We found that
these architectural variations not only affected agent survival, but also qualitatively altered the be-
haviour and representations of the agent. One one hand, we found that providing metabolic readouts
to the agent helped it to avoid overeating and depleting food in the environment. On the other, we
found that recurrence both facilitated object discrimination on visually complex tasks, and allowed
it to capture features of the environment beyond the immediate presence of food.

1.1   BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

Efficient use of computational resources is a major challenge in deep RL, and the IMPALA RL archi-
tecture (Espeholt et al., 2018) laid the groundwork for many approaches and studies. This includes
the “For The Win” (FTW) architecture, which successfully trained agents to achieve human-level
playing in first-person environments (Jaderberg et al., 2019), and the work of Merel et al. (2019),
where they trained an agent with a detailed mouse body to solve naturalistic tasks.
ANNs have long served as models of sensory neural circuits. Recent papers have sought to mimic
the architecture of animal visual systems with convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and model
features of early vision by training the CNNs on naturalistic stimuli (Lindsey et al., 2018; Qiu et al.,
2021; Maheswaranathan et al., 2023).
Our work builds on these two streams of research. In particular, we explored how agents survive in
naturalistic, first-person environments that necessitate precisely-tuned behaviours, as well as vision
systems with high acuity.

2     C OMPUTATIONAL F RAMEWORK
To simulate visual environments we relied on ViZDoom Schulze & Schulze (2019), an RL-focused,
high-throughput simulation engine based on the computer game Doom, that simulates pseudo 3-d
environments, and provides agents with rich visual input. In general, our environments were 2-d
planes populated with different objects (Fig. 1a). The environment had the base appearance of a
grassy field and a blue sky, and the objects within it were visualized by various textures depending
on the task. The agent perceived the environment through a 160 × 120 pixel, RGB viewport. We
measured environment time in simulation frames — when rendered for human perception, simu-
lations are intended to run at 35 frames per second (FPS), so that 1000 frames is a little under 30
seconds of real-time.

2.1   V ISION AND BRAIN MODEL ARCHITECTURE

Every fourth frame in the simulation was processed by the vision model of the agent, which is de-
fined as a CNN implemented in PyTorch (Fig. 1b). We modeled the CNN after the early mammalian
visual system: the base layers were grouped sequentially into the photoreceptor (PR), bipolar (BP),
retinal ganglion cell (RGC), lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), and primary visual cortex (V1) layers.
Each group comprised a convolutional layer with a cer-
tain number of channels (NC) and kernel size (KS), fol-
                                                                Class     NC      KS Pooling
lowed by the ELU nonlinearity, followed by a pooling
layer with non-overlapping windows of size KS (Tab. 1).          PR        3       −       −
The number of channels in each layer was governed                BP      nBC       3    Average
by nBC (number of base channels), except at the LGN             RGC 2nBC           3    Average
where it was governed by nLGN .                                 LGN nLGN           1       −
                                                                 V1     4nBC       4      Max
The output of the CNN was fed into a sequence of three
fully connected (FC) layers each with nF C neurons and
ELU nonlinearities. Some models that we considered                   Table 1: Vision Model


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a                                 b     Policy               Value         c


                                                                               Satiety
                                                       Latents                                     -   +
                                                       FCs


                                                                               Visual Complexity
                                                                 Satiety


                                        Vision Model

Figure 1: Overview of the computational framework. a: A depiction (top) of the agent (mouse) in
an environment (green field), surrounded by nourishment (red dots) and poison (blue dots). The
agent perceives the environment through its viewport (bottom). b: The brain model of the agent
processes the viewport with a CNN modelled after early animal vision (bottom). The output of the
vision model and the satiety signal feed into the FC layers which can also be modulated by input
satiety, and which ultimately outputs into a GRU. The policy and estimated value function (top) are
linear functions of the latent, GRU state. c: Task complexity varies with visual complexity, from
food represented by apples to CIFAR-10 images.


also include what we call input satiety (IS), where we added an extra input neuron to the second FC
layer of the network that equaled the current satiety of the agent (we formally explain satiety in the
next subsection). For recurrent (RNN) brain models, the FC layers fed into a gated recurrent unit
(GRU) with nF C neurons. For feedforward (FF) brains, the FC layers fed into another FC layer
with nF C neurons and a sigmoid nonlinearity. We consider both feedforward (FF-IS) and recurrent
(RNN-IS) models with input satiety, and in all cases we refer to activity in the output layers as the
latent state of the agent.
The policy of our agent was represented by two, independent categorical distributions: the heading
distribution over the actions left, right, and centre, and the velocity distribution over the actions
forward, backward, and stationary. We used an actor-critic architecture for our agents, and both the
actor and critic were linear functions of the latent state. We trained our agents with proximal policy
optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) using the Sample Factory Petrenko et al. (2020) library,
which provided a high-performance, asynchronous implementation of PPO.

2.2   T HE FORAGING TASK

In our foraging task the agent had a satiety (inverse hunger) state that ranged from 0 to 100, and
the reward at every frame was equal to the current satiety of the agent. The satiety of the agent
decreased at a constant rate, and the agent died/the simulation ended when satiety reached 0. Every
environment was populated with 10 classes of objects, which added -25, -20, -15, -10, -5, 10, 20,
30, 40, or 50 to satiety, respectively, depending on the class, up to the bound of 100 on satiety.
The environment was initialized with a greater abundance of positive objects (nourishment) than
negative objects (poison), and after environment initialization new nourishment and poison objects
were generated at the same, constant rate. A consequence of this design was that the task tended to
become more difficult over time as the agent consumed nourishment and thereby lowered the ratio
of nourishment to poison.
The primary way we varied task difficulty was with the textures that represented each class (Fig. 1c).
The four tasks we considered were: The apples task, where the positive and negative objects classes
were represented by red and blue apples, respectively. The Gabors task, where each object class was


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


represented by one of eight Gabor patches, and in particular -5 and -10, and 10 and 20 each share a
patch texture. The MNIST task, where each object class was associated with a digit, and each object
was represented by a randomly chosen image from MNIST for the associated digit. Finally, the
CIFAR-10 task, where each object class was associated with a CIFAR-10 class.

3     R ESULTS
One of our aims was to provide a broad spectrum of benchmarks for studying synthetic ecology
within an RL setting. We ran our simulations on a high performance computing cluster, where we
had access to 18 Nvidia A100 GPUs and 4 AMD EPYC 7742 CPUs. We trained most models for
8 · 109 simulation frames each — on our hardware we achieved training speeds of around 40,000
frames per second, so that the average wall-clock training time for a single model was around 2 and
a half days. Running all the training simulations that we present took approximately 2 months using
all available hardware.
The standard hyperparameters for the recurrent neural networks (RNN or RNN-IS) were nBC = 16,
nLGN = 32, and nF C = 128; for the feedforward networks (FF or FF-IS) nF C = 32 and all
other parameters remained the same. We always state any deviations from this standard. For all
combination of hyperparameters we repeated training simulations three times, and throughout the
paper we typically report the median, minimum, and maximum of the quantities of interest (e.g.
survival time).

3.1   V ISION MODEL COMPLEXITY SCALES WITH TASK DIFFICULTY

We began by characterizing how agent lifespan depended on both the complexity of the vision
model and the visual complexity of the objects it had to recognize. We textured our objects with
canonical image datasets used in machine vision and vision neuroscience (Fig. 2a), so as to guide our
expectations of agent performance with established results for ANNs on classification tasks. That
being said, our RL agents had to learn to solve a multi-scale, multi-object discrimination problem
based on these textures. As a performance baseline, we note that an agent that took no actions
survived for 200 simulation frames.
We first studied how the training time of RNN agents depended on the visual complexity of the
task (Fig. 2b). We saw that average lifespan on the apples and Gabors tasks converged within the
training time of 8 · 109 video frames, yet the MNIST task, and especially the CIFAR-10 task could
benefit from additional training time. We ran an additional set of simulations (not shown) on the
CIFAR-10 task where we increased training time fivefold to 4 · 1010 frames, and found that average
agent lifespan increased by approximately 20% over the model trained for 8 · 109 frames, and that
this amount of training was sufficient for convergence. We also saw that learning exhibits a high
degree of stability, with little difference between minimum and maximum performance.
We next analyzed how the architecture of the brain model impacted average lifespan (Fig. 2c). In
particular, we considered linear FF (an FF model with “nonlinearities” given by the identity func-
tion), FF, FF-IS, RNN, and RNN-IS models. We saw that while the linear FF architecture was
sufficient for achieving relatively good survival times on the apples task, it fared poorly on all other
tasks. We found that the nonlinearities in the FF network allowed the agent to achieve significant
improvements over the linear network on the Gabors and MNIST tasks, yet the gains were minimal
on CIFAR-10. We observed that the RNN architecture facilitated major improvements to lifespan
on all tasks, and seemed particular necessary for achieving lifespans of more than a few hundred
frames on CIFAR-10. Input satiety also facilitated large performance gains, with the RNN-IS agents
achieving the longest lifespans in every case. We also noted that the more complex brain archi-
tectures, especially the IS architectures, achieved higher performance on the Gabors task than the
apples task, indicating that they took advantage of the extra information about object nourishment
available in the Gabors task.
We then studied how varying the number of base channels nBC and the size of the LGN nLGN
in the vision model affected the survival of agents with the FF and RNN brain models (Fig. 2d-e).
Trends suggested that FF models benefited from fewer parameters on the apples and Gabors tasks,
and benefited slightly from additional parameters on the MNIST task, yet lifespans of FF agents on
CIFAR-10 remained limited regardless of vision model complexity. The lifespan of RNN agents ex-


                                                   4
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Apples                         Gabors                          MNIST                         CIFAR-10
                    a



                     b                                                               c
Lifespan (Frames)


                    3000
                    2000
                    1000
                     200
                           0                         4 109                     8 109 Linear             FF             FF-IS     RNN         RNN-IS
                                         Training Time (Frames)                                                  Architecture
                     d                                            e                                          f
Lifespan (Frames)


                    3000

                    2000

                    1000
                     200
                               4     8          12           16       1    2     4       8   16    32             16      32    64     128     256
                                          nBC                                       nLGN                                        nFC

     Figure 2: Benchmarking vision models and brain architectures. a: Sample viewports from the apples
     (red frame), Gabors (blue frame), MNIST (green frame), and CIFAR-10 task (purple frame). b:
     Median (points) and min-max range (filled area) of 3 training histories of an RNN on each task. Each
     training history is composed of 10,0000 samples and smoothed with a sliding Gaussian window of
     size 51. c: Average lifespan of the linear (squares), FF (filled triangles), FF-IS (empty triangles),
     RNN (filled circles), and RNN-IS (empty circles) brains. Lifespan computed as the average over
     the last 500 steps of the smoothed training histories. d: Lifespan of FF (triangles) and RNN agents
     (circles) as a function of base channels nBC . e: Lifespan of the FF and RNN agents as a function of
     LGN size nLGN . f: Lifespan of the FF and RNN as a function of latent space size nF C .


     hibited similar trends, except on the CIFAR-10 task where RNN agents revealed the largest positive
     correlation between vision model complexity and lifespan of any architecture and task combination.
     We also modulated the size of the FC and latent layers nF C (Fig. 2f), and found that while FF agent
     survival was insensitive to nF C , RNN agents profited from larger values for nF C on all tasks. We
     also noted that RNN agents would sometimes fail to learn the task at all when trained with smaller
     values of nF C (indicated by the shaded min-max region reaching the baseline of 200) — in these
     cases agents learned a policy of taking no actions.

      3.2               R ECURRENCE FACILITATES DISCRIMINATION OF VISUALLY COMPLEX OBJECTS

     In order to disentangle lifespan increases due to better object recognition from increases due to
     smarter behaviour, we characterized the discrimination performance of the FF, FF-IS, RNN, and
     RNN-IS brain architectures by counting the relative frequencies with which the agent picked up each
     poison and nourishment (Fig. 3). We noted that as a performance baseline, agents with no ability to
     discriminate between objects would pick up poison or nourishment with an equal frequency of 0.1.
     On the apples and the Gabors task we found that all architectures performed equally well, and
     sought nourishment and avoided poison with similar frequencies (Fig. 3a, b). Although agents easily
     distinguished red and blue apples, they were indeed unable to recognize which apples were more or
     less nourishing (or more or less poisonous; Fig. 3a). For the Gabors task on the other hand, agents
     tended to most strongly avoid and seek the most poisonous and nourishing foods, respectively.


                                                                                5
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        a               FF
                                                  Apples                            b                                Gabors
            0.2         FF-IS
                        RNN
Frequency               RNN-IS


            0.1



            0.0


        c                                         MNIST                             d                            CIFAR-10
            0.2
Frequency


            0.1



            0.0
                  -25    -20     -15   -10   -5            10   20   30   40   50       -25   -20   -15   -10   -5            10   20   30   40   50
                                             Food Effect                                                        Food Effect

   Figure 3: Characterizing the discrimination performance of different architectures. Median fre-
   quency of pickups of poison and nourishment for the FF (light blue), FF-IS (blue), RNN (purple),
   and RNN-IS (magenta) agents on a: the apples task, b: the Gabors task, c: the MNIST task, and d:
   the CIFAR-10 task.


   We saw similar avoidance and seeking trends on the MNIST task (Fig. 3c) as the Gabors task, yet the
   increased difficulty of the task was reflected in the frequency of most pickups trending closer to 0.1.
   Moreover, RNN architectures began to demonstrate improved discrimination performance on the
   MNIST task relative to the FF architectures. Finally, on the CIFAR-10 task (Fig. 3d) we observed
   a large increase in difficulty, and a particularly strong decline in discrimination performance for FF
   architectures. In all cases, we found little systematic difference in the discrimination performance
   of agents with or without input satiety.
   We thus concluded that a recurrent brain architecture is required to fully exploit complex vision mod-
   els, and achieve non-trivial lifespans on the CIFAR-10 task. Nevertheless, we saw in the previous
   subsection that advanced brain architectures led to significant performance improvements regardless
   of task visual complexity. As such, we also concluded that maximizing lifespan in the foraging en-
   vironment required not only maximizing discrimination performance, but also implementing better
   behaviour and strategies.

   3.3            M ODEL BRAIN ARCHITECTURE SHAPES AGENT REPRESENTATIONS OF VALUE

   To isolate the source of lifespan gains in the representations learned by the agent, we began by qual-
   itatively examining the estimated value function V̂ of various agents, which offers a scalar summary
   of the agent’s perceived quality of its current state. (Fig. 4). We recorded 1000-frame videos of
   agent behaviour, and studied the sensitivity of V̂ to changes in the current input image (Fig. 4a)
   with the method of integrated gradients (Fig. 4b, Sundararajan et al. (2017)). We observed that all
   architectures learned to accurately segment multiple food objects in parallel. We then studied the
   dynamics of V̂ (Fig. 4c), and observed that the functions V̂ learned by RNN agents were noticeably
   smoother. We also compared V̂ with the agent’s satiety, and noticed two key features: firstly, that the
   magnitude of satiety for architectures appeared predictive of V̂ for all architectures, except for FF,
   and secondly, that the time until a satiety jump (corresponding to food pickups) appeared predictive
   of V̂ for all architectures, but especially FF.
   To quantify how important these features were to determining V̂ , we performed a regression analysis
   of V̂ using 100,000 frames of simulated data (Fig. 5). Because FF architectures appeared to exhibit
   a degree of task-irrelevant, high-frequency noise (Fig. 4c), we first estimated the intrinsic noise of


                                                                                6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  a                       b                       c 100                                              +2


                                                                                                          Est. Value (V)
                                                             75


                                                  Satiety
FF                                                           50
                                                             25
                                                                                                     -2
                                                              0
                                                            100
                                                                                                     +2


                                                                                                          Est. Value (V)
                                                             75
RNN


                                                  Satiety
                                                             50
                                                             25
                                                                                                     -2
                                                              0
                                                            100
                                                                                                     +2


                                                                                                          Est. Value (V)
                                                             75
FF-IS


                                                  Satiety
                                                             50
                                                             25
                                                                                                     -2
                                                              0
                                                            100
                                                                                                     +2


                                                                                                          Est. Value (V)
RNN-IS


                                                             75
                                                  Satiety
                                                             50
                                                             25
                                                                                                     -2
                                                              0
                                                                  0   200    400     600    800   1000
                                                                            Time (Frames)

  Figure 4: Qualitative analyses of the estimated value function. Each row visualizes a 1000 frame
  simulation of a trained agent on the MNIST task. a: Sample viewport from trained models with
  the FF, FF-IS, RNN, and RNN-IS architectures. b: Sensitivity of V̂ of each architecture to the
  corresponding viewports in a based on the method of integrated gradients. c: The satiety (gold line)
  and V̂ (purple line) of the agent over time. The dashed gold lines indicate a task reset, and the
  dashed black line indicates the time of the corresponding viewport shown in a.


  each V̂ by convolving it with a sliding window of 20 frames, computing the standard error of the
  residuals, and using this to indicate an upper bound on the coefficient of determination (r2 ). We
  then estimated V̂ as a function of agent satiety (Fig. 5a), and found that satiety was indeed highly
  predictive of V̂ for IS architectures. Unsurprisingly, satiety was unpredictive of V̂ for FF agents, as
  they had no capacity for estimating their own satiety. On the other hand, the memory afforded to
  RNN agents allowed them to estimate their own satiety, and satiety was ultimately predictive of V̂
  for RNN agents.
  When we regressed V̂ on the time until the next satiety jump (food countdown) alone (Fig. 5b),
  we found it to be highly predictive of V̂ for FF architectures, especially in light of the estimated
  upper bound, yet more limited for other architectures. Finally, when we regressed on both satiety
  and food countdown (Fig. 5c), we found we could explain around 3/4 of the variance in V̂ for FF-IS
  agents, with an even larger fraction for the CIFAR-10 task. Although the variance explained in V̂
  for FF agents was lower than for FF-IS agents, we presumed that FF agents had no ability to capture
  additional features that cannot be captured by FF-IS agents, and therefore that most of unexplained
  variance in V̂ for the FF agent was incidental to task performance. In contrast, while satiety and
  food countdown explained a moderate share of the variance in V̂ for the recurrent architectures, we
  concluded that these value functions were driven by additional task-relevant latent variables.

  3.4    I NPUT SATIETY ENABLES BETTER FORAGING STRATEGIES

  In our final analysis we sought to characterize how the behaviour of IS agents allowed them to
  achieve additional lifespan (Fig. 6). In our recorded videos we noticed that IS agents often paused


                                                      7
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      a              Satiety
                                                              b        Food Countdown
                                                                                                 c        Satiety + Countdown

Cross-validated r 2   0.8

                      0.6

                      0.4
                                               Apples
                                               Gabors
                      0.2                      MNIST
                                               CIFAR-10
                                               Upper Bound
                          0
                              FF   RNN     FF-IS     RNN-IS       FF    RNN     FF-IS   RNN-IS       FF      RNN      FF-IS     RNN-IS


   Figure 5: Regression analysis of the estimated value function. 10-fold cross-validated r2 for the
   linear prediction of V̂ given distinct regressors. Colours indicate task, points indicate median r2 ,
   filled areas indicate min-max r2 , and bounding lines indicate performance upper bounds based on the
   estimated intrinsic noise of V̂ . a: Regression of V̂ at time t on agent satiety at time t. a: Regression
   of V̂ on the time in frames (countdown) until the next food is consumed. c: Regression of V̂ on both
   satiety and food countdown.


   in front of nourishment before eventually consuming it. To quantify this we computed the average
   velocity policy over 100,000 simulation frames. We found that IS agents spent more than twice as
   much time in a stationary state than agents without IS, and when comparing FF-IS to FF, and RNN
   to RNN-IS architectures, IS architectures spent more time going backwards as well.
   In our videos we then noticed that agents only paused when their satiety was already high, suggesting
   that they were avoiding consuming nourishment that would bring them above 100 satiety, and thus
   be partially wasted. We therefore computed the percentage of total accumulated nourishment that the
   agent wasted, and found indeed that IS facilitated a large drop in waste nourishment across tasks and
   architectures (Fig. 6b). Surprisingly, even though we previously showed that RNN agents encode
   information about their satiety, we found that they were in fact more wasteful than FF architectures.
   We also observed that the apples task led to the most wasted nourishment, presumably because the
   agent could not discriminate the degree of nourishment provided by each apple. Overall we found
   that task difficulty was inversely proportional to wasted nourishment, presumably, at least in part
   because agents were more hungry whenever they managed to eat.

   4                      D ISCUSSION
   In this paper, we presented a computational framework studying visual ecology using deep rein-
   forcement learning, and studied the lifespan of agents in a foraging task with visually diverse foods.
   We systematically explored how the complexity of the agent’s vision model interacted with the vi-
   sual complexity of its environment, and unsurprisingly found that complex vision models facilitated
   agent survival in more visually complex environments. Yet we also showed that recurrent brain ar-
   chitectures were critical for fully exploiting complex vision models on the most visually demanding
   tasks, demonstrating how even the perception of static objects benefits from integrating visual infor-
   mation over time. Overall, successful agents developed an impressive ability to segment their visual
   input, and race towards nourishment to avoid starvation.
   In spite of the apparent simplicity of the foraging task, we found that an agent’s lifespan did not re-
   duce to its ability to discriminate foods, and that more complex brain architectures improved survival
   through sophisticated behaviours. In particular, we demonstrated how recurrent brains attended to
   latent variables beyond the agent’s hunger and the immediate presence of food. We also found that
   a simple signal indicating agent hunger allowed the agent to avoid overeating and achieve superior
   task performance. Yet even though RNN architectures could estimate hunger, they did not exhibit
   this behavioural strategy without an explicit hunger signal.
   Our framework opens up the way to a rigorous integration of efficient coding theories in compu-
   tational neuroscience in light of behavioral demands. Towards this goal, we aim to better isolate


                                                                           8
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       a 0.15                                                                              b 30%
                                                                             FF
Mean Probability (MNIST)
                                                                             RNN


                                                                                      Wasted Nourishment
                                                                             FF-IS
                                                                             RNN-IS
                           0.10

                                                                                                           20%

                           0.05
                                                                                                                      Apples
                                                                                                                      Gabors
                                                                                                                      MNIST
                                                                                                                      CIFAR-10
                           0.00                                                                            10%
                                  Stationary                      Backward                                       FF              RNN          FF-IS   RNN-IS
                                               Velocity Actions                                                                    Architecture

       Figure 6: Characterizing behaviour of agents with input satiety. a: Median (bar height) and min and
       max (error bars) of the average probability of velocity actions on the MNIST task over 3 simulations
       of 100,000 frames. b: Wasted nourishment as a percentage of total accumulated nourishment per
       task and architecture.


       the environmental variables that drive the latent activity and value functions of our agents using
       methods for analyzing neural population dynamics (Whiteway & Butts, 2019). Secondly, we aim
       to better characterize how our RNN agents compressed past sensory information and integrated it
       with incoming observations, which was critical for survival in our CIFAR-10 task. This process
       is analogous to Kalman filtering, which is known to be a good model of how cortical areas track
       low-dimensional variables (Funamizu et al., 2016). Understanding how our agents solve this infor-
       mation integration problem should provide insights into efficient neural coding in high-dimensional,
       visually rich, dynamic environments.
       One behaviour of our agents that we observed yet did not report is that they rarely walked straight
       towards food, but rather exhibit high-frequency, left and right jitters along their trajectory. We could
       not rule out that these were simply compensatory movements to not miss the target. Nevertheless, it
       is striking that visual systems take advantage of retinal jitter to improve visual acuity (Rucci et al.,
       2007; Intoy & Rucci, 2020), and in future work we aim to identify whether the movement jitters of
       our agents also improve their visual acuity.
        Silver et al. (2021) proposed that sophisticated intelligence could emerge from simple reward func-
       tions, and indeed, we believe that understanding the neural architectures and behaviours that facil-
       itate survival requires specifying the details of survival as little as possible. There are, however,
       major challenges in this approach. Firstly, maximizing simulation throughput is still not sufficient
       for deep RL architectures to capture many basic behaviours in 3-d environments (Petrenko et al.,
       2021). Secondly, normative principles such as survival and efficient coding can only take us so far
       in understanding neural circuits, as many of their particulars are simply accidents of evolutionary
       history. Nevertheless, our work demonstrates that these challenges can be overcome. By curating
       task design within the limits of deep RL, and designing models with biologically meaningful de-
       grees of freedom, we have demonstrated how to explore the emergence of neural architectures and
       agent behaviours in accurate and authentic arenas.

       R EPRODUCABILITY S TATEMENT

       All code used to train our agents and run our analyses will be made publicly available at publication
       time. The state of all trained models used to generate the figures will also be made available. Suf-
       ficient details are also provided in the Computational Framework and Results sections to reproduce
       these models.

       R EFERENCES
       Tom Baden, Thomas Euler, and Philipp Berens. Understanding the retinal basis of vision across
         species. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(1):5–20, January 2020. ISSN 1471-0048. doi: 10.
         1038/s41583-019-0242-1.


                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Horace B. Barlow. Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory
  communication, 1(01):217–233, 1961.
Jeffrey M. Beck, Wei Ji Ma, Xaq Pitkow, Peter E. Latham, and Alexandre Pouget. Not Noisy, Just
   Wrong: The Role of Suboptimal Inference in Behavioral Variability. Neuron, 74(1):30–39, April
   2012. ISSN 08966273. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.016.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  Scalable Distributed Deep-RL with Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architectures. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, July
  2018.
Akihiro Funamizu, Bernd Kuhn, and Kenji Doya. Neural substrate of dynamic Bayesian inference in
  the cerebral cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19(12):1682–1689, December 2016. ISSN 1097-6256.
  doi: 10.1038/nn.4390.
Janis Intoy and Michele Rucci. Finely tuned eye movements enhance visual acuity. Nature Com-
  munications, 11(1):795, February 2020. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14616-2.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castañeda, Charles Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nico-
 las Sonnerat, Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Koray
 Kavukcuoglu, and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in 3D multiplayer games with
 population-based reinforcement learning. Science, 364(6443):859–865, May 2019. ISSN 0036-
 8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.aau6249.
Jack Lindsey, Samuel A. Ocko, Surya Ganguli, and Stephane Deny. A Unified Theory of Early
  Visual Representations from Retina to Cortex through Anatomically Constrained Deep CNNs. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, September 2018.
Niru Maheswaranathan, Lane T. McIntosh, Hidenori Tanaka, Satchel Grant, David B. Kastner,
  Joshua B. Melander, Aran Nayebi, Luke E. Brezovec, Julia H. Wang, Surya Ganguli, and
  Stephen A. Baccus. Interpreting the retinal neural code for natural scenes: From compu-
  tations to neurons. Neuron, pp. S0896627323004671, July 2023. ISSN 08966273. doi:
  10.1016/j.neuron.2023.06.007.
Josh Merel, Diego Aldarondo, Jesse Marshall, Yuval Tassa, Greg Wayne, and Bence Olveczky. Deep
  neuroethology of a virtual rodent. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  September 2019.
Beren Millidge, Anil Seth, and Christopher L. Buckley. Predictive Coding: A Theoretical and
  Experimental Review, July 2022.
B Olshausen and D Field. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14
  (4):481–487, August 2004. ISSN 09594388. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2004.07.007.
Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sample
  Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with Asynchronous Reinforcement
  Learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7652–7662. PMLR, November
  2020.
Aleksei Petrenko, Erik Wijmans, Brennan Shacklett, and Vladlen Koltun. Megaverse: Simulating
  Embodied Agents at One Million Experiences per Second. In Proceedings of the 38th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8556–8566. PMLR, July 2021.
Alexandre Pouget, Jeff Beck, Wei Ji Ma, and Peter Latham. Probabilistic brains: Knowns and
  unknowns. Nature Neuroscience, 16(9):1170–1178, 2013.
Yongrong Qiu, Zhijian Zhao, David Klindt, Magdalena Kautzky, Klaudia P. Szatko, Frank Schaeffel,
  Katharina Rifai, Katrin Franke, Laura Busse, and Thomas Euler. Natural environment statistics
  in the upper and lower visual field are reflected in mouse retinal specializations. Current Biology,
  pp. S096098222100676X, June 2021. ISSN 09609822. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.05.017.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rajesh PN Rao and Dana H. Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpre-
  tation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience, 2(1):79–87, 1999.
Blake A. Richards, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Rafal Bogacz, Amelia
  Christensen, Claudia Clopath, Rui Ponte Costa, Archy de Berker, Surya Ganguli, Colleen J.
  Gillon, Danijar Hafner, Adam Kepecs, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Peter Latham, Grace W. Lind-
  say, Kenneth D. Miller, Richard Naud, Christopher C. Pack, Panayiota Poirazi, Pieter Roelfsema,
  João Sacramento, Andrew Saxe, Benjamin Scellier, Anna C. Schapiro, Walter Senn, Greg Wayne,
  Daniel Yamins, Friedemann Zenke, Joel Zylberberg, Denis Therien, and Konrad P. Kording. A
  deep learning framework for neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience, 22(11):1761–1770, November
  2019. ISSN 1546-1726. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0520-2.
Michele Rucci, Ramon Iovin, Martina Poletti, and Fabrizio Santini. Miniature eye movements
 enhance fine spatial detail. Nature, 447(7146):852–855, June 2007. ISSN 1476-4687. doi:
 10.1038/nature05866.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Policy
  Optimization Algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347 [cs], August 2017.
Christopher Schulze and Marcus Schulze. ViZDoom: DRQN with Prioritized Experience Replay,
  Double-Q Learning and Snapshot Ensembling. In Kohei Arai, Supriya Kapoor, and Rahul Bhatia
  (eds.), Intelligent Systems and Applications, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp.
  1–17, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-01054-6. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-030-01054-6 1.
David Silver, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Richard S. Sutton. Reward is enough. Artificial
  Intelligence, 299:103535, October 2021. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2021.103535.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks. In
 Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR,
 July 2017.
Matthew R Whiteway and Daniel A Butts. The quest for interpretable models of neural population
 activity. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 58:86–93, October 2019. ISSN 0959-4388. doi:
 10.1016/j.conb.2019.07.004.
Daniel L. K. Yamins and James J. DiCarlo. Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand
  sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19(3):356–365, March 2016. ISSN 1546-1726. doi: 10.
  1038/nn.4244.


                                               11
