Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTRASTIVE P REFERENCE L EARNING : L EARNING
FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK WITHOUT RL

 Joey Hejna                              Rafael Rafailov ∗                      Harshit Sikchi ∗
 Stanford University                     Stanford University                    UT Austin
 jhejna@cs.stanford.edu                  rafailov@cs.stanford.edu               hsikchi@utexas.edu


 Chelsea Finn                   Scott Niekum            W. Bradley Knox           Dorsa Sadigh
 Stanford University            UMass Amherst           UT Austin                 Stanford University


                                                A BSTRACT

             Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a popu-
             lar paradigm for aligning models with human intent. Typically RLHF algorithms
             operate in two phases: first, use human preferences to learn a reward function and
             second, align the model by optimizing the learned reward via reinforcement learning
             (RL). This paradigm assumes that human preferences are distributed according to
             reward, but recent work suggests that they instead follow the regret under the user’s
             optimal policy. Thus, learning a reward function from feedback is not only based on
             a flawed assumption of human preference, but also leads to unwieldy optimization
             challenges that stem from policy gradients or bootstrapping in the RL phase. Because
             of these optimization challenges, contemporary RLHF methods restrict themselves
             to contextual bandit settings (e.g., as in large language models) or limit observation
             dimensionality (e.g., state-based robotics). We overcome these limitations by intro-
             ducing a new family of algorithms for optimizing behavior from human feedback
             using the regret-based model of human preferences. Using the principle of maximum
             entropy, we derive Contrastive Preference Learning (CPL), an algorithm for learning
             optimal policies from preferences without learning reward functions, circumventing
             the need for RL. CPL is fully off-policy, uses only a simple contrastive objective,
             and can be applied to arbitrary MDPs. This enables CPL to elegantly scale to high-
             dimensional and sequential RLHF problems while being simpler than prior methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION

As large pretrained models have become increasingly performant, the problem of aligning them
with human preferences has risen to the forefront of research. This alignment is especially difficult
when larger datasets inevitably include suboptimal behaviors. Reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a popular solution to this problem. Using human preferences, RLHF
techniques discriminate between desirable and undesirable behaviors with the goal of refining a learned
policy. This paradigm has shown promising results when applied to finetuning large language models
(LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022), improving image generation models (Lee et al., 2023), and adapting
robot policies (Christiano et al., 2017) – all from suboptimal data. For most RLHF algorithms, this
process includes two phases. First, a reward model is trained from user preference data. And second,
that reward model is optimized by an off-the-shelf reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm.
Unfortunately, this two-phase paradigm is founded on a flawed assumption. Algorithms that learn
reward models from preference data require that human preferences are distributed according to the
discounted sum of rewards or partial return of each behavior segment. However, recent work (Knox
et al., 2022) calls this into question, positing that humans instead provide preferences based on the
regret of each behavior under the optimal policy of the expert’s reward function. Intuitively, a human’s
judgement is likely based on optimality, instead of which states and actions have higher quantity for
    ∗
        Equal Contribution.       Our code is released at https://github.com/jhejna/cpl


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reward. As a result, the correct quantity to learn from feedback might not be the reward, but instead
the optimal advantage function or, in other words, the negated regret.
In their second phase, two-phase RLHF algorithms optimize the reward function learned from the
first phase with RL. In practice, RL algorithms suffer from a suite of optimization challenges stemming
from temporal credit assignment, such as the high-variance of policy gradients (Marbach & Tsitsiklis,
2003) or instability of approximate dynamic programming (Van Hasselt et al., 2018). Thus, past
works limit their scope to circumvent these issues. For instance, RLHF techniques for LLMs assume
a contextual bandit formulation (Ouyang et al., 2022), where the policy receives a single reward value
in response to a given query to the user. While this reduces the need for long-horizon credit assignment,
and consequently the high variance of policy gradients, in reality user interactions with LLMs are
multi-step and sequential, violating the single-step bandit assumption. As another example, RLHF
has been applied to low-dimensional state-based robotics problems (Christiano et al., 2017; Sikchi
et al., 2023a), a setting where approximate dynamic programming excels, but not yet scaled to more
realistic high-dimensional continuous control domains with image inputs. Broadly, RLHF methods
not only incorrectly assume that the reward function alone drives human preferences, but also require
mitigating the optimization challenges of RL by making restrictive assumptions about the sequential
nature of problems or dimensionality.
In this work, we introduce a new family of RLHF methods that use a regret-based model of preferences,
instead of the commonly accepted partial return model that only considers the sum of rewards. Unlike
the partial return model, the regret-based model directly provides information about the optimal policy.
A fortunate outcome of this is that it completely eliminates the need for RL, allowing us to solve RLHF
problems in the general MDP framework with high-dimensional state and action spaces. Our key insight
is to combine the regret-based preference framework with the principle of Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt),
resulting in a bijection between advantage functions and policies. By exchanging optimization over
advantages for optimization over policies, we are able to derive a purely supervised learning objective
whose optimum is the optimal policy under the expert’s reward. We refer to our approach as Contrastive
Preference Learning due to its resemblance with commonly accepted contrastive learning objectives.
CPL has three key benefits over prior work. First, CPL can scale as well as supervised learning
because it uses only supervised objectives to match the optimal advantage without any policy gradients
or dynamic programming. Second, CPL is fully off-policy, enabling effectively using any offline
sub-optimal data source. Finally, CPL can be applied to arbitrary Markov Decision Processes (MDPs),
allowing for learning from preference queries over sequential data. To our knowledge, no prior
methods for RLHF simultaneously fulfill all three of these tenets. To demonstrate CPL’s adherence
to the three aforementioned tenets, we show its effectiveness on sequential decision making problems
with sub-optimal and high-dimensional off-policy data. Notably, we show that CPL can effectively
use the same RLHF fine tuning procedure as dialog models to learn temporally extended manipulation
policies in the MetaWorld Benchmark. Specifically, we pretrain policies using supervised learning
from high-dimensional image observations, before fine tuning them with preferences. Without
dynamic programming or policy gradients, CPL is able to match the performance of prior RL based
methods. At the same time, it is 1.6× faster and four times as parameter efficient. When using denser
preference data, CPL is able to surpass the performance of RL baselines on 5 out of 6 tasks.



2    P RELIMINARIES

We consider the general reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) problem within a reward-
free MDP M/r = (S,A,p,γ) with state space S, action space A, transition dynamics p(st+1 |st ,at ),
and discount factor γ. We assume all states are reachable by some policy. The goal of RLHF is to learn
a policy π(a|s) that maximizes an expert user’s reward function rE (s,a). However, since the reward
function is not given in an MDP /r, it must be inferred from the expert’s preferences. Typically, a user
preference orders two behavior segments. A length-k segment is denoted σ = (s1 ,a1 ,s2 ,a2 ,...,sk ,ak ).
We use σ + ≻ σ − to indicate that segment σ + was preferred to σ − by the user without loss of generality
and assume we are given a dataset Dpref = {(σi+ ,σi− )}ni=1 of such preferences where σ + ≻ σ − .
Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning. The aim of maximum-entropy reinforcement learning
is to learn a policy π that maximizes its causal entropy in addition to the cumulative discounted return:


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Standard Two-Phase RLHF                                Contrastive Preference Learning

      𝜎+                                             𝜎+                              ෍ log 𝜋𝜃 (𝑎𝑡+ |𝑠𝑡+ )
                               RL                                                            𝜎+
                 𝑟𝜃
                            Algorithm                                                                                               𝑎+
      𝜎−                                                                             ෍ log 𝜋𝜃 (𝑎𝑡− |𝑠𝑡− )           𝑎−
                                                     𝜎−
                                                                                             𝜎−
                                                                                                                         𝜋𝜃 (𝑎|𝑠)
                             𝜋𝜃 (𝑎|𝑠)
                                              Regret-based Preferences                                         Contrastive Learning
                                                                                 ∗   +   +
          Phase 1            Phase 2                                  𝑒 σ𝜎+ 𝐴 (𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )
                                         𝑃𝐴∗ 𝜎 + ≻ 𝜎 − =                                                    𝐿𝐶𝑃𝐿 = −𝔼 log 𝑃log 𝜋𝜃 𝜎 + ≻ 𝜎 −
       Reward Learning         RL                           σ + 𝐴∗ (𝑠𝑡+ ,𝑎𝑡+ )
                                                           𝑒 𝜎
                                                                                          ∗ − −
                                                                                 + 𝑒 σ𝜎− 𝐴 (𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )
Figure 1: While most RLHF algorithms use a two-phase reward learning, then RL approach, CPL
directly learns a policy using a contrastive objective. This is enabled by the regret preference model.
                                      [︄ ∞                               ]︄
                                        ∑︂
                                              t
                              maxEπ         γ (r(st ,at )−αlogπ(at |st )) ,                          (1)
                                π
                                        t=0
where α is a temperature parameter. Augmenting the reward function with an additional negated
logµ(a|s) term for reference distribution µ(a|s) yields the KL-constrained objective used in offline
RL (Levine & Koltun, 2013; Garg et al., 2023) and prominent RLHF approaches for LLMs (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022). Though we adopt the standard maximum entropy framework,
our approach easily extends to the constrained setting. Under policy π and reward function r, we
denote the state-value function by Vrπ (s) and state-action value function by Qπr (s,a). The advantage
function, Aπr (s,a) ≜ Qπr (s,a) − Vrπ (s), measures how much worse taking action a is than acting
according to π. We use π ∗ as short-hand for the solution to Eq. (1) with reward function rE , and write
                                                                                        ∗         ∗
its corresponding corresponding value functions as V ∗ (s) and Q∗ (s,a) instead of VrπE and QπrE . We
measure the optimality of behavior directly by using the advantage function of π ∗ , A∗ (s,a).
The Regret (or Advantage) Preference Model. Learning π ∗ requires characterizing how preferences
are generated according to a preference model PE [σ + ≻ σ − ], or the probability the expert prefers σ +
to σ − . Typically, the preference model is chosen to be the Boltzmann rational distribution over each
                                       ∑︁k
segment’s discounted partial return, t=1 γ t rE (st ,at ), where rE is the expert’s hidden reward function.
However, such models have been shown to be inconsistent with real human preferences (Knox et al.,
2022). For instance, consider a sparse reward rE (s,a) = 1{s = g}. Two segments that do not reach the
goal would have the same partial returns even if one moved towards the goal g while the other moved
away from it. This inconsistency is resolved by considering preferences to be distributed according to the
                                                                                         ∑︁k
Boltzmann rational distribution over the negated discounted regret under rE , or − t=1 γ t (V ∗ (st )−
Q∗ (st ,at )). In this framework, a user’s preference indicates that a segment has lower regret with respect
to their intended optimal policy. Leveraging the equivalence of negated regret and the discounted sum
of optimal advantages, we equivalently write the regret-based preference model as
                                                    exp σ+ γ t A∗ (s+       +
                                                        ∑︁
                               −                                       t ,at )
                         [︁ +     ]︁
                    PA∗ σ ≻ σ =                                                t ∗ − −
                                                                                            ,            (2)
                                      exp σ+ γ t A∗ (s+     +
                                           ∑︁                         ∑︁
                                                        t ,at )+exp       σ − γ A (st ,at )
where we use the shorthand “+” and “−” as indexing the states and actions of segments σ + and σ − .
In the next section, we use the regret preference model in combination with the principle of maximum
causal entropy to derive CPL.

3    C ONTRASTIVE P REFERENCE L EARNING
Though recent work has shown that human preferences are better modeled by the optimal advantage
function or regret, most existing RLHF algorithms assume otherwise. By learning a reward function
with a mistaken model of preference and then applying RL, traditional RLHF approaches incur a
vast, unnecessary computational expense (Knox et al., 2023). Our aim is to derive simple and scalable
RLHF algorithms that are purpose-built for the more accurate regret model of human preferences.
Modeling human preferences with regret is not new, but past work suffers from a number of short-
comings. Specifically, existing algorithms using the regret preference model are brittle, as they rely
on estimating gradients with respect to a moving reward function, which thus far has only been approx-
imated by computing successor features and assuming a correct linear or tabular representation of the
expert reward function rE (Knox et al., 2022; 2023). Consequently, these algorithms appear unsuitable
for complex scenarios beyond the simplistic grid world environments in which they have been tested.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The key idea of our approach is simple: we recognize that the advantage function, used in regret
preference model, can easily be replaced with the log-probability of the policy when using the
maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework. The benefit of this simple substitution is
however immense. Using the log-probability of the policy circumvents the need to learn the advantage
function or grapple with optimization challenges associated with RL-like algorithms. In sum, this
enables us to not only embrace a more closely aligned regret preference model, but also to exclusively
rely on supervised learning when learning from human feedback.
In this section, we first derive the CPL objective and show that it converges to the optimal policy for
rE with unbounded data. Then, we draw connections between CPL and other supervised-learning
approaches. Finally, we provide recipes for using CPL in practice. Our algorithms are the first
examples of a new class of methods for sequential decision making problems which directly learn
a policy from regret based preferences without RL, making them far more efficient.

3.1   F ROM O PTIMAL A DVANTAGE TO O PTIMAL P OLICY

Under the regret preference model, our preference dataset Dpref contains information about the optimal
advantage function A∗ (s,a), which can intuitively be seen as a measure of how much worse a given
action a is than an action generated by the optimal policy at state s. Therefore, actions that maximize
the optimal advantage are by definition an optimal actions and learning the optimal advantage function
from preferences should intuitively allow us to extract the optimal policy.
Naı̈ve approach. When presented with Dpref , one might naı̈vely follow the standard RLHF
reward modeling recipe, but with advantages. This would equate to optimizing a parameterized
advantage Aθ to maximize the log likelihood of Dpref given the preference model in Eq. (2), or
maxAθ E(σ+ ,σ− )∼Dpref [logPAθ [σ + ≻ σ − ]], where PAθ is the preference model induced by the learned
advantage function. Once an advantage function that aligns with the preference data is learned, it could
be distilled into a parameterized policy. At first glance, it seems like this simple two-step approach
could be used to recover the optimal policy from preference data. However, it turns out that learning
a Bellman-consistent advantage function is non-trivial in both standard and MaxEnt RL, making
learning a valid intermediate advantage function not only unnecessary, but also harder in practice.
Eliminating the need to learn advantage. In maximum entropy RL, Ziebart (2010) has shown that
the following relationship between the optimal advantage function and optimal policy holds:
                                                        ∗
                                          π ∗ (a|s) = eAr (s,a)/α .
This
  ∫︁ means   that in order for a learned advantage function to be optimal, it must be normalized, that
        ∗
is A eA (s,a)/α da = 1. Enforcing this constraint is intractable, particularly in continuous spaces with
large neural networks, making naı̈vely learning Aθ via maximum likelihood estimation difficult.
However, one might instead notice that the above equation establishes a bijection between the
advantage function A∗r and the policy π ∗ , namely that the optimal advantage function is proportional
to the optimal policy’s log-likelihood:
                                          A∗r (s,a) = αlogπ ∗ (a|s).                                   (3)
This means that instead of learning the optimal advantage function, we can directly learn the optimal
policy. Given preferences are distributed according to the optimal advantage function for the expert
reward function rE , we can write the preference model in terms of the optimal policy π ∗ by substituting
Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) as follows,
                                                  exp σ+ γ t αlogπ ∗ (a+      +
                                                      ∑︁
                                                                          t |st )
             PA∗ σ + ≻ σ − =
                 [︁          ]︁
                                                                                             − .       (4)
                                exp σ+ γ t αlogπ ∗ (at |st )+exp σ− γ t αlogπ ∗ (a−
                                                        +  +
                                   ∑︁                                ∑︁
                                                                                         t |st )
Thus, the maximum entropy framework has led to a model of human preferences that is solely in terms
of the optimal policy π ∗ . Using this equivalent form of the advantage-based preference model, we
can directly optimize a learned policy πθ to match the preference model via maximum likelihood with
the following convex objective:
                                                                     γ t αlogπ (a+ |s+ )
                                       [︂                       ∑︁                                  ]︂
                                                            exp
    LCPL (πθ ,Dpref ) = E(σ+,σ− )∼Dpref −log exp∑︁ γ t αlogπ (aσ++|s+ )+expθ∑︁ t γtt αlogπ (a− |s− ) . (5)
                                                  σ+         θ   t   t       σ−        θ   t   t

Assuming sufficient representation power, at convergence πθ will perfectly model the user’s
preferences, and thus exactly recover π ∗ under the advantage-based preference model given an
unbounded amount of preference data. Specifically, in Appendix B, we prove the following Theorem:


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Assume an unbounded number of preferences generated from a noisy rational
regret-preference model with expert advantage function A∗ . CPL recovers the optimal policy π ∗
corresponding to reward rE .

This proof relies on the bijection between optimal advantage functions and policies in maximum
entropy RL and the fact that the regret preference model is identifiable (Knox et al., 2022), meaning
the objective can achieve a loss of zero.
Benefits of directly learning the policy. Directly learning π in this manner has several benefits, both
practical and theoretical. Perhaps most obviously, directly learning the policy circumvents the need for
learning any other functions, like a reward function or value function. This makes CPL extremely simple
in comparison to prior work. When scaling to larger models, only learning the policy reduces both com-
plexity and computational cost. Second, as pointed out by prior works (Christiano et al., 2017; Hejna &
Sadigh, 2023), reward learning can be harmed by the invariance of Boltzmann rational preference mod-
                                                                                       +    −
                                                                     ∫︁ not change P [σ ≻ σ ]. In CPL the
els (Eq. (2)) to shifts; i.e., adding a constant to each exponent does
distributional constraint of the policy (πθ (a|s)∫︁≥ 0 for all a and A πθ (a|s)da = 1) remedies this issue
automatically, since adding a constant makes A πθ (a|s)da ̸= 1. Finally, per previous arguments, the
policy’s distributional constraint guarantees that A eAθ (s,a)/α da = 1. Thus, it can be shown that CPL’s
                                                      ∫︁
learned implicit advantage function is always the optimal advantage function for some reward function.
We call this property, defined below, consistency and prove the following Proposition in Appendix B.
Definition 1. An advantage function A(s,a) is consistent if there exists some reward function r(s,a)
for which A is the optimal advantage, or A(s,a) = A∗r (s,a).
Proposition 1. CPL learns a consistent advantage function.
The consequences of this are that no matter the amount of preference data used, CPL will always learn
the optimal policy for some reward function, and adding additional preference data only improves
the implicit estimate of rE .
Connections to Contrastive Learning. When deriving CPL, we intentionally chose to denote
preferred and unpreferred behavior segments by “+” and “-” to highlight the similarities between
CPL and contrastive learning approaches. Though some two-phase RLHF approaches have drawn
connections between their reward learning phase and contrastive learning (Kang et al., 2023), CPL
directly uses a contrastive objective for policy learning. Specifically, Eq. (5) is an instantiation of
the Noise Constrastive Estimation objective (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010) where a segment’s score
is its discounted sum of log-probabilities under the policy, the positive example being σ + and the
negative σ − . In the appendix we show that when applied to ranking data using a Plackett-Luce Model,
CPL recovers the InfoNCE objective from Oord et al. (2018) where the negative examples are all the
segments ranked below the positive segment. Effectively, CPL has fully exchanged the reinforcement
learning objective for a supervised, representation learning objective while still converging to the
optimal policy. As marked success has been achieved applying contrastive learning objectives to
large-scale datasets and neural networks (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021), we
expect CPL to scale more performantly than RLHF methods that use traditional RL algorithms.

3.2   P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

The Contrastive Preference Learning framework provides a general loss function for learning policies
from advantage-based preferences, from which many algorithms can be derived. In this section, we
detail practical considerations for one particular instantiation of the CPL framework which we found
to work well in practice. In the appendix, we include several instantiations of CPL for different types
of data and conservative regularizers.
CPL with Finite Offline Data. Though CPL converges to the optimal policy with unbounded
preference data, in practice we are often interested in learning from finite offline datasets. In this setting,
policies that extrapolate too much beyond the support of the dataset perform poorly as they take actions
leading to out of distribution states. Like many other preference-based objectives, CPL’s objective is
not strictly convex (Appendix B.3). Thus, many policies, even those with a high weight on actions not
in the dataset, can achieve the same optima of Eq. (5). We demonstrate this by formulating CPL as a
logistic regression problem. Let the policy be represented
                                                       ∑︁ by a one-dimensional      vector π ∈ R|S×A| . The
                                                                                                        − −
difference between positive and negative segments, σ+ γ t αlogπθ (a+          +            t
                                                                                   ∑︁
                                                                         t  |st )−    σ + γ αlogπθ (at |st )
can be re-written as a dot-product between π and a “comparison” vector x, whose values are either


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


γ t , −γ t , or 0 indicating membership to the comparison σ + ≻ σ − . Using the logistic function,
logistic(z) = 1+e1−z , we re-write the CPL objective in the finite case as ⎧
                                                                                    t   +
                            |Dpref |
                             ∑︂                                                 ⎨γ if σi,t = (s,a)
                                                                                ⎪
                                                  ⊤                                   t  −
      LCPL (πθ ,Dpref ) = −         loglogistic(αxi logπ(a|s)), where xi [s,a] = −γ if σi,t = (s,a)
                                                                                ⎪
                             i=1                                                ⎩ 0 otherwise
          +
where σi,t    denotes the tth timestep of the preferred segment from the ith comparison in Dpref . We can
reason about the set of all policies that yield the same CPL loss by assembling all comparison vectors into
a matrix X, where the ith row of X is the vector xi for the ith comparison in the dataset. Any changes
to logπ in the null space of X have no effect on the logits of the logistic function, and consequently
no effect on the loss. In practice, |S ×A| >> n, making the null space of X often nontrivial such that
there are multiple minimizers of the CPL loss, some of which potentially place a high probability on
state-action pairs not in the dataset. In Appendix B.3 we provide constructions of X where this is true.
Next, we show how this problem can be resolved by incorporating regularization into the CPL objective.
Regularization. In finite settings, we want to choose the policy that minimizes the CPL loss function
while placing higher likelihood on actions in the dataset. To accomplish this, we modify Eq. (5) with
a conservative regularizer that assigns lower loss when the policy has higher likelihood on actions
in Dpref , keeping it in-distribution. Though there are many possible choices of regularizers, we use
an asymmetric “bias” regularizer adapted from An et al. (2023) as it performed best in our experiments.
Within our objective, the bias regularizer down-weights negative segments by λ ∈ (0,1) as so:
                                                        exp σ+ γ t αlogπθ (a+    +
                                 [︂                         ∑︁                                      ]︂
                                                                             t |st )
    LCPL(λ) (πθ ,Dpref ) = EDpref −log exp∑︁        t         +   +        ∑︁     t         −   −      .   (6)
                                               σ + γ αlogπθ (at |st )+expλ   σ − γ αlogπθ (at |st )

If the policy places more weight on actions in the dataset, logπθ (a|s) will increase. In the standard
Boltzmann model, increasing the log-probabilities of both the positive and negative segments
by the same amount would have no effect on the loss. The bias, however, weighs the increased
log-probabilities of the negative segments less, which ultimately decreases the loss. Thus, while a
minimizer of the vanilla CPL loss function could place a high probability on unseen actions, Eq. (6) is
minimized with a higher weight on in-distribution actions. This is formally captured by the following
proposition, which shows that, for a fixed policy, LCPL(λ) is lower when the policy places a higher
likelihood on actions in the dataset versus other comparisons with the same CPL Loss.
Proposition 2. Consider a comparison σ + ≻ σ − from Dpref and an arbitrary comparison
  ′+       ′−
∑︁ ≻t σ such
σ                         LCPL (π, σ + ≻ σ − ) = LCPL (π, σ ′+ ≻ σ ′− ) for a fixed policy π. If
                    that ∑︁
               + +               t      + +                       +   −                ′+  ′−
   σ + γ logπ(at |st ) >   σ ′+ γ logπ(at |st ), then LCPL(λ) (π,σ ≻ σ ) < LCPL(λ) (π,σ ≻ σ ).

Essentially, this shows that the bias regularizer breaks ties in the CPL loss function by penalizing lower
likelihoods. We prove this, along with a more general version, in Appendix B.4. In Appendix C we
also consider CPL variants with other forms of conservative regularization.
Pretraining. Pre-training the policy πθ with behavior cloning (BC) is a common practice in RLHF
(Ouyang et al., 2022). Thus, before fine-tuning with preferences using the CPL loss, we trained the
policy using the standard maximum likelihood BC objective, minθ E(s,a)∼D [logπθ (a|s)]. Though
D could be any dataset, we chose Dpref . We found that this helped performance in some cases, but hurt
it others (Appendix D). We posit that pre-training helps when a policy closer to the data distribution
is desirable, particularly when out-of-distribution actions are detrimental.

4    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we address the following questions about CPL: First, is CPL effective at fine-tuning
policies from regret-based preferences? Second, does CPL scale to high-dimensional control problems
and larger networks? Third, what ingredients of CPL are important for attaining high performance?
Additional experiments with human data and details are included in the appendix.
Preference Data. We evaluate CPL’s ability to learn policies for general MDPs from sub-optimal off-
policy rollout data and preferences. In particular, we consider the training procedure commonly used
for large foundation models: supervised learning followed by fine-tuning with RLHF. To do this, we
use six tasks from the MetaWorld robotics benchmark (Yu et al., 2020). First, we train baseline policies
until they approximately reach a 50% success rate. Then, we rollout 2500 episodes for each suboptimal


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stochastic policy. We then form synthetic preference datasets Dpref of different sizes by sampling
segments of length 64 uniformly from the rollout data. We estimate regret-based preference labels using
the Q-function and policy of an oracle Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) model trained to
100% success on a combination of the suboptimal rollout and online data. In practice, we consider two
main types of preference datasets: dense, where we label comparisons between every sampled segment
(effectively ranking all segments), and sparse, where we label only one comparison per segment.
Baseline Methods. We consider four strong baselines. First, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) trains a
policy with BC on all segments, then fine-tunes on only the preferred segments, i.e., all σ + in Dpref .
The second baseline is Preference IQL (P-IQL), which learns a reward function from Dpref assuming
the partial return model, then subsequently learns a policy to maximize it with Implicit Q-Learning
(Kostrikov et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art offline RL algorithm. Though P-IQL was first used with
the partial return model, here it uses an approximation of A∗rE as its reward, which as we show in
Appendix B’s Corollary 1 preserves the optimal policy. In fact, P-IQL should be more performant
with regret-based labels, since A∗rE is a highly shaped reward function for rE Ng et al. (1999); Knox
et al. (2023). We use Hejna & Sadigh (2023)’s implementation of P-IQL as it outperformed several
contemporary baselines. Third, we consider PPO with a KL-constrained reward as commonly used
for RLHF with LLMs (Ziegler et al., 2019). This is not a fair comparison, as PPO requires 3.84 million
additional online state-action pairs to estimate the policy gradient, totalling 25× the data for CPL 2.5K
Dense and 4× the data for CPL 20K Sparse. Unlike the contextual bandit setting used for LLMs, PPO
here require full trajectory rollouts. Finally, to demonstrate CPL’s ability to extrapolate beyond the
best performance in the data, we compare to %BC, where a policy is trained with behavior cloning
on the top X% of rollouts according to the ground truth rE .


4.1   H OW DOES CPL P ERFORM ?

How does CPL perform with state-based observations? Our main state-based results can be found in
rows 1 and 3 of Table 1. When using sparser comparison data (row 3), CPL outperforms prior methods
in 5 of 6 environments, often by a substantial margin of over P-IQL, particularly in Button Press,
Bin Picking, and Sweep Into environments. When applied to datasets with more dense comparisons,
CPL outperforms P-IQL even more (row 1), doing so substantially in all environments. Though the
dense-comparison datasets have less state-action coverage, they have substantially more preference
comparisons than the sparse comparison datasets. We posit that more comparisons per segment is more
beneficial to CPL than to P-IQL because of its contrastive objective – more comparison-rich datasets
are likely to have more informative positive-negative pairs that help shape the policy. Moreover, PPO
is unable to consistently perform better than CPL despite access to vast amounts of online data from
the environment. We found PPO to be very sensitive to the KL-constraint coefficient on reward, which
makes it difficult to tune as observed in prior work (Touvron et al., 2023). This problem is likely
exacerbated by the instability of the KL-divergence in continuous spaces and the high variance of
both value estimation and policy gradients with longer horizons in robotics tasks versus LLM bandits.
We find that CPL consistently outperforms %BC, indicating the CPL is indeed exhibiting policy
improvement beyond the best behaviors in the dataset.
How does CPL scale to high-dimensional observations? To test how CPL’s supervised objectives
scale to high-dimensional continuous control problems, we render the MetaWorld datasets discussed
above to 64 × 64 images. We use the network architecture from DrQv2 (Yarats et al., 2022) and
the same hyper-parameters as our state-based experiments. We additionally use random shift
augmentations, which drastically improve the performance of RL from images (Laskin et al., 2020).
Our image-based results can be found in rows 2 and 4 of Table 1. Interestingly, we find that
performance moderately increases for SFT but substantially for P-IQL. We posit that this is because
data-augmentation, which is inapplicable in state, plays a key role in improving value representation
for P-IQL. Despite this, when learning from denser preference data (row 2), CPL still outperforms
P-IQL in 4 of 6 environments and ties on Sweep Into. When learning from sparser comparisons (row
4), CPL and P-IQL perform comparably on most tasks, even though CPL is drastically simpler than
P-IQL. Again, the gap in performance between CPL and P-IQL is higher with denser comparison data.
These results are only more impressive considering CPL’s significant reduction in complexity. P-IQL
must learn a reward function, a Q-function, a value function, and a policy. CPL avoids all of this, and
only learns a policy, drastically reducing training time and parameter count. As we can see in Table 2,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Bin Picking   Button Press   Door Open    Drawer Open   Plate Slide   Sweep Into
                        PPO      83.7 ± 3.7    22.7 ± 1.9    79.3 ± 1.2    66.7 ± 8.2   51.5 ± 3.9    55.3 ± 6.0
         2.5k Dense


                        SFT      66.9 ± 2.1    21.6 ± 1.6    63.3 ± 1.9    62.6 ± 2.4   41.6 ± 3.5    51.9 ± 2.1
 State



                        P-IQL    70.6 ± 4.1    16.2 ± 5.4    69.0 ± 6.2    71.1 ± 2.3   49.6 ± 3.4    60.6 ± 3.6
                        CPL      80.0 ± 2.5    24.5 ± 2.1    80.0 ± 6.8    83.6 ± 1.6   61.1 ± 3.0    70.4 ± 3.0
                        SFT      74.7 ± 4.8    20.8 ± 2.4    62.9 ± 2.3    64.5 ± 7.6   44.5 ± 3.2    52.5 ± 2.5
         2.5k Dense
 Image


                        P-IQL    83.7 ± 0.4    22.1 ± 0.8    68.0 ± 4.6    76.0 ± 4.6   51.2 ± 2.4    67.7 ± 4.4
                        CPL      80.0 ± 4.9    27.5 ± 4.2    73.6 ± 6.9    80.3 ± 1.4   57.3 ± 5.9    68.3 ± 4.8
                        PPO      68.0 ± 4.3    24.5 ± 0.8    82.8 ± 1.6    63.2 ± 6.6   60.7 ± 4.2    58.2 ± 0.6
         20k Sparse


                        SFT      67.0 ± 4.9    21.4 ± 2.7    63.6 ± 2.4    63.5 ± 0.9   41.9 ± 3.1    50.9 ± 3.2
 State


                        P-IQL    75.0 ± 3.3    19.5 ± 1.8    79.0 ± 6.6    76.2 ± 2.8   55.5 ± 4.2    73.4 ± 4.2
                        CPL      83.2 ± 3.5    29.8 ± 1.8    77.9 ± 9.3    79.1 ± 5.0   56.4 ± 3.9    81.2 ± 1.6
                        SFT      71.5 ± 1.9    22.3 ± 2.9    65.2 ± 2.2    67.5 ± 1.1   41.3 ± 2.8    55.8 ± 2.9
         20k Sparse
 Image


                        P-IQL    80.0 ± 2.3    27.2 ± 4.1    74.8 ± 5.8    80.3 ± 1.2   54.8 ± 5.8    72.5 ± 2.0
                        CPL      78.5 ± 3.1    31.3 ± 1.6    70.2 ± 2.1    79.5 ± 1.4   61.0 ± 4.2    72.0 ± 1.8
                        10%      62.6 ± 2.6    18.9 ± 1.7    57.5 ± 3.0    61.5 ± 3.7   39.1 ± 2.5    49.3 ± 2.1
 State
         % BC


                        5%       64.6 ± 4.1    18.2 ± 0.6    59.8 ± 1.6    61.3 ± 1.8   38.6 ± 2.5    49.2 ± 1.9
Table 1: Success rates ( inpercent) of all methods across six tasks on the MetaWorld benchmark on
different datasets. The leftmost column contains the observation modality (state or image), the number
of segments in the dataset, and the means of labeling comparisons (dense or sparse). Dense refers
to labeling every possible pairwise comparison and sparse refers to labeling only one comparison
for every two segments, e.g., 10k comparisons for 20k segments. We run four seeds for state and three
seeds for images. We report the maximum average performance across seeds over an 8-checkpoint, 200
episode evaluation window (details in Appendix E). Bolded values are within 1% of the top-performing
method. The bottom section shows oracle performance of %BC with access to ground-truth reward.
State-spaces results include PPO (delinated with a dashed line) which is not a 1-1 comparison as it
uses 3.84 million extra online transitions.
CPL runs 1.62× faster than P-IQL on images and has less than a quarter of the the parameters. As
networks get larger and larger, the performance gain from using CPL would only increase.

4.2                   W HAT CONTRIBUTES TO CPL’ S PERFORMANCE ?

As alluded to in previous sections, we find that the gap in performance between CPL and baselines is
higher for datasets with denser comparisons. This is consistent with prior works in contrastive learning
(Robinson et al., 2021). To study this effect, evaluate CPL’s performance as we increase the number
of comparisons sampled per segment over a fixed dataset of 5000 segments. We show results of this for
Drawer Open with state-based observations on the left of Fig. 2 and include the rest in Appendix D.3
in addition to dense data scaling. Overall, we find that CPL benefits from an increasing number of com-
parisons per segment in all tasks except Plate Slide. P-IQL is less affected, though sometimes performs
worse with more comparisons, which we suspect is due to reward under-fitting. This highlights another
drawback of P-IQL – due to its higher number of components, it has more hyperparameters and is
consequently more sensitive to changes in the dataset. We tuned hyperparameters for all methods
with 10K comparisons, then left them the same for scaling experiments.
Finally, we ablate both of CPL’s hyperparameters – the temperature value α and bias regularizer λ
– for Drawer Open on the right of Fig. 2. While CPL generally performs well with all values, we find
that higher performance could have been attained with further hyper-parameter tuning, particularly
for λ. In the Appendix C we ablate more design decisions, like the choice of conservative regularizer.

5              R ELATED W ORK
Though RLHF has recently surged in popularity, learning policies from human preferences has been
a long-studied problem, referred to as preference-based RL (PbRL).


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Data Density, Drawer Open                                    Hyperparameter Ablations on Drawer Open
                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                  0.9
              0.90
                                                                   0.8
              0.85                                                                                                0.8

    Success Rate


                                                         Success Rate
              0.80                                                 0.7                                            0.7
              0.75                                                 0.6                                            0.6
              0.70                                                                                 alpha 0.02                                lambda 0.25
                                                                   0.5                             alpha 0.1      0.5                        lambda 0.5
              0.65                                                                                 alpha 0.5                                 lambda 0.75
                      2       4    8                16
                          Comparisons per Segment                        100000     200000   300000      400000         100000     200000   300000   400000
                      P-IQL       CPL                                             Training Steps                                 Training Steps
Figure 2: Left: Performance when increasing the number of comparisons per segment on Drawer Open
state with 5k segments on two seeds. Right: Ablations on CPL’s hyperparameters on Drawer Open
from State. The dotted vertical line shows when BC pretraining stops.
PbRL methods typically start by learning a reward function, usually from pairwise comparisons, then
use an RL algorithm for policy optimization (Fürnkranz et al., 2012). While Akrour et al. (2012; 2011);
Wilson et al. (2012) were some of the first examples of PbRL, more recently several works have shown
that, provided thousands of queries or sufficient pretraining, PbRL can train deep neural-network
policies for control using comparisons (Christiano et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021; Ibarz et al., 2018;
Brown et al., 2020; Hejna & Sadigh, 2022; Shin & Brown, 2021) or rankings (Brown et al., 2019; Bıyık
et al., 2019; Sikchi et al., 2023a). These approaches, however, are generally demonstrated only on low-
dimensional state-based control because of the challenges RL faces when scaling to larger inputs and net-
works (Ota et al., 2021). In the past, removing RL has lead to effective algorithms for goal-conditioned
RL from images (Hejna et al.; Eysenbach et al., 2022). CPL does the same but for PbRL. Other works
address the problem of selecting feedback (Sadigh et al., 2017; Biyik et al., 2020; Daniel et al., 2015),
which we consider complementary because CPL can benefit from higher quality data elicitation.
To scale RLHF, recent approaches for refining LLMs have ignored       Method Params Runtime
the temporal component of RL, and instead treated text-generation     P-IQL       9.6m      16.5 hrs
as a contextual bandits problem (Ziegler et al., 2019). While         CPL         2.1m      10.2 hrs
this approach has proven effective at tasks like summarization
                                                                    Table 2: Computational efficiency
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu & Hu, 2018), instruction following
                                                                    of each method when learning
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Nakano et al., 2021), and even image
                                                                    from pixels for 200k training steps
generation (Lee et al., 2023; Black et al., 2023), it fundamentally
                                                                    on a single TitanRTX GPU.
ignores the fact that interaction with users is often sequential,
spanning multiple turns. Unlike these methods, CPL works with general MDPs. CPL’s unique ability
to learn from sequence data with only supervised objectives makes it a prime candidate for scaling to
more complex problems. In fact, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) recently
demonstrated that a supervised objective similar to CPL works better than RL in the contextual bandits
setting. We show in Appendix B that DPO can be derived as a special case of CPL in which segments
are of length 1 and always start at the same state. This parallels Knox et al. (2023), who show that
the common contextual bandit-approach is a special case of the naı̈ve approach from Section 3.
To derive CPL’s objective, we leverage knowledge from works building on the principle of maximum
entropy in control (Ziebart et al., 2008; Ziebart, 2010; Haarnoja et al., 2017). The resulting contrastive
update directly learns the optimal policy with fully off-policy data. This is unlike many RL-based
RLHF algorithms in both langauge (Ziegler et al., 2019) or control (Christiano et al., 2017) which
require on policy rollouts and additional learned components that have been shown to increase variance
(Hejna & Sadigh, 2023). Similar contrastive learning objectives have shown to be effective for temporal
representation learning (Ma et al., 2023), even with preference data (Kang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023).

6        D ISCUSSION
In this work we introduce CPL, a novel framework for RLHF using the regret preference model. Theo-
retically, we proved that CPL always learns a consistent advantage function and converges to the optimal
policy for the expert’s reward function. Practically, we showed that CPL’s supervised objective is able
to outperform RL baselines when learning complex manipulation policies from dense preference data
while being simpler and 1.6× faster. Due to space constraints, we include limitations in Appendix A.


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by NSF Award 2006388, NSF Award 2218760, NSF Award 1933032, NSF
Award 1953032, NSF Award 1941722, NSF Award 2125511, NSF Award IIS-1749204, AFOSR YIP,
AFOSR (FA9550-20-1-0077), ARO (78372-CS, W911NF-19-2-0333), ONR (N00014-21-1-2685),
ONR, Ford, DARPA YFA, and the Center for AI Safety. JH is supported by a DoD NDSEG Fellowship.
CF is a CIFAR Fellow in the Learning in Machines and Brains program. WBK is supported by
UT Austin’s Good Systems grand challenge. We would like to thank Archit Sharma for valuable
discussions on the conservative regularizer used in CPL. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the sponsors.

C ONTRIBUTIONS

JH led the project, contributing to all aspects including ideation, theory, experimentation, and writing.
RR proposed linking advantages and likelihoods and contributed to early stage ideation. HS contributed
to the theory, experiment design, and ran experiments. CF, SN, WBK, DS oversaw, advised, and
provided feedback on the project.

R EFERENCES
Riad Akrour, Marc Schoenauer, and Michele Sebag. Preference-based policy learning. In Joint
  European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, 2011.
Riad Akrour, Marc Schoenauer, and Michèle Sebag. April: Active preference learning-based reinforce-
  ment learning. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference,
  ECML PKDD 2012, Bristol, UK, September 24-28, 2012. Proceedings, Part II 23, pp. 116–131.
  Springer, 2012.
Gaon An, Junhyeok Lee, Xingdong Zuo, Norio Kosaka, Kyung-Min Kim, and Hyun Oh Song. Direct
  preference-based policy optimization without reward modeling. 2023.
Erdem Bıyık, Daniel A Lazar, Dorsa Sadigh, and Ramtin Pedarsani. The green choice: Learning and
  influencing human decisions on shared roads. In 2019 IEEE 58th conference on decision and control
  (CDC), pp. 347–354. IEEE, 2019.
Erdem Biyik, Nicolas Huynh, Mykel J. Kochenderfer, and Dorsa Sadigh. Active preference-based
  gaussian process regression for reward learning. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems
  (RSS), July 2020.
Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of
  paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond suboptimal
  demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.
Daniel Brown, Russell Coleman, Ravi Srinivasan, and Scott Niekum. Safe imitation learning via fast
  bayesian reward inference from preferences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 1165–1177. PMLR, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christian Daniel, Oliver Kroemer, Malte Viering, Jan Metz, and Jan Peters. Active reward learning
  with a novel acquisition function. Autonomous Robots, 39(3):389–405, 2015.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Contrastive learning
  as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:35603–35620, 2022.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Johannes Fürnkranz, Eyke Hüllermeier, Weiwei Cheng, and Sang-Hyeun Park. Preference-based
  reinforcement learning: a formal framework and a policy iteration algorithm. Machine learning, 89:
  123–156, 2012.
Divyansh Garg, Joey Hejna, Matthieu Geist, and Stefano Ermon. Extreme q-learning: Maxent RL
  without entropy. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJ0Lde3tRL.
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In Yee Whye Teh and Mike Titterington (eds.), Proceedings
 of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 9 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 297–304, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, 13–15
 May 2010. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/gutmann10a.html.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with deep
  energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352–1361. PMLR,
  2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-shot preference learning for human-in-the-loop RL. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, 2022.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Inverse preference learning: Preference-based rl without a reward
  function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15363, 2023.
Joey Hejna, Jensen Gao, and Dorsa Sadigh. Distance weighted supervised learning for offline
  interaction data. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
  13774.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021.
Yachen Kang, Diyuan Shi, Jinxin Liu, Li He, and Donglin Wang. Beyond reward: Offline preference-
  guided policy optimization. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
  Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  15753–15768. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  kang23b.html.
Changyeon Kim, Jongjin Park, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Preference
  transformer: Modeling human preferences using transformers for rl. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W Bradley Knox, Stephane Hatgis-Kessell, Serena Booth, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro
 Allievi. Models of human preference for learning reward functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02231,
 2022.
W. Bradley Knox, Stephane Hatgis-Kessell, Sigurdur Orn Adalgeirsson, Serena Booth, Anca Dragan,
  Peter Stone, and Scott Niekum. Learning optimal advantage from preferences and mistaking it for
  reward, 2023.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning.
   In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 19884–19895, 2020.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive reinforcement
  learning via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2021.
Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.
Sergey Levine and Vladlen Koltun. Guided policy search. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1–9. PMLR, 2013.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy
  Zhang. VIP: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YJ7o2wetJ2.
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei,
  Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. What matters in learning from offline human
  demonstrations for robot manipulation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
Peter Marbach and John N Tsitsiklis. Approximate gradient methods in policy-space optimization of
  markov reward processes. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13:111–148, 2003.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-
  answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
 Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pp. 278–287. Citeseer, 1999.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Kei Ota, Devesh K Jha, and Asako Kanezaki. Training larger networks for deep reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07920, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
  Applied Statistics, 24(2):193–202, 1975.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
  Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from
  natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763.
  PMLR, 2021.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Joshua David Robinson, Ching-Yao Chuang, Suvrit Sra, and Stefanie Jegelka. Contrastive learning
  with hard negative samples. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=CR1XOQ0UTh-.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learning
  of reward functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2017.
Daniel Shin and Daniel S Brown. Offline preference-based apprenticeship learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.09251, 2021.
Harshit Sikchi, Akanksha Saran, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. A ranking game for imitation
  learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023a. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=d3rHk4VAf0.
Harshit Sikchi, Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Scott Niekum. Dual rl: Unification and new methods
  for reinforcement and imitation learning. In Sixteenth European Workshop on Reinforcement
  Learning, 2023b.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.01325, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and
  fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Hado Van Hasselt, Yotam Doron, Florian Strub, Matteo Hessel, Nicolas Sonnerat, and Joseph Modayil.
  Deep reinforcement learning and the deadly triad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02648, 2018.
Aaron Wilson, Alan Fern, and Prasad Tadepalli. A bayesian approach for policy learning from trajectory
  preference queries. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
Yuxiang Wu and Baotian Hu. Learning to extract coherent summary via deep reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Wanqiao Xu, Shi Dong, Dilip Arumugam, and Benjamin Van Roy. Shattering the agent-environment
 interface for fine-tuning inclusive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11455, 2023.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous con-
  trol: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=_SJ-_yyes8.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal entropy.
  Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ISCUSSION

Limitations. CPL, like other RLHF approaches, assumes knowledge of the human rater’s temporal
discounting (i.e., of the discount factor γ), which in practice would be difficult to communicate. As
CPL’s loss function is computed over segments, it requires a substantial amount of GPU memory for
large segment sizes. Finally, no model of human behavior is perfect.
Future Directions. Several exciting research directions remain. First is scaling CPL to larger datasets
and architectures where we believe its benefits will be more pronounced. One potentially exciting
application is LLMs, where CPL enables fine-tuning on multiple steps of turn-based dialogue. To
our knowledge, no multi-step preferences dataset currently exists for LLMs. Second, our work only
considers offline data generated by suboptimal policies. An online version of CPL could be developed
that works with online human feedback, allowing policies to continually improve.

B     T HEORY

B.1    P ROOF OF C ONSISTENCY

We first prove a lemma about the consistency of CPL as it is used when proving convergence.
Lemma 1. Any function A(s,a) that satisfies A eA(s,a)/α da = 1 ∀s ∈ S is a consistent advantage
                                               ∫︁
function under some reward function r in the MaxEntRL setting.

Idea. Given advantage A(s,a), we want to show that there exists a reward function r for which A is the
optimal advantage function.

Proof. Given A eA(s,a)/α da = 1, consider the corresponding policy π A (a|s) = eA(s,a)/α . Let the
                ∫︁

reward function be the advantage, or r(s,a) = A(s,a) = αlogπ A (a|s). We can determine the optimal
policy π ∗ for this reward according to Eq. (1):


                     π ∗ = argmaxEρπ [r(s,a)−αlogπ(a|s)]
                                 π
                                ∞
                                ∑︂
                        = argmax Es∼ρtπ (s),a∼π(a|s) [αlogπ A (a|s)−αlogπ(a|s)]
                                 π
                                     t=1
                                ∞
                                ∑︂
                        = argmax Es∼ρtπ (s) [−αDKL (π(·|s)||π A (·|s))]
                                 π
                                     t=1
                                ∞
                                ∑︂
                        = argmin Es∼ρtπ (s) [αDKL (π(·|s)||π A (·|s))]
                                π
                                     t=1


Thus, the objective is point-wise maximized if and only if π A (·|s) = π(·|s) ∀ s ∈ S. Therefore, π A is
the optimal policy for reward function r(s,a) = A(s,a).1 Under this reward function, π ∗ = π A = eA ,
which implies that A is a consistent advantage function.
Proposition 1. CPL learns a consistent advantage function.
                                                     ∫︁
Optimization via CPL fits a valid policy π subject to A π(a|s)da = 1 ∀s ∈ S, with corresponding
MaxEnt Advantage function A(s,a) = αlogπ(a|s).
                    ∫︂                 ∫︂                  ∫︂
                        eA(s,a)/α da = eαlogπ(a|s)/α da = π(a|s)da = 1
                           A                   A                        A

Thus, by the above Lemma CPL fits a consistent advantage function.
   1
     Note that we assume that all states are reachable and therefore have support in ρtπ (s) for any optimal MaxEnt
policy.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 1. The reward function r and the reward function defined as the optimal advantage function
for r, A∗r , have the same optimal MaxEnt policy.

This corollary can be seen by examining the proof of Lemma 1. According to the MaxEnt RL objective
                                           ∗
for reward r the optimal policy is πr∗ = eAr /α (Ziebart, 2010). Therefore A∗r = αlogπr∗ . Repeating the
steps of Lemma 1 by setting r′ = A∗r = αlogπr∗ , we get the following objective for the optimal policy
πr∗′ with respect to r′ :


                     πr∗′ = argmaxEρπ [r′ (s,a)−αlogπ(a|s)]
                                  π
                                      ∞
                                      ∑︂
                         = argmax       Es∼ρtπ (s),a∼π(a|s) [αlogπr∗ (a|s)−αlogπ(a|s)]
                                  π
                                      t=1
                                 ∞
                                 ∑︂
                         = argmax Es∼ρtπ (s) [−αDKL (π(·|s)||πr∗ (·|s)]
                                  π
                                      t=1
                                 ∞
                                 ∑︂
                         = argmin Es∼ρtπ (s) [αDKL (π(·|s)||πr∗ (·|s)]
                                  π
                                      t=1


Since the final expression above is minimized only when π = πr∗ , then πr∗′ = πr∗ . In other words, the
reward function r and reward function r′ = A∗r have the same optimal MaxEnt policy.
Implication for our P-IQL baseline. With regret-based preferences, an algorithm that learns a reward
function while assuming the partial return preference model and then conducts RL on that learned
reward function—including P-IQL—is actually using an approximation of A∗r as the reward function.
This corollary therefore implies that if that approximation is error-free, then P-IQL is using a reward
function that preserves the optimal policy of the expert user’s reward function rE . This application of
the corollary extends the similar insight of Knox et al. (2023) to the MaxEnt RL setting. Furthermore,
as shown in Lemma 1, when π = π ∗ , Eρπ [r(s,a)−αlogπ(a|s)] = 0, implying that V ∗ (s) = 0 as the
reward and entropy regularization over the occupancy measure from any state is exactly the value
function. Thus, as originally pointed out by (Ng et al., 1999), using A∗r as the reward function results
in a high amount of shaping, so much so that a horizon of one transition is sufficient to determine the
optimal action in each state (Knox et al., 2023).

B.2    P ROOF OF C ONVERGENCE

Theorem 1. Assume an unbounded number of preferences generated from a noisy rational regret-
preference model with expert advantage function A∗ . CPL recovers the optimal policy π ∗ .

Proof. Without loss of generality we let α = 1. For the purposes of this proof only, let
σk denote a segment of length k where the state-actions in the segment are denoted by σk =
(s0 ,a0 ,s1 ,a1 ,...,sk−1 ,ak−1 ). Let
                                    [︁ 1y be 0the
                                               ]︁ label indicating whether the expert regret ∗preference model
           1       0
prefers σk to σk , i.e., y ∼ PA σk ≻ σk . Let Â∑︁
                                  ∗                     = logπ̂ be the implicit estimate of A learned by CPL.
For brevity, we will use the shorthand A(σk ) = σk γ t A(st ,at ) to denote the discounted sum of advan-
                                                           A∗ (σ 1 )                                      Â(σ 1 )
tages of a segment σ. Let P (σk1 ,σk2 ) = Bern( eA∗ (σe1 ) +eA∗ (σ0 ) ) and Q(σk1 ,σk2 ) = Bern( eÂ(σe1 ) +eÂ(σ0 ) )
The cross-entropy CPL loss function can be re-written as follows:
                      LCPL (Â,D) = Eσ1 ,σ0 ∼D DKL P (σk1 ,σk2 )∥Q(σk1 ,σk2 )
                                                 [︁        (︁                         )︁]︁

The KL divergence is optimized only when the two distributions are exactly equal. Because the
preference model is rational and we assume sufficient representation power and unbounded data,
it is possible for the loss to converge to zero by pointwise matching KL-divergence for each two
comparisons (See Knox et al. (2022) for more information specific to the identifiability of regret based
preferences). Thus, under the assumption of unbounded data, for all possible segments σk1 ,σk0 we must
have that                            ∗  1                  1
                                 eA (σk )            eÂ(σk )
                               ∗  1       ∗ 0 =                      ∀σk1 ,σk0 .
                             eA (σk ) +eA (σk ) eÂ(σk1 ) +eÂ(σk0 )

                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rearranging, we get:
                                                1    ∗       0            ∗    1         0
                                        eÂ(σk ) eA (σk ) = eA (σk ) eÂ(σk )

Consider σkp = (sp0 ,ap0 ,sp1 ,ap1 ...spk−1 ,apk−1 ) where p ∈ {0,1}. We will show that the above equality also
holds for all sequences of length k−1. Consider the last action for the segment σk1 denoted as a1k−1 ,
then:
                                       ∑︂            1           ∗   0          ∑︂             ∗   1       0
                         ∀σk1 ,σk0              eÂ(σk ) eA (σk ) =                      eA (σk ) eÂ(σk )
                                     a1k−1 ∈A                                 a1k−1 ∈A


Now, we will use the consistency of CPL. Per Ziebart (2010), for the optimal value function A∗ ,
         A∗ (s,a)
                  = 1, ∀s. Because CPL is consistent (Proposition 1), we also have that a∈A eÂ(s,a) =
∑︁                                                                                     ∑︁
   a∈A e
1, ∀s. We use this, in combination with the fact that all possible dynamically feasible segments of
length k−1 are a subset of dynamically feasible segments of length k to arrive at:

                                                     1               ∗    0        ∗       1           0
                              1
                            ∀σk−1 ,σk0 ,        eÂ(σk−1 ) eA (σk ) = eA (σk−1 ) eÂ(σk )
Inductively we have that:

                                                                 ∗    0            0
                                            ∀σk0 ,       eA (σk ) = eÂ(σk )

Applying the same argument again, this time for σk0 , we have
                                                         ∗       0    0            0   0
                                         ∀s0i ,a0i eA (si ,ai ) = eÂ(si ,ai )

which is equivalent to A∗ (s,a) = Â(s,a) ∀s,a.

B.3    C ONVEXITY OF CPL WITH F INITE DATA

CPL is convex, but not strictly convex. Here we show that the CPL loss function is convex in logπ.
Consider the logistic regression interpretation of CPL for finite data
                                                      n
                                                     ∑︂
                           LCPL (π,Dpref ) = −               loglogistic(αx⊤
                                                                           i logπ(a|s)),
                                                     i=1

where xi is the “comaprison” vector for the ith comparison in Dpref . We can re-write this using matrix
notation as:
                                           ∑︂n
                       LCPL (π,Dpref ) = − loglogistic((αXlogπ(a|s))i ).
                                                     i=1

The hessian of this objective (logistic regression) with respect to logπ is X ⊤ DX, where D is the
diagonal matrix such that Dii = logistic(xi ·logπ)(1−logistic(xi ·logπ)). As X ⊤ DX is symmetric, it
is guaranteed to be positive semi-definite  making the objective function convex. The distributional
constraint of CPL, that ∀s ∈ S, A elogπ(a|s) da = 1, is also convex as elogπ is convex in logπ. Thus, the
                               ∫︁
overall objective is convex.
However, this does not imply strict convexity, or that there is a unique solution. X ⊤ DX is only positive
definite if it is full rank, which is unlikely to happen in practice as usually |S ×A| >> n. This means
that the objective is likely not strictly convex in practice, as there can exist more than one minimizer
of the objective, formally denoted π̂ = argminπ LCPL (π, Dpref ). To prove that CPL is not always
strictly convex, we construct another policy π̂ ′ such that LCPL (π̂,Dpref ) = LCPL (π̂ ′ ,Dpref ). First, we
demonstrate this on a simple single-state MDP and then provide a general construction for arbitrary
MDPs with discrete actions.
A simple example. Consider a single state MDP with three actions a1 , a2 , a3 and expert reward
function rE (s, ai ) = ri where i indexes the actions. It can be shown that, due to the single state
nature of this simple MDP, the optimal maximum entropy advantage function is A∗ (s, ai ) = ri .
Consider a preference dataset Dpref consisting only of comparisons between segments (s,a1 ) and


                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(s,a2(︁). According to the regret
                               )︁ preference model, the expert labels these preferences according to
Bern expr1 /(expr1 +expr2 ) and thus we expect some labels in the preference matrix X to conflict.
The finite CPL loss becomes

                   LCPL (π,Dpref ) = −c1 loglogistic αlogπ(a1 |s)−αlogπ(a2 |s)
                                                    (︁                         )︁

                                      −c2 loglogistic αlogπ(a2 |s)−αlogπ(a1 |s)
                                                       (︁                         )︁


where c1 and c2 are the number of comparisons where a1 and a2 were preferred respectively.
By taking
        (︁ the gradient of this objective,    it can be shown that the loss is optimized only when
logistic αlogπ(a1 |s)−αlogπ(a2 |s) = c1c+c         or reducing, α log π(a1 |s) − α log π(a2 |s) = log cc12 .
                                       )︁      1
                                                 2
Intuitively, this makes sense, as the logits are optimized to produce the same ratio of preferences
as found in the dataset. However, when we consider the unseen action a3 , to which we can assign
arbitrary probability, the existence of multiple optimizers π̂ becomes clear. For example, take c1 = c2 .
By the conditions above its straightforward to see that π̂ = [0.5,0.5,0.0] is an optimum of the CPL
loss function. However, π̂ = [0.1,0.1,0.8] achieves the same loss as its difference in log probabilities
logπ(a1 |s)−logπ(a2 |s) is the same. If c2 = 0, or we have no conflicting preferences, π̂ = [1,0,0] and
the implied Â = logπ̂ is undefined, implying some of the reward values are infinite. This means we do
not have enough data to accurately fit π ∗ . Next, we provide a construction for more general MDPs in
the presence of OOD actions.
A more general construction. Let the expert reward function rE to be bounded. We will interpret the
finite preference dataset as a matrix X as described in Section 3.2 and use N (X) to denote the null
space of X. For a vector u ∈ R|S×A| we use u(s,a) to index the vector at state s and action a. Assume
the following about X:


      1. There exists a vector u ∈ N (X) such that for state action s,a contained in X, u(s,a) ̸= 0. In
         other words, the null space is non-trival on the support of Dpref .

      2. For every state in the dataset where there is an action such that u(s,a) ̸= 0, there exists at least
         one out-of-distribution (OOD) action aOOD not in the dataset. The indicator vector for s,aOOD
         is thus a basis vector for N (X).


Let π̂ be the minima of the CPL loss function. We will construct π̂ ′ as follows. Select a vector
u ∈ N (X) that is non-zero for at least one s,a pair in X. As u ∈ N (X), we have that LCPL (π̂,Dpref ) =
LCPL (elogπ̂+u ,Dpref ). However, elogπ̂+u violates the policy constraint as it may not integrate to one. We
can fix this problem by adding or removing probability mass from the OOD actions we have assumed
exist at states where u is non-zero. We do this by constructing another vector v ∈ N (X) by choosing
one aOOD at each state without loss of generality. By examining the total sum of probabilities of the
modified policy,
                                ∑︂                ∑︂
                         ∀s ∈ X, π̂eu(s,a) =           π̂(a|s)eu(s,a) +π̂(aOOD |s)
                                  a             a̸=aOOD

we can normalize the sum using the indicator vectors for s,aOOD , which are necessarily in the nullspace
N (X). ∑︁
        Consider a vector v such that at each state s, v(s,a) = 0 except for at aOOD , where v(s,aOOD ) =
log(1− a̸=aOOD π̂(a|s)eu(s,a) )−logπ̂(aOOD |s). Then,
                    ∑︂                  ∑︂
             ∀s ∈ X, π̂eu(s,a)+v(s,a) =    π̂(a|s)eu(s,a) +π̂(aOOD |s)ev(s,aOOD ) = 1
                       a                    a̸=aOOD

As v is formed from a linear combination of basis vectors of N (X), v ∈ N (X). Consequently,
LCPL (π̂,Dpref ) = LCPL (elogπ̂+u+v ,Dpref ) and by the above construction π̂ ′ = π̂eu+v is a valid policy.
This completes the construction.
We have shown that an infinite number of policies can attain the same optima, just by shifting the
amount of probability assigned to OOD actions. For some of these solutions, the entire mode of the
policy is potentially out-of-distribution. In the offline setting, the pessimism principle dictates that we
should discourage modes that are out-of-distribution. We fix this by introducing regularization.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4     C ONSERVATIVE B IAS R EGULARIZATION

CPL loss translates a relative weighting between preferences to a policy, but does not employ any
mechanism to ensure the learned policy is close to the dataset. In the offline setting, this can be detri-
mental if the learned policy incorrectly extrapolates to out of distribution actions. A similar approach,
under the name of pessimism or conservatism, is commonly seen in offline RL literature (Levine et al.,
2020; Jin et al., 2021; Sikchi et al., 2023b). As expalined in Section 3.2, we want to learn policies that
have a high-probability on the dataset. However, there are many datasets that potentially have the the
∑︁ loss,
same         as LCPL depends
                          ∑︁ only      on the difference in probability for each preference comparison, or
        t                         t
  σ + γ   logπ(a t |st )−   σ − γ   logπ(a t |st ), and thus constants added to the log probabilities of each
segment cancel. However, we would prefer that a higher loss is given when the policy is assigns lower
probability to actions in the dataset.
To remedy this, we introduced bias regularizer λ ∈ (0,1) in Section 3, which leads to the modified
preference loss:


                                                     exp σ+ γ t αlogπ(a+    +
                                [︃                      ∑︁                                    ]︃
                                                                       t |st )
      LCPL(λ) (π,Dpref ) = EDpref −log                                                − −       .
                                       exp σ+ γ t αlogπ(a+   +
                                          ∑︁                          ∑︁      t
                                                         t |st )+expλ    σ − γ αlogπ(at |st )

Next, we prove that this loss discourages the policy from learning modes that are out-of-distribution,
starting with the proposition from the main text.
Proposition 2. Consider a comparison σ + ≻ σ − from Dpref and an arbitrary comparison σ ′+ ≻ σ ′−
such that LCPL (π,σ + ≻ σ − ) = LCPL (π,σ ′+ ≻ σ ′− ) for a fixed policy π. If σ+ γ t logπ(a+   +
                                                                              ∑︁
                                                                                            t |st ) >
∑︁      t      + +                       +    −                   ′+    ′−
  σ ′+ γ logπ(at |st ), then LCPL(λ) (π,σ ≻ σ ) < LCPL(λ) (π,σ ≻ σ ).

Succinctly, this proposition states that if preference comparisons each achieve the same loss, the less
likely comparisons under the policy (in this case σ ′+ ≻ σ ′− ), will have higher regularized CPL loss.
Essentially, this shows that the regularized objective encourages the policy to have higher likelihood
on the provided comparisons    ∑︁than any other potential∑︁
                                                         comparison that exists. Proof. By the stated
assumptions, it must be that σ′+ γ t logπ(at |st )+δ = σ+ γ t logπ(at |st ) for some δ > 0. As the two
comparisons also have the same CPL Loss, their logits must be the same, or
           ∑︂                     ∑︂                  ∑︂                    ∑︂
               γ t logπ(at |st )− γ t logπ(at |st ) =    γ t logπ(at |st )−   γ t logπ(at |st ).
            σ+                       σ−                          σ ′+                     σ ′−

                 the same δ must hold for the negative segments, or σ′− γ t log π(at |st ) + δ =
                                                                                      ∑︁
Consequently,
       t
∑︁
  σ − γ logπ(at |st ). We can then examine the regularized CPL loss under each comparison. First, we
evaluate the finite regularized loss for σ + ≻ σ − , algebraically simplified for clarity:
                                                         exp σ+ γ t αlogπ(at |st )
                                                             ∑︁
         LCPL(λ) (π,σ + ≻ σ − ) = −log       ∑︁                             ∑︁
                                         exp σ+ γ t αlogπ(at |st )+expλ σ− γ t αlogπ(at |st )
                                                (︄                                         )︄
                                                   ∑︂                     ∑︂
                                                         t                     t
                                = −loglogistic          γ logπ(at |st )−λ γ logπ(at |st )
                                                           σ+                        σ−
                                          (︄          (︄                                              )︄)︄
                                             ∑︂                  ∑︂
                                = log 1+exp λ γ t logπ(at |st )−   γ t logπ(at |st )
                                                            σ−                       σ+
                                                                   ′+    ′−
We can then compare this to the regularized loss for σ ≻ σ .
                              (︄       (︄                                      )︄)︄
                                           ∑︂                ∑︂
              ′+   ′−                           t                t
 LCPL(λ) (π,σ ≻ σ ) = log 1+exp λ γ logπ(at |st )−              γ logπ(at |st )
                                                    σ ′−                      σ ′+
                                (︄             (︄                               )︄)︄
                                       ∑︂                   ∑︂
                                          t                    t
                          = log 1+exp λ (γ logπ(at |st )−δ)− (γ logπ(at |st )−δ)
                                                    σ−                               σ+
                                (︄                                 (︄                     )︄)︄
                                                  ∑︂                  ∑︂
                          = log 1+exp(δ(1−λ))exp λ γ t logπ(at |st )−    γ t logπ(at |st )
                                                                        σ−                       σ+



                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The key step in the above is substituting the relationship between the log probabilities of the comparisons.
As δ > 0 and 0 < λ < 1, it can easily be seen that the loss is lower for σ + ≻ σ − , letting us conclude that
                             LCPL(λ) (π,σ + ≻ σ − ) < LCPL(λ) (π,σ ′+ ≻ σ ′− )

We can extend this proposition to the regularized CPL loss over entire datasets as follows:
For a fixed policy π, consider two preference datasets Dn = {(σi+ ,σi− )}ni=1 and     ′      ′+ ′− n
                                                                                 ∑︁ Dn = {(σi ,σi )}i=1
                                                                 ′
such that ∀m = 1, 2, ..., n, LCPL (Dm , π) = LCPL (Dm              , π). Then, if σ′+ γ t log π(at |st ) ≤
                                                                                    i
        t
∑︁
  σ + γ logπ(at |st ) for all i and strictly for at least one i,
    i


                                         LCPL(λ) (Dn ,π) < LCPL(λ) (Dn′ ,π)

The proof of this amounts to first noticing that, because the preference losses are the same for every
ordered subset, the losses for the ith datapoints in Dn′ and Dn must be the same. Then, we can repeatedly
apply Proposition 2. Since the inequality is strict at at-least one datapoint, the regularized loss will be
strictly lower.
We can construct datasets for which this is applicable. For example, consider a dataset D containing a
total ordering over n segments, σ 1 ⪰ σ 2 ⪰ ... ⪰ σ n . The unregularized loss for this policy and dataset is
LCPL (π,D). We can construct another dataset D′ over a different set of totally ordered segments from
anywhere in the state space σ ′1 ⪰ σ ′2 ⪰ .. ⪰ σ ′n such that:
                               ∑︂                         ∑︂
                                   γ t logπ(at |st )+δ =       γ t logπ(at |st )
                                  σ ′i                       σi

for all i = 1,2,...,n and some δ ≥ 0.

B.5     CPL FOR R ANKINGS

We can derive a version of CPL for ranking data using a Plackett-Luce model (Plackett, 1975). We
denote the chosen ranking as a permutation τ : [K] → [K] where K is the number of segments presented,
σ 1 ,...,σ K . The Plackett-Luce model under regret based preferences is:

                                               K                    τ (k) τ (k)
                                               exp στ (k) γ t A∗ (st ,at )
                                               ∏︂  ∑︁
                              1          K
                      P (τ |σ ,...,σ ) =
                                                                  t ∗ τ (j) ,aτ (j) )
                                             ∑︁K       ∑︁
                                         k=1   j=k exp   σ τ (j) γ A (st      t

This model generalizes to Bradley-Terry (Bradley & Terry, 1952) when K = 2. To learn the opti-
mal policy, we maximize the log likelihood of the above and make the same substitution as CPL,
αlogπ ∗ (a|s) = A∗ (s,a). This gives us the CPL loss function for rankings, which can be seen as a
verison of the InfoNCE objective. Without loss of generality, we order the permutations τ such that
σ 1 ⪰ σ 2 ⪰ ... ⪰ σ K .
                                                  [︄ K                                          ]︄
                                                           exp στ (k) γ t αlogπθ (akt |skt )
                                                     ∑︂        ∑︁
          LCPL (πθ ,Drank ) = E(σ1 ,...,σK )∼Drank − log ∑︁K       ∑︁                    j j
                                                                              t
                                                     k=1   j=k exp   σ τ (j) γ αlogπθ (at |st )

Except for the sum over k, this is the exact objective from Oord et al. (2018) where the scores are the
discounted sum of log probabilities over the segments.

B.6     D IRECT P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION AS SPECIAL CASE OF CPL

Reduction via Maximum Entropy Advantage. Note that by the Bellman equation,
                   A∗ (s,a) = Q∗ (s,a)−V ∗ (s,a) = rE (s,a)+γEs′ [V ∗ (s′ )]−V ∗ (s)
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) assumes the contextual-bandits setting, thus the MDP terminates after
a single step and there is no next state s′ . As we can see from the above, in this setting, A∗ (s,a) =
rE (s,a) − V ∗ (s). DPO also assumes that all preferences start from the same state s, and thus only
actions a+ and a− differ. This is consistent with RLHF on LLMs as humans score “responses” to fixed
prompts.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The regret preference model becomes:
                                                 exprE (s,a+ )−V ∗ (s)
                   PA∗ σ + ≻ σ − =
                      [︁        ]︁
                                      exprE (s,a+ )−V ∗ (s)+exprE (s,a− )−V ∗ (s)
                                             exprE (s,a+ )
                                    =
                                      exprE (s,a+ )+exprE (s,a− )
which is the same preference model used in DPO. From here the same conservative deriva-
tion as DPO can be applied by noting that, for KL-constrained contextual bandits, π ∗ (a|s) =
         ∗        ∗                         ∗
µ(a|s)eQ (s,a)−V (s) = µ(a|s)erE (s,a)−V (s) for reference distribution µ. Solving for rE , we can
perform a substitution just like in CPL to arrive at the DPO objective.
CPL under Constrained Regret Preferences. We can also consider a setting where users provide
preferences constrained to a reference distribution µ. This might arise in scenarios where users are only
shown a fixed set of behaviors, and do not extrapolate far beyond them. Though we do not believe this
premise has previously been considered, it leads to an interesting result.
Assume preferences to be distributed according to the KL constrained advantage function. In this
                              ∗
setting, π ∗ (a|s) = µ(a|s)eA (s,a) and by substitution the CPL loss becomes
                                                                             πθ (a+    +
                                                                                   t |st )
                                      ⎡                                                                      ⎤
                                                          exp σ+ γ t αlog µ(a
                                                              ∑︁
                                                                                  + +
                                                                                    |s  )
  LCPL (πθ ,Dpref ) = E(σ+,σ− )∼Dpref ⎣−log                                       t   t
                                                                                                     − −
                                                                                                             ⎦.
                                               ∑︁            πθ (a+   +
                                                                  t |st )
                                                                              ∑︁         t αlog πθ (at |st )
                                            exp σ+ γ t αlog µ(a   + +
                                                                   |s )
                                                                          +exp    σ −  γ        µ(a− |s− )
                                                                   t   t                           t   t


which is essentially a multi-step generalization of DPO which has not previously been considered. In
the next section, we expand on this as a variant of CPL.

C    VARIANTS OF CPL

In the main body of the paper, we presented the version of CPL which we found to consistenly attain
good performance. In some of our experiments, we also considered two other variants of CPL. We
detail these below.
BC-Regularized CPL. Instead of using our biased conservative regularization from An et al. (2023),
we consider using a simple BC regularizer. This can be derived by considering the objective:
                         minLCPL (πθ ,Dpref ) s.t. Es∼ρµ [DKL (µ(·|s)||π(·|s)] < ϵ
                          π

Relaxing the problem via Lagrangian duality with langrangian β, we arrive at a BC regularized version
of CPL.

                              minLCPL (πθ ,Dpref )−βE(a,s)∼ρµ [logπ(a|s)]
                                π

We refer to this method as CPL (BC).
KL Constrained CPL. We can also consider the setting where preferences are assumed to be distributed
according to the constrained advantage function. Though in practice we sample preferences according
to the maximum entropy advantage function, we found this approach to still work in many settings.
First, we learn the reference distribution µ using behavior cloning. Then, we use constrained CPL with
bias regularization, making the final loss function:
                                                                               πθ (a+    +
                                                                                     t |st )
                                          ⎡                                                                 ⎤
                                                               exp σ+ γ t αlog µ(a
                                                                    ∑︁
                                                                                    + +
                                                                                    t |st )
LCPL-KL(λ) (πθ ,Dpref ) = E(σ+,σ− )∼Dpref ⎣−log                                                             ⎦
                                                    ∑︁           πθ (a+   +
                                                                      t |st )
                                                                                ∑︁             πθ (a−   −
                                                                                                    t |st )
                                                exp σ+ γ αlog µ(a+ |s+ ) +exp σ− λγ t αlog µ(a
                                                          t
                                                                                                    − −
                                                                                                     |s )
                                                                           t   t                           t   t



We refer to this method as CPL (KL).
CPL with Dense Preferences. When learning from “dense” preference data, it is possible to augment
the batch to include more comparisons using the transitive property. Specifically, given a batch of b


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


segments, we compute all possible pairwise comparisons within a batch:

                    b−1 ∑︂
                        b−1
                                                                                  exp σi γ t αlogπθ (ait |sit )
                   ∑︂                                                                 ∑︁
      LCPL(λ)-D = −         1{σi ≻ σj }log
                                                                    exp σi γ t αlogπθ (ait |sit )+expλ σj γ t αlogπθ (ajt |sjt )
                                                                       ∑︁                             ∑︁
                                 i=0 j=0



This provides as much contrastive signal per-batch as possible. We applied this technique to our CPL
experiments with images, and found that it lead to a slight increase in performance for some tasks.



D          E XTENDED R ESULTS

In this section we provide our full experimental results:


              1. Learning curves from state for CPL, baselines, and variants described in Appendix C.

              2. Learning curves from images for CPL and baselines.

              3. Scaling results for CPL and P-IQL with different sized dense datasets and fixed sparse datasets
                 with a varying number of comparisons.

              4. Results when varying the number of comparisons for a fixed dataset.

              5. More Hyper-parameter ablations, include temperature and pretraining.

              6. D4RL real human results.


D.1                S TATE L EARNING C URVES


                                                                  MetaWorld State 2.5K Dense
              0.9
                               Bin Picking                                   Button Press                                Door Open
                                                           0.30                                           0.9
              0.8                                          0.25                                           0.8
    Success Rate


              0.7                                          0.20                                           0.7
              0.6                                          0.15                                           0.6
              0.5                                          0.10
                                                                                                          0.5
              0.4                                          0.05
                                                                                                          0.4
                      100000 200000 300000 400000 500000             100000 200000 300000 400000 500000         100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                              Drawer Open                                     Plate Slide                                Sweep Into
                                                                                                          0.8
              0.9
                                                            0.6                                           0.6
    Success Rate


              0.8
                                                            0.5                                           0.4
              0.7
              0.6                                           0.4                                           0.2

              0.5                                           0.3                                           0.0

                      100000 200000 300000 400000 500000             100000 200000 300000 400000 500000         100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                             Training Steps                                 Training Steps                             Training Steps
                     SFT       P-IQL          PPO           CPL (BC)           CPL
Figure 3: State-based results in MetaWorld with 2.5K segments and dense comparisons. This plot also
shows CPL BC. The dotted vertical line indicates when BC pretraining stops for CPL, SFT, and PPO.
We show a KL-coefficient of 2 for PPO, which uses 3.84 million extra state-action pairs.


                                                                                21
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             MetaWorld State 20K Sparse
                                             Bin Picking               0.4
                                                                                       Button Press                                      Door Open
                          0.8                                                                                       0.9
                                                                       0.3                                          0.8

                Success Rate
                          0.6
                          0.4                                          0.2                                          0.7

                          0.2                                                                                       0.6
                                                                       0.1
                          0.0                                                                                       0.5
                                                                       0.0
                                  100000 200000 300000 400000 500000           100000 200000 300000 400000 500000               100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                            Drawer Open                                 Plate Slide                                      Sweep Into
                          0.9
                                                                       0.6                                          0.8
                          0.8
                Success Rate


                                                                                                                    0.7
                                                                       0.5
                          0.7
                                                                                                                    0.6
                          0.6                                          0.4
                                                                                                                    0.5
                          0.5                                          0.3                                          0.4
                                  100000 200000 300000 400000 500000           100000 200000 300000 400000 500000               100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                           Training Steps                             Training Steps                                   Training Steps
                                 SFT         P-IQL          PPO        CPL (BC)          CPL (KL)        CPL
    Figure 4: State-based results in MetaWorld with 20K segments and sparse comparisons. This plot also
    shows CPL variants. The dotted vertical line is when BC pretraining stops for CPL, SFT, and PPO. We
    show a KL-coefficient of 2 for PPO, which uses 3.84 million extra state-action pairs.


    D.2                        I MAGE L EARNING C URVES


                                                                        MetaWorld Image 2.5K Dense
                                        Bin Picking               0.35                 Button Press                                           Door Open
          0.8                                                     0.30                                                    0.8
Success Rate


          0.7                                                     0.25                                                    0.7

          0.6                                                     0.20                                                    0.6
                                                                  0.15
          0.5                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                  0.10
          0.4                                                                                                             0.4
                      20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                  20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
                                       Drawer Open                                      Plate Slide                                           Sweep Into
          0.8                                                      0.6                                                    0.7
Success Rate


          0.7                                                      0.5                                                    0.6
                                                                   0.4                                                    0.5
          0.6
                                                                   0.3
          0.5                                                                                                             0.4
                      20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                  20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
                                       Training Steps                                 Training Steps                                        Training Steps
                      SFT                P-IQL          CPL

    Figure 5: Image-based results in MetaWorld with 2.5K segments and dense comparisons. This plot
    additionally shows the CPL BC variant. The dotted vertical line indicates when BC pretraining stops
    for CPL and SFT.


                                                                                          22
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    MetaWorld Image 20K Sparse
                                  Bin Picking                                            Button Press                                         Door Open
          0.9
                                                                 0.35                                                 0.8
          0.8                                                    0.30
Success Rate
                                                                                                                      0.7
          0.7                                                    0.25
                                                                 0.20                                                 0.6
          0.6
                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                      0.5
          0.5                                                    0.10
                        50000     100000    150000      200000                 50000      100000    150000   200000                 50000     100000     150000   200000
                                Drawer Open                                              Plate Slide                  0.8                     Sweep Into
          0.8
                                                                  0.6                                                 0.7
Success Rate


          0.7
                                                                  0.5                                                 0.6
          0.6                                                     0.4                                                 0.5

          0.5                                                     0.3                                                 0.4
                        50000     100000    150000      200000                 50000      100000    150000   200000                 50000     100000     150000   200000
                                Training Steps                                         Training Steps                                       Training Steps
                 SFT              P-IQL           CPL             CPL (BC)

    Figure 6: Image-based results in MetaWorld with 20K segments and sparse comparisons. This plot
    shows CPL variants in addition to baselines. The dotted vertical line indicates when BC pretraining
    stops for CPL and SFT.


    D.3            DATA S CALING


                                                                          MetaWorld State Dense
                                   Bin Picking                                           Button Press                                         Door Open
                                                                 0.35
                                                                                                                      0.90
          0.85
                                                                 0.30                                                 0.85
Success Rate


          0.80
                                                                 0.25                                                 0.80
          0.75                                                   0.20                                                 0.75
          0.70                                                   0.15                                                 0.70
                                                                                                                      0.65
                 1000      2500            5000           7500          1000      2500             5000        7500          1000      2500            5000        7500
                                  Drawer Open                                             Plate Slide                                         Sweep Into
                                                                 0.65
          0.85                                                   0.60                                                 0.75
          0.80                                                   0.55                                                 0.70
          0.75                                                   0.50
                                                                                                                      0.65
          0.70                                                   0.45
                                                                                                                      0.60
                 1000      2500            5000           7500          1000      2500             5000        7500          1000      2500            5000        7500
                                  Dataset Size                                            Dataset Size                                        Dataset Size
                 P-IQL              CPL

    Figure 7: Scaling on state-based MetaWorld environments for different sized dense comparison
    datasets.


                                                                                           23
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           MetaWorld State Sparse, 5000 Segments
                                           Bin Picking                                                             Button Press                                                    Door Open
          0.90
                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                       0.85
          0.85
Success Rate
                                                                                     0.30
          0.80                                                                       0.25                                                              0.80
          0.75                                                                       0.20
                                                                                                                                                       0.75
          0.70                                                                       0.15
          0.65                                                                       0.10
                 2        4                     8                               16           2           4            8                           16             2      4              8                  16
                                          Drawer Open                                                              Plate Slide                                                     Sweep Into
                                                                                                                                                       0.80
          0.90
                                                                                     0.60                                                              0.75
          0.85
          0.80                                                                       0.55                                                              0.70
          0.75
          0.70                                                                       0.50                                                              0.65
          0.65
                 2        4                     8                               16           2           4            8                           16             2      4              8                  16
                         Comparisons per Segment                                                         Comparisons per Segment                                       Comparisons per Segment
                 P-IQL                         CPL

    Figure 8: Scaling on state-based MetaWorld environments for 5000 segments varying the number
    of comparisons per segment. We find that for these results, P-IQL’s performance sometimes goes
    down. Inspecting our training logs reveals that this is likely due to the reward function underfitting. For
    example, on Door Open, the reward modeling loss is near zero with only 2 comparisons per segment
    (10K comparisons total, which is the amount we tuned our hyper-parameters for). With 16 comparisons
    per segment, the loss ends near 0.16. This highlights an additional limitation of P-IQL: it requires
    tuning an addition reward model, which can be very sensitive to its training parameters. CPL removes
    this additional complexity, and is thus easier to scale.


    D.4              A DDITIONAL A BLATIONS


                                                                                Drawer Open State 20k Sparse, Segment Size Ablation
                                                        8                                           16                                   32                                       64
                                                                          0.9
                                                                                                                      0.9                                     0.9
                                   0.9                                    0.8
                                   0.8                                    0.7                                         0.8                                     0.8
                         Success Rate


                                   0.7                                    0.6                                         0.7                                     0.7
                                                                          0.5
                                   0.6                                                                                0.6                                     0.6
                                                                          0.4
                                   0.5                                                                                0.5
                                                                          0.3                                                                                 0.5
                                   0.4
                                          100000 200000 300000 400000 500000         100000 200000 300000 400000 500000     100000 200000 300000 400000 500000       100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                                 Training Steps                             Training Steps                         Training Steps                           Training Steps
                                         SFT         P-IQL         CPL (BC)              CPL (KL)            CPL


    Figure 9: Results varying the size of segments on Drawer Open from State. The dataset was fixed to
    20K segments with 10K comparisons, but the size of each segment was varied.


                                                                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Walker-Med-Exp                Walker-Med-Replay                       Hopper-Med-Exp             Hopper-Med-Replay
 P-IQL                       99.9 ± 6.2                        71.6 ± 5.9                        88.6 ± 3.6                     60.2 ± 20.6
 PT                          110.2 ± 0.8                       76.6 ± 3.2                        86.7 ± 6.8                     78.9 ± 10.3
 CPL                         109.2 ± 0.2                       48.3 ± 3.7                       109.1 ± 0.7                     72.4 ± 3.1

Table 3: Results on the D4RL benchmark from real human feedback from Kim et al. (2023). “PT”
denotes the original Preference Transformer baseline which uses the IQL algorithm after learning a
transformer-based reward model.


                                                                    MetaWorld State 2.5K Dense
                                 Bin Picking                 0.35              Button Press                                Door Open
                0.8
                                                             0.30                                           0.8
                0.7
      Success Rate


                                                             0.25
                0.6                                                                                         0.6
                                                             0.20
                0.5
                                                             0.15                                           0.4
                0.4
                                                             0.10
                        100000 200000 300000 400000 500000             100000 200000 300000 400000 500000         100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                Drawer Open                                     Plate Slide                                Sweep Into
                0.9                                                                                         0.8
                                                              0.6
                0.8
      Success Rate


                                                                                                            0.7
                                                              0.5
                0.7                                                                                         0.6
                                                              0.4
                0.6                                                                                         0.5
                                                              0.3                                           0.4
                0.5
                        100000 200000 300000 400000 500000             100000 200000 300000 400000 500000         100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                               Training Steps                                 Training Steps                             Training Steps
                       CPL        CPL (No Pretrain)

Figure 10: Results with and without pretraining on MetaWorld state with 2.5K Dense segments.
Interestingly, performance can be higher without pretraining.


D.5                  D4RL R EAL -H UAMN P REFERENCE R ESULTS



To demonstrate both the applicability of the regret preference model and performance of CPL, we
perform additional experiments with real-human preferences. Specifically, we adopt the benchmarks
from Kim et al. (2023) which use either 100 (expert) or 500 (replay) real human preferences on datasets
from the D4RL benchmark (Fu et al., 2020). To faciliate learning from such a limited number of
queries, we modified CPL by first learning a logistic regression model to predict the users preference
P [σ + ≻ σ − ] following An et al. (2023). Critically, this is not a reward or advantage function as it
takes entire segments as inputs, not single state-action pairs. We then use this model to relabel the
offline D4RL data with dense preferences for CPL. We borrow logistic regression model borrows
the architecture from Kim et al. (2023) and do not use BC pretraining. Our results can be found in
Table 3. CPL has the best performance by a large margin in Hopper-Medium-Exp, but performs worse
in Walker-Medium-Replay. We posit that this is because the preferences for this dataset, may not
closely follow the regret-based model as per discussions with the authors of Kim et al. (2023), they
were collected by a single user with a pre-planned rules-based approach. Nonetheless, CPL is still able
to perform well on these tasks with only 100 or 500 human preferences, and no value or Q-function
learning.


                                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Human Feedback D4RL Locomotion Benchmark
                                               Walker2D Medium Expert                                Walker2D Medium Replay
                                                                                        0.8
                             1.0


               Normalized Score
                             0.8                                                        0.6
                             0.6
                                                                                        0.4
                             0.4
                                                                                        0.2
                             0.2
                                   0.0       0.2       0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8    1.0
                                                                                 1e6                                                  1e6
                                                   Hopper Medium Expert                                   Hopper Medium Replay
                                                                                        1.0
                             1.0
               Normalized Score

                                                                                        0.8
                             0.8
                             0.6                                                        0.6

                             0.4                                                        0.4
                             0.2                                                        0.2

                                   0.0       0.2       0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8    1.0
                                                      Training Steps              1e6                        Training Steps           1e6
                                     P-IQL             PrefTransformer          CPL

                                         Figure 11: Results for the D4RL human preference datasets.



E     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS .

Our datasets and code are publicly released at https://github.com/jhejna/cpl.


E.1   E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

We use a modified version of the MetaWorld environments (Yu et al., 2020) in our experiments, which
we found necessary to obtain good regret-based preference labels. MetaWorld was designed for
Meta-RL, and thus by default hides the goal from the state spaces. Prior works like Lee et al. (2021),
have randomized the goal but left it hidden, making the reward function stochastic. We randomize
the goal, but make it observable to remove reward stochasticity. We additionally randomize the initial
position of the arm, which is not done by default. This increases data coverage but also leads to more
robust policies. Finally, in MetaWorld v2 the state by default includes object and proprioceptive history.
We remove proprioceptive history to make the environment more Markovian.


E.2   DATASETS AND P REFERENCE L ABELING

In Section 4 we provided details on how we generated our datasets. Though we tried to select suboptimal
SAC checkpoints that achieves approximately a 50% success rate, there was some variance. In Table 4
we show the overall success rate of trajectories in the rollout dataset for each environment. We also
apply gaussian noise of standard deviation 0.3 when collecting rollouts. Next, we provide further
details on how we generated accurate regret-based labels.

Env                      Bin Picking                   Button Press            Door Open            Drawer Open               Plate Slide   Sweep Into
Success Rate             55.6%                         15.56%                  53.96%               60.12%                    34.4%         42.25%

      Table 4: Success rate of suboptimal checkpoints used for generating the rollout datasets.

First, we train an Oracle SAC policy to obtain Q∗ and π ∗ . To ensure low TD-error on the offline rollout
dataset, we add all rollouts to the replay buffer of the SAC model before we start training. We then
run SAC as usually, collecting online data, but with a sufficiently large replay buffer such that no data
rollout data is overridden.
After training the policy, we estimate regret labels for entire segments at a time by writing the negated
regret in terms of the value function and reward. We find that this lowers variance. Under deterministic


                                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dynamics, it can be shown that:
                                                            ∑︂                   ∑︂
                                         −regret(σ) =         γ t A∗ (st ,at ) =   γ t (Q∗ (st ,at )−V ∗ (st ))
                                                             σ                                 σ
                                                            ∑︂
                                                          =   γ t (r(st ,at )+γV ∗ (st+1 )−V ∗ (st ))
                                                             σ
                                                                                                   k−1
                                                                                                   ∑︂
                                                          = γ k V ∗ (sk )−V (s0 )+                       γ t r(st ,at )
                                                                                                   t=0


We then estimate V ∗ (s) = Ea∼π∗ (·|s) [Q∗ (s, a)] by evaluating the SAC Q function on 64 MCMC
samples from the policy. Accurately estimating the optimal advantage function over the entire sub-
optimal rollout dataset was difficult. We found that this procedure lead to the best results in comparison
to other means of estimating the advantage, like directly evaluating Q∗ (s,a)−V ∗ (s), using αlogπ(a|s)
per the bijection in maximum entropy RL, or by using MCMC rollouts of the policy from states in a
segment. In the figure below we show how these options, though theoretically equivalent, do not agree
in practice.


                                            Bin Picking                                                               Drawer Open
                                                                        1.0                                                                    1.0
                           Sum             0.71     0.73         0.74                              Sum               0.73        0.74   0.69
                                                                        0.9                                                                    0.9
    Estimation Method


                                                                          Estimation Method


                          Q-V     0.71              0.62         0.71                           Q-V         0.73                 0.62   0.70
                                                                            % Agreement


                                                                                                                                                 % Agreement
                                                                        0.8                                                                    0.8


                         MCMC     0.73     0.62                  0.72   0.7                    MCMC         0.74     0.62               0.63   0.7

                                                                        0.6                                                                    0.6
                        LogProb   0.74     0.71     0.72                                      LogProb       0.69     0.70        0.63
                                                                        0.5                                                                    0.5
                                  Sum      Q-V     MCMC LogProb                                             Sum      Q-V        MCMC LogProb
                                         Estimation Method                                                         Estimation Method


                                            Plate Slide                                                                   Sweep Into
                                                                        1.0                                                                    1.0
                           Sum             0.67     0.61         0.64                              Sum               0.70        0.59   0.61
                                                                        0.9                                                                    0.9
    Estimation Method


                                                                          Estimation Method


                          Q-V     0.67              0.47         0.71                           Q-V         0.70                 0.48   0.73
                                                                            % Agreement


                                                                                                                                                 % Agreement


                                                                        0.8                                                                    0.8


                         MCMC     0.61     0.47                  0.50   0.7                    MCMC         0.59     0.48               0.44   0.7

                                                                        0.6                                                                    0.6
                        LogProb   0.64     0.71     0.50                                      LogProb       0.61     0.73        0.44
                                                                        0.5                                                                    0.5
                                  Sum      Q-V     MCMC LogProb                                             Sum      Q-V        MCMC LogProb
                                         Estimation Method                                                         Estimation Method



Figure 12: Comparing the agreement between different methods of estimating the advantage for
generating regret based preferences. We used the sum variant because we found that it usually had the
highest agreement across tasks (average of its row).


                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3   E VALUATION

Evaluating CPL in comparison to other RL baselines can be difficult, as CPL uses only supervised
learning, while P-IQL is RL based. Superivsed learning methods, like CPL can easily overfit the
training data. On the other hand, off-policy RL methods like P-IQL converge to a fixed point and
thus often take much longer to train before overfitting. While notable works in imitation learning
(Mandlekar et al., 2021) have reported the average of the maximum performance of each seed, we find
this to be a bit overly optimistic to randomness in evaluation episodes and assumes one can evaluate
every checkpoint. on the other hand, offline RL works like (Kostrikov et al., 2022), report evaluation
after a fixed amount of training, which can lead to overfitting for supervised approaches like CPL. We
take a middle-of-the-road approach when reporting numbers in Table 1.
Every 5000 steps for state-based experiments and every 2500 steps for image-based experiments we run
25 evaluation episodes. We then average evaluation performance across eight neighboring checkpoints
with a running average, totaling 200 evaluation episodes. We then average this value across seeds.
Finally, we take the maximum point of the average. This exactly corresponds to the peak of the learning
curves provided for all of our experiments. This evaluation procedure first averages performance over a
number of checkpoints and episodes, and then averages over seeds. This maximum-of-the-average
approach mitigates the over-optimism of average-of-the-maximum evaluation procedures like those
used in Mandlekar et al. (2021). At the same time, it assumes that we can reasonably stop training
before over-fitting begins.
For the D4RL Preference datasets results we follow the same methodology except perform 10 evaluation
episodes every 5000 steps following Kim et al. (2023).



E.4   H YPERPARAMETERS

Below we detail hyper-parameters for all methods. Note that we assumed all policies to be Gaussian.
For Metaworld we used a fixed variance and thus compute the log probability logπ(a|s) for CPL as
−||π(s)−a||22 . For the D4RL datasets we use a diagonal gaussian distribution with a learned variance
for each action dimension. For preference transformer we use the authors original codebase to re-run
their results. For CPL in D4RL, we implement the CPL loss function in the codebase from An et al.
(2023) which is based on Kim et al. (2023). We run results for P-IQL using the implementation from
Hejna & Sadigh (2023), but remove the data augmentation to be consistent with all other methods.
We left all other hyper-parameters, except for the temperatures of CPL, the same as the author’s
implementations.


      Hyperparameter                             State          Image Sparse      Image Dense
      Total Training Steps                        500k               200k             120k
      Pre-training Steps (except P-IQL)           200k                80k              40k
      Batch Size                                   96                 48               32
      Segment Size                                 64                 64               64
      Actor Dropout                               0.25                0.5              0.5
      Architecture                          [512, 512] MLP          DrQv2            DrQv2

Table 5: Common MetaWorld Hyper-parameters. Batch size refers to the number of comparisons
sampled from the dataset. So, a single batch contains 2× batch size × segment size total states. We use
the same batch size for all methods, even if they do not need to operate on full segments. Running so
many image-based experiments is computationally expensive. Thus, for the image based experiments
we lowered the batch size. Because our dense datasets had only 2.5K segments versus the 20K in our
sparse datasets, we trained for fewer steps. We also lowered the batch size because the comparisons
were more dense. Table 2 reports training speed for image results using the sparse datasets. We use the
same architecture for all methods. Pre-training was used for CPL and variants and SFT. Pre-training
steps counted towards the total training step budget, as shown in the learning curves. We found that
dropout helped all methods.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Hyperparameter         CPL       CPL (BC)             CPL (KL)           CPL for D4RL
       Learning Rate         0.0001       0.0001              0.0001               0.0001
       Temp α                  0.1          0.1                  0.1                 0.2
       Bias λ                  0.5           -                  0.75                 0.5
       BC Weight β             0.0          1.0                  0.0                 0.0
       LR Schedule              -            -          10% after pretraining         -
       γ                        1            1                    1                   1

                          Table 6: Hyper-parameters for CPL and variants.


Hyperparameter                  P-IQL
Expectile τ                       0.7                                     Hyperparameter        SFT
Temperature                     0.3333
                                                                          Learning Rate       0.0001
Bias λ                            0.5
γ                                0.99
Reward Net Steps                  50k
Learning Rate         0.0003 state, 0.0001 image

Table 7: Hyperparameters for P-IQL and SFT for MetaWorld. We closely follow details from Kostrikov
et al. (2022) and Hejna & Sadigh (2023) and tune parameters, particularly the number of reward net
steps, as it is crucial for performance. Parameters not listed are left to their defaults


                                  Hyperparameter               PPO
                                  Batch Size                    128
                                  Collection steps             4096
                                  Epochs per collection          10
                                  learning rate               0.0003
                                  KL reward weight             2 or 5
                                  GAE λ                        0.95
                                  Discount γ                   0.99
                                  Policy std-dev Limits      (0.5, 1.5)
                                  Activation                   Tanh

Table 8: PPO Hyperparameters. Note that we spent a lot of time tuning PPO to try and get better results.
We found that limited the standard deviation of the policy to be at least 0.5 was crucial, as well as
bounding the reward values of the pretrained reward model to stay between 0 and 1. We left the network
architecture the same as other baselines, but used a Tanh activation since it is suggested for PPO.


                                                   29
