Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE H ARDNESS OF O NLINE N ONCONVEX
O PTIMIZATION WITH S INGLE O RACLE F EEDBACK
 Ziwei Guan┬ž , Yi ZhouÔÇí & Yingbin Liang┬ž
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ohio State University┬ž
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of UtahÔÇí
 {guan.283, liang.889}@osu.edu, yi.zhou@utah.edu



                                              A BSTRACT
         Online nonconvex optimization has been an active area of research recently. Pre-
         vious studies either considered the global regret with full information about the
         objective functions, or studied the local regret with window-smoothed objective
         functions, which required access to unlimited number of gradient oracles per time
         step. In this paper, we focus on the more challenging and practical setting, where
         access to only a single oracle is allowed per time step, and take the local regret
         of the original (i.e., unsmoothed) objective functions as the performance metric.
         Specifically, for both settings respectively with a single exact and stochastic gra-
         dient oracle feedback, we derive lower bounds on the local regret and show that
         the classical online (stochastic) gradient descent algorithms are optimal in the
         class of linear-span algorithms. Moreover, for the more challenging setting with a
         single function value oracle feedback, we develop an online algorithm based on a
         one-point running difference gradient estimator, and show that such an algorithm
         achieves a local regret that a generic stochastic gradient oracle can best achieve.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Online optimization is a popular learning framework that models sequential decision-making in
a non-stationary environment, and it has attracted a lot of attention in the past decade (Hazan
et al., 2016; Orabona, 2019). In online optimization, an agent interacts with the environment by
selecting a sequence of control variables x1 , . . . , xt and receiving information about loss functions
f1 (┬Ě), . . . , ft (┬Ě) from the environment. Specifically, at each iteration t, the agent selects a control
variable xt based on the historical information about f1 , . . . , ftÔłĺ1 . After the selection has been made,
certain feedback about ft is revealed to the agent, who then selects the next control variable xt+1
based on the updated information. The goal of the agent is to select xt sequentially to minimize a
certain metric of regret, typically defined as the cumulative difference between the function value at
the chosen control variable and the minimal function value with hindsight information.

In the existing studies on online optimization, many efficient online algorithms have been proposed
to minimize different types of regret for convex objective functions, whose global minimum can be
efficiently achieved with gradient oracles (Agarwal et al., 2010; Suggala & Netrapalli, 2020; He╠üliou
et al., 2020; Zinkevich, 2003; Hall & Willett, 2013; Jadbabaie et al., 2015; Mokhtari et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2018). As a comparison, the more challenging online nonconvex optimization has not
been well explored yet. Specifically, the existing studies on online nonconvex optimization have
focused on two major settings. One line of work adopted the global regret as the performance metric
(Krichene et al., 2015; Agarwal et al., 2019; Lesage-Landry et al., 2020; He╠üliou et al., 2020), which
compares the algorithm output to the global minimum of the nonconvex objective functions. However,
accessing the global minimum of nonconvex functions is typically infeasible. Another line of work
considered the more feasible local regret (Hazan et al., 2017; Aydore et al., 2019; Hallak et al., 2021;
Guan et al., 2023), which compares the control variables to the stationary points of corresponding
nonconvex functions. Importantly, these nonconvex functions are smoothed versions of the online
nonconvex objective functions ft averaged over a sliding window. These studies designed online
algorithms that achieve a sublinear local regret of the smoothed nonconvex objective functions with a
sufficiently large window length. However, the local regret of window-smoothed functions can be
very different from that of the original online objective functions and hence may not accurately reflect


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the actual performance of the system, especially when the functions ft change rapidly. Therefore, we
are motivated to study the following fundamental problems in this work.
  ÔÇó Q1: What are the fundamental lower bounds on the local regret (without function smoothing)
    for online nonconvex optimization with different types of single oracle feedback, e.g., exact
    gradient, stochastic gradient, and function value oracles?
  ÔÇó Q2: What online learning algorithms can achieve these lower bounds on the local regret using
    only single oracle feedback of nonconvex functions?
1.1 O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
In this paper, we follow the line of research on the local regret of online nonconvex optimization, and
focus on the setting with only a single oracle feedback per time step. In particular, we study the local
regret of the original online objective functions (i.e., without window-smoothing). Below we discuss
the major challenges in each setting and summarize our contributions.
  ÔÇó Single Gradient Oracle (SGO) feedback, where only one gradient oracle is available at a
    time. In this setting, instantiating the existing analysis (Hazan et al., 2017; Guan et al., 2023) by
    taking the window size w = 1 provides an ÔäŽ(T ) lower bound on the local regret, which ignores
    the intrinsic function variation over time and can be overly pessimistic when the functions
    change slowly. We provide a tighter and problem-dependent lower bound on the local regret
    that captures how the function variation affects the hardness of the problem. Then, we show
    that the classical online gradient descent algorithm achieves the optimal regret bound for the
    class of linear-span algorithms.
  ÔÇó Single Stochastic Gradient Oracle (SSGO) feedback, where only one stochastic gradient
    oracle is available at a time and the local regret is harder to optimize. In this setting, the
    existing study (Guan et al., 2023) provides an ÔäŽ (T ) lower bound by taking window size
    w = 1, but it does not capture the impact of function variation and can be overly pessimistic.
    We characterize the challenge through establishing another tight lower bound on the expected
    local regret. Then, we show that the online stochastic gradient descent algorithm achieves the
    optimal regret for the class of linear-span algorithms.
  ÔÇó Single function value oracle (SVO) feedback, where only one function value oracle is
    available at a time. In this setting, the challenge lies in constructing a good gradient estimator
    with only one function value oracle.We found that online gradient descent with the classical
    one-point gradient estimator has poor performance due to large variance. To address this, we
    developed a one-point running difference gradient estimator. We show that such a zeroth-order
    gradient estimator, when applied to the online gradient descent algorithm, achieves an optimal
    local regret for the class of linear-span algorithms with generic stochastic gradient oracle.
The above three settings capture different application scenarios. The SGO setting applies to white-box
systems with known objective functions, where exact gradients can be calculated. However, many
systems can have various uncertainties, e.g., loss functions depending on random samples or systems
with intrinsic noise. In such a case, even if the system objective function is known, the calculation
of their gradients can still be stochastic, leading to the SSGO setting. Moreover, the SVO setting is
suitable to model black-box systems, where objective functions are unknown but only function values
can be queried. For example, the recommendation system can provide usersÔÇÖ ratings (i.e., reward
values), but the reward function following which users provide ratings is typically unknown.
1.2 R ELATED W ORK
Online convex optimization: Online convex optimization has been extensively studied in the past,
and we refer the readers to the standard textbooks (Hazan et al., 2016; Orabona, 2019; Shalev-Shwartz,
2012) and a recent survey (Hoi et al., 2021) to obtain a comprehensive understanding. Below we
summarize a few main directions on the topic.
Studies on online convex optimization can be generally divided into three categories based on which
notion of regret they are interested in and what feedback information a learner has for the design.
Extensive works such as Agarwal et al. (2010); Suggala & Netrapalli (2020); He╠üliou et al. (2020)
studied static regret, which is defined as the difference between cumulative losses and the minimum
cumulative losses with hindsight information. Many other works (Zinkevich, 2003; Hall & Willett,
2013; Jadbabaie et al., 2015; Mokhtari et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; He╠üliou et al., 2020) studied


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the dynamic regret, where the comparison is made to the function value at a given reference point
(typically chosen as a global minimum of the instantaneous objective function) at each time step.
Among these three lines of research, the studies on the dynamic regret (Zinkevich, 2003; Hall &
Willett, 2013; Jadbabaie et al., 2015; Mokhtari et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; He╠üliou et al., 2020)
are closest to this paper. Their development of upper bounds on the dynamic regret uses the Lipschitz
smoothness, gradient update direction, and the convexity of online functions. In particular, their upper
bounds involve various types of function variation such as the path length (defined as the summation
of differences between two adjacent global minimal variables) and the gradient variation. In our
study of online nonconvex optimization, the development of upper bounds on the dynamic regret
also uses the Lipschitz smoothness and the gradient update direction (which are the same as online
convex optimization). However, since there is no convexity property we can use here, we leverage
the Lipschitz smoothness of each objective function to connect the local regret to the cumulative
difference in function values, which leads to a different function variation we define in eq. (2).
Further, a number of works such as Hazan & Seshadhri (2009); Daniely et al. (2015); Zhang et al.
(2019); Garber & Kretzu (2022) studied the adaptive regret, which is defined as the static regret on
the subsets of all iterations, bridging between the dynamic regret and the static regret. Online convex
optimization has also been studied under function value feedback, which captures many practical
applications. In particular, Flaxman et al. (2005) and Saha & Tewari (2011) studied the setting
with one-point gradient estimators, and Agarwal et al. (2010) studied the setting with multiple-point
estimators. Further, Cao & Liu (2018); Kim & Lee (2023) studied functional constrained online
optimization and Yi et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2022) studied distributed online optimization with
both one-point and two-point estimators.
Online nonconvex optimization: One line of studies on online nonconvex optimization considered
the global regret as the performance metric, which is defined as the cumulative discrepancy between
the loss of the algorithm output and the lowest possible loss. Particularly, Krichene et al. (2015)
extended the Hedge algorithm to the continuum and showed it achieves a sublinear regret. Yang
et al. (2018) developed an improved algorithm based on the Hedge algorithm with a novel weighting
strategy. Agarwal et al. (2019) extends the bandit algorithm of follow-the-perturbed-leader to the
nonconvex setting, and Suggala & Netrapalli (2020) further showed that such an algorithm achieves
the optimal regret. Online nonconvex optimization has also been studied under certain assumptions
on nonconvex objective functions, such as the weak pseudo-convex condition (Gao et al., 2018)
and the Polyak-Lojasiewicz condition (Mulvaney-Kemp et al., 2022). Moreover, the global regret
minimization of online nonconvex functions has also been studied under the function value feedback
in Gao et al. (2018); He╠üliou et al. (2020; 2021); Gao et al. (2018).
Another line of research studied the more feasible local regret that compares the control variables
to the stationary points of window-smoothed nonconvex functions. Particularly, Hazan et al. (2017)
provided the first analysis, where the objective functions are smoothed via a sliding window and
developed a lower bound on the local regret. The authors further devised a nested-loop algorithm and
showed that it achieves the regret lower bound. Aydore et al. (2019) adopted the nested-loop type
algorithm to a dynamic environment application, and Hallak et al. (2021) adopted the same approach
and extended it to the setting with nonsmooth functions. Guan et al. (2023) considered the setting with
a limited number of feedback concerning the gradient or the function value of the window-smoothed
objectives and provided tight lower and upper bounds for linear-span algorithms. Our study follows
this line of research with the following main differences. First, we do not take window-smoothed
objective functions but rather focus on the original functions and their corresponding local regret and
provide a problem-dependent analysis based on the function variation. Second, all the algorithms
developed in the above studies require multiple feedback oracles concerning ft due to the window-
smoothing, whereas we study the settings with only a single oracle feedback of ft . It is worth noting
that the aforementioned previous studies on the complimentary regret metric based on window-
smoothed functions are still valuable, particularly for studying slowly changing environments. In the
future, it is interesting to continue their line of work and obtain refined problem-dependent bounds
based on function variations.
Gradient estimation with function value oracles: Various gradient estimation methods have
been applied to online optimization when there is only function value (i.e., bandit) feedback. The
performance of these gradient estimators highly affect the performance of their corresponding online
algorithms. Specifically, the conventional one-point gradient estimator was developed in Flaxman et al.
(2005); Dekel et al. (2015); Gasnikov et al. (2017) to estimate the gradient of a function based only


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on one function value. Two-point gradient estimators (Agarwal et al., 2010; Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017; Shamir, 2017) are also designed to estimate the gradient based on two function values and can
achieve much better performance over the conventional one-point estimator. Recently, Zhang et al.
(2022) proposed a novel one-point estimator which uses an immediate previous function value during
iterations to serve as the second function value in the gradient estimator to reduce the variance. Such
an estimator has been shown in Zhang et al. (2022) to achieve a much better performance than the
conventional one-point estimator but still performs weaker than the two-point estimator. Inspired
by such an estimator, in this paper, we propose a one-point running difference estimator for online
nonconvex optimization and show that it enjoys the same regret bound as two-point estimator.

2    P RELIMINARY
In this paper, we consider the online nonconvex optimization (ONO) problem with a sequence of
objective functions f1 , f2 , . . . , ft , . . .. The objective functions are smooth and bounded on Rd and
are generally nonconvex. We adopt the following standard assumption that is widely used in the
online optimization literature (Agarwal et al., 2010; Flaxman et al., 2005; Hazan et al., 2017; Aydore
et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Hallak et al., 2021).
Assumption 1. For all t Ôëą 1, function ft : Rd Ôćĺ R satisfies |ft (x)| ÔëĄ M for some M Ôëą 0 and
for all x Ôłł Rd . Moreover, there exist universal constants L0 , L1 Ôëą 0 such that for any x, y Ôłł Rd ,
|f (x) Ôłĺ f (y)| ÔëĄ L0 Ôłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą, and ÔłąÔłçf (x) Ôłĺ Ôłçf (y)Ôłą ÔëĄ L1 Ôłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą, where Ôłą ┬Ě Ôłą denotes the Ôäô2 norm.
At each iteration t, the agent first submits a control variable xt Ôłł Rd to the system based on the
historical feedback. After that, the feedback about objective function ft is revealed from the system,
and based on that, the agent further determines the next control variable. For such an ONO problem,
we study the following local regret.
                                                        XT
                             (Local regret): R(T ) :=       ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 .                          (1)
                                                           t=1
Intuitively, the local regret defined in eq. (1) compares the control variables to the stationary points
xÔłŚt that satisfies Ôłçft (xÔłŚt ) = 0. It can also be interpreted as the dynamic local regret because the
comparison baseline is a stationary point of the instantaneous objective function ft .
We note that the previous work of online nonconvex optimization (Hazan et al., 2017; Hallak et al.,
2021; Guan et al., 2023) studied the local regret with window-smoothing, which is defined as
            PT                                        Pt
Rw (T ) := t=1 ÔłąÔłçFt,w (xt )Ôłą, where Ft,w (x) := w1 i=tÔłĺw+1 fi (x) corresponds to the smoothed
objective function averaged over a sliding window of size w. It reduces to our definition of the local
regret in eq. (1) when w = 1. In Hazan et al. (2017); Hallak et al. (2021); Guan et al. (2023), the
window size w is chosen to be large so that the smoothed functions {Ft,w }t change slowly over
the iterations, making it easier to minimize the local regret. However, the local regret of window-
smoothed functions can be very different from that of the original functions and hence may not
accurately reflect the actual performance of the system, particularly when functions change rapidly.
In this work, we focus on online nonconvex optimization with single oracle feedback about ft per
iteration, and our goal is to develop algorithms that minimize the local regret in eq. (1). In particular,
we consider the following single oracle feedback settings:
      ÔÇó Single Gradient Oracle (SGO) feedback: At each time t, one can only access a single
        exact gradient oracle.
      ÔÇó Single Stochastic Gradient Oracle (SSGO) feedback: At each time t, one can only
        access a single stochastic gradient oracle.
      ÔÇó Single Value Oracle (SVO) feedback: At each time t, one can only access a single
        function value oracle.
We also define the following notion of function variation over time, a fundamental quantity that is
useful to characterize the local regret in the nonconvex setting.
                                          T
                                          X +1
                                  VT :=        sup |ftÔłĺ1 (x) Ôłĺ ft (x)|.                        (2)
                                                   d
                                         t=2 xÔłłR
The above function variation intuitively reflects how much the online learning objective functions
vary over time. In particular, when VT = 0, all ft ÔÇÖs are the same as f1 , and online learning problem


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reduces to an offline optimization problem. On the other hand, when VT = cT for some constant
c > 0, the number of objective functions ft that are totally different from all previous ones can scale
linearly with T . No algorithm can perform well for these rapidly changing functions ft because all
received information is about f1 up to ftÔłĺ1 , which contains little information about ft .

3    O NLINE N ONCONVEX O PTIMIZATION WITH SGO
Previous studies (Hazan et al., 2017; Hallak et al., 2021; Guan et al., 2023) of online nonconvex
optimization have been focusing on window-smoothed functions that require access to multiple
gradient oracles of ft . In this section, we study online nonconvex optimization with SGO, where only
a single access to the gradient oracle of ft is available at each time t.
3.1 L OWER B OUND ON L OCAL R EGRET UNDER SGO
In order to understand the complexity limit of the problem under SGO, we establish a lower bound
on the local regret. We first specify the algorithm class that we consider as follows.
Definition 1 (Linear-span (Nesterov, 2003)). The class of online learning algorithms A with SGO
feedback at each time generates
                            ( a sequence    of variables {xt }Ôł×t=1 according )    to
                                   X t
                    xt+1 Ôłł x1 +        at,i Ôłçfi (xi ) : at,i Ôłł R, i = 1, . . . , t .
                                      i=1
The above class of algorithms queries only a single gradient oracle each time step, and it covers many
widely used gradient-based algorithms, including gradient descent, accelerated gradient descent, etc.
The following theorem establishes the first lower bound on the local regret in online nonconvex
optimization for all linear-span algorithms with SGO feedback defined in Definition 1.
Theorem 1. Consider any algorithm A that satisfies Definition 1 and has access to a single gradient
oracle Ôłçft at each iteration. Then, for problems with the dimension d Ôëą ÔäŽ(1 + VT ), there exist
{ft }Ôł×
     t=1 with function variation VT (defined in eq. (2)) and satisfying Assumption 1, for which
R(T ) Ôëą ÔäŽ (1 + VT ).
Theorem 1 shows that the hardness of the problem over any linear-span algorithm is entirely deter-
mined by the function variation defined in eq. (2), i.e., the changes of the objective functions. If the
objective function ft is totally different from the previous functions, then all previous learning history
is not helpful, and the agent is forced to learn each ft from scratch. In such a case, the local regret
must be ÔäŽ(T ). Nonetheless, if the changes of functions are small and scale sublinearly with T , it can
be possible to achieve a sublinear regret.
As a comparison, although the existing works (Hazan et al., 2017; Guan et al., 2023) provided lower
bounds on the local regret that can instantiate to our setting of SGO (Hazan et al. (2017, Theorem
2.7) with w = 1 and Guan et al. (2023, Theorem 1) with w = 1 and ¤â = 0), their resulting lower
bounds do not capture the impact of the function variation VT . They are vacuous with the order of
ÔäŽ(T ). In contrast, our lower bound in Theorem 1 is tighter and problem-dependent by capturing how
the function variation affects the hardness of the problem.

Proof Outline of Theorem 1. The details of the proof can be found in Appendix A.1. The main idea
of the proof is as follows. Given a total budget of VT on the function variation, the objective function
can have ÔäŽ(1 + VT ) times of rapid change. Thus, we divide the total time steps into ÔäŽ(1 + VT ) blocks,
choose the same objective function within each block and change the objective function across blocks.
We then construct a series of functions whose gradients are orthogonal to each other and assign them
to these blocks, which hinders the agent from constructing Ôłçft (xt ) based on feedback from previous
blocks. This construction of {ft }Tt=1 forces the agent to restart the learning process in each block.
The agent suffers from a high value of ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 at the beginning of each restart, and thus the local
regret is doom to be ÔäŽ(1 + VT ).

3.2 L OCAL R EGRET OF O NLINE G RADIENT D ESCENT
Consider the simple online gradient descent (OGD) algorithm described in Algorithm 1, which clearly
belongs to the class of linear-span algorithms defined in Definition 1. At each iteration t + 1, the
OGD algorithm with constant stepsize ╬Ě > 0 takes the update
                                      xt+1 = xt Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔłçft (xt ).                                     (3)


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Online Gradient Descent (OGD)
    Input: Initial point x1 , stepsizes ╬Ě
    for t = 1, . . . , T do
      Update xt+1 based on eq. (3)
    end for

Our next result shows that OGD achieves the local regret O(1 + VT ) for online nonconvex optimiza-
tion, which matches the lower bound in Theorem 1. This implies that OGD is optimal in the class of
linear-span algorithms for online nonconvex optimization with SGO.
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Consider Algorithm 1 with initial point x1 = 0, and
stepsize ╬Ě = L11 . Then, we have R(T ) ÔëĄ O(1 + VT ).
The proof of Theorem 2 is included in Appendix A.2. The main idea is to leverage the Lipschitz
smoothness of each objective function to connect the local regret to the cumulative difference
PT
  t=1 ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 ) that is upper-bounded by VT .

4     O NLINE N ONCONVEX O PTIMIZATION WITH SSGO
In many practical online learning scenarios, the exact gradient feedback may not be available, and
one has access to only noisy stochastic gradient oracles. Thus, in this section, we consider the setting
where only a single stochastic gradient oracle (SSGO) is available at each time step. We adopt the
following standard unbiasedness and bounded variance assumptions on the stochastic gradient, which
is widely adopted in the online optimization literature (Agarwal et al., 2010; Flaxman et al., 2005;
Hallak et al., 2021; Hazan et al., 2017; Guan et al., 2023).
Assumption 2. For every t, the stochastic gradient gt (x) (ashan estimator of the itrue gradient
Ôłçft (x)) satisfies that for all x Ôłł Rd , E [gt (x)] = Ôłçft (x) and E Ôłągt (x) Ôłĺ Ôłçft (x)Ôłą
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            ÔëĄ ¤âg2 , where
¤âg2 is the variance of the stochastic gradient feedback.
4.1 L OWER B OUND ON L OCAL R EGRET WITH SSGO
We first establish a novel lower bound on the local regret of the class of linear-span algorithms defined
in Definition 1 in the nonconvex SSGO setting.
Theorem 3. Suppose that an algorithm A satisfies Definition 1 with
                                                                pÔłçft (xt ) replaced
                                                                                     by its stochastic
version gt (xt ). Then, for problems with the dimension d Ôëą ÔäŽ      T (1 + VT ) , there exist {ft }Ôł×
                                                                                                  t=1
with the function variation VT (defined in eq. (2)) and satisfying Assumption
                                                                              1 as well as {gt }Ôł×
                                                                                                t=1
satisfying Assumption 2, for which E [R(T )] Ôëą ÔäŽ ¤âg T (1 + VT ) .
                                                      p


Proof Outline of Theorem 3. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix B.2. Rather than taking the
sigmoid function as the basic example function in the proof of Theorem 1, we adopt the components
of hard-to-learn function in offline nonconvex optimization (Carmon et al., 2021; Arjevani et al.,
2022) to construct the hard case here, to capture how the randomness of the stochastic gradient can
hinder the learning process.

Theorem 3 provides the first meaningful lower bound on the local regret for online nonconvex
optimization with SSGO feedback. It captures how the regret scales with the variance of stochastic
gradients, the number of iterations, and the function variation. The existing result only provides a
vacuous ÔäŽ(T ) lower bound by taking w = 1 in Guan et al. (2023, Theorem 1).
Compared to the lowerp bound in Theorem 1 for the SGO setting, the lower bound in Theorem 3
is larger due to: (a) T (1 + VT ) Ôëą ÔäŽ(VT ) because VT ÔëĄ O(T ) and (b) the positive variance ¤âg .
Hence, stochastic gradients cause the problem to be harder than exact gradients.
4.2 L OCAL R EGRET OF O NLINE S TOCHASTIC G RADIENT D ESCENT
In this subsection, we show that the standard online stochastic gradient descent (OSGD) algorithm
achieves the lower bound on the local regret in the nonconvex setting with SSGO feedback.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Online Stochastic Gradient Descent (OSGD)
    Input: Initial point x1 , stepsizes ╬Ě
    for t = 1, . . . , T do
      Update xt+1 based on eq. (4)
    end for


At each t, the OSGD algorithm (see Algorithm 2) with constant stepsize ╬Ě > 0 takes the update
                                            xt+1 = xt Ôłĺ ╬Ěgt (xt ),                                       (4)
where gt is the stochastic gradient that satisfies Assumption 2.
Our lower bound in Theorem    p 3 implies that the lowest possible regret for the class of linear-span
algorithms to expect is O ¤âg T (1 + VT ) . The following theorem shows that such an optimal
rate for linear-span algorithms is attained by OSGD.
Theorem 4. Suppose
                  Assumptions     1 and 2 hold. Consider Algorithm 2 with initial point x1 = 0, and
                            q                                         p
stepsize ╬Ě = min 2L1 1 , ¤â1g 1+V
                               T
                                 T
                                     . Then, we have E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O ¤âg (1 + VT )T .


Proof Outline of Theorem 4. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix B.3. The main step lies in
decomposing the regret into the tracking error of the stationary points, which is bounded by O( 1+V
                                                                                                  ╬Ě ),
                                                                                                    T


and the variance of the stochastic gradient (by taking the conditional expectation given the history
information) which is bounded by O(╬Ě¤âg2 ). Then, the final regret bound can be obtained by the best
tradeoff between the tracking error and the variance via the stepsize ╬Ě.


Theorem 4 provides an upper bound on the expected value of the local regret. Next, we establish a
more refined characterization of the local regret with a high probability guarantee. To this end, we
first state the following boundedness assumption on the stochastic gradient.
Assumption 3. For any t and x Ôłł Rd , there exists a constant G > 0, such that the stochastic
gradient satisfies Ôłągt (x)Ôłą ÔëĄ G almost surely.
Theorem 5. Suppose Assumptions
                                 1 to 3 hold. Consider the OSGD Algorithm 2 with initial point
                                     q
x1 = 0 and stepsize ╬Ě = min 2L1 , ¤â1g 1+V
                             1
                                         T
                                           T
                                              . Then, for any 0 < ╬ż < 1, with probability at least
                           p                      p
1 Ôłĺ ╬ż we have R(T ) ÔëĄ O ¤âg (1 + VT )T + O ¤âg T log (1/╬ż) .

Theorem 5 shows that if the stochastic gradient feedback has a bounded norm, the local regret
concentrates around its expected value with high probability.


Proof Outline of Theorem 5. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix B.4. Below we summarize
our main proof steps. In the proof of Theorem 4, we have shown that conditioned on the filtration
Ft = ¤â(g1 (x1 ), . . . , gtÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 )), ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 ÔëĄ ft (xt )Ôłĺ E[ft (xt+1 )|Ft ] +L1 ╬Ě¤â 2
                                                                                          g
                                                               (1ÔłĺL1 ╬Ě)╬Ě             2(1ÔłĺL1 ╬Ě) . Based on the
above property, we can construct the following super-martingale sequence Z0 = 0, and Zt+1 =
                                             L1 ╬Ě¤â 2
Zt + ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 Ôłĺ ft (x(1ÔłĺL
                          t )Ôłĺft (xt+1 )
                               1 ╬Ě)╬Ě
                                         Ôłĺ 2(1ÔłĺL1g╬Ě) . It can be shown that |Zt Ôłĺ ZtÔłĺ1 | is bounded by a
certain constant. Then by applying the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality to {Zt }, we can obtain a high
probability upper bound on the local regret.


5     O NLINE N ONCONVEX O PTIMIZATION WITH SVO
In this section, we study the online nonconvex optimization problem with the agent having access to
only a single function value oracle (SVO) feedback at each time t.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1 A LGORITHM D ESIGN
The setting with SVO feedback is much more challenging than the gradient feedback because with
only a single function value, the gradient of the function cannot be estimated accurately. The
conventional one-point gradient estimator (Flaxman et al., 2005) has been used in online optimization
and is also widely adopted in offline gradient-free algorithms. The performance of such an estimator
is much worse than the standard two-point gradient estimator used previously in online optimization
(Agarwal et al., 2010). Albeit the great performance gain, the two-point estimator cannot be used in
our setting of SVO because it requires two function value oracles at each time step.
Hence, our goal here is to design an online algorithm that requires only a single function value oracle,
but achieves the same regret as that of a two-point estimator. To this end, we design the following
one-point gradient estimator based on the running difference of online function values:
                      b t (xt ) := dut (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 )) ,
                      Ôłçf                                                                            (5)
                                    ╬┤

where ut is drawn from the uniform distribution over unit sphere on Rd independently from history.
Such an estimator uses the consecutive value feedback to construct a similar residual structure as the
two-point estimator. Our idea is inspired by the one-point residual estimator proposed in Zhang et al.
(2022) for offline optimization but has a subtle yet critical difference. The one-point residual estimator
                                     b t (xt ) := dut f╬ż (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ f╬ż (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 ) , where

in Zhang et al. (2022) is given by Ôłçf               ╬┤      t                 tÔłĺ1
╬żt and ╬żtÔłĺ1 are two samples following the same distribution as the sampling variable ╬ż. Thus, both
f╬żt and f╬żtÔłĺ1 are unbiased noisy samples of E╬ż [f╬ż ]. However, in our one-point running difference
estimator, ft and ftÔłĺ1 are two online functions and can be very different. Their relationship is only
captured by the function variation over time. This difference causes a significant difference in the
theoretical analysis: our analysis relies on the function variation VT to bound the regret in online
optimization, whereas the analysis in Zhang et al. (2022) exploits the stochastic unbiased property
of the two functions in offline optimization. Compared to the one-point estimator used in Guan
et al. (2023), our estimator does not skip updates in every other iteration and thus is much more
sample efficient. We then propose an OGD-type algorithm (see Algorithm 3) for online nonconvex
optimization with SVO feedback, which uses the one-point running difference gradient estimator
given in eq. (5) to update the variable.

Algorithm 3 OGD with One-point Running Difference Estimation
  Input: Initial point x1 , stepsizes ╬Ě and parameter ╬┤
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
    Draw ut from the uniform distribution over the unit sphere and observe ft (xt + ╬┤ut )
         b t (xt ) = d (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 )) ut
    Let Ôłçf              ╬┤
    Let xt+1 = xt Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłçf  b t (xt )
  end for

5.2 R EGRET A NALYSIS
As aforementioned, the technical analysis of Algorithm 3 in online optimization is very different from
the one-point gradient residual estimator in offline optimization. In particular, our main technical
development lies in providing a novel upper bound on the magnitude of the one-point running
difference gradient estimator regarding the function variation (see Lemma 1). With such a property,
the local regret can be further bounded via the function variation.
Lemma 1. Suppose ╬Ě and ╬┤ are chosen satisfying ╬Ě ÔëĄ ╬┤/(4L0 d). For Algorithm 3, we have
                          2                      2             t
                                                           2
                                                               X                              2
                                                                 (f (x )Ôłĺf      ¤ä Ôłĺ1 (x¤ä ))
              Ôłçf
              b t (xt )           1
                              ÔëĄ 2tÔłĺ1 Ôłçf
                                     b 1 (x1 )       + 4d
                                                        ╬┤2
                                                                      ¤ä   ¤ä
                                                                              2tÔłĺ¤ä                + 16d2 L20 .   (6)
                                                               ¤ä =2


Proof Outline of Lemma 1. The proof of Lemma 1 is provided in Appendix C.1. It mainly relies on
two developments: (a) extracting the function variation from the form of the gradient estimator; and
(b) constructing the contraction of gradient norms by selecting sufficiently small stepsize.

Applying Lemma 1, we establish the following upper bound on the regret for Algorithm 3.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 6. Suppose
             p      Assumption 1 holds. Consider Algorithm 3 with initial point x1 = 0, per-
turbation ╬┤ = p(1 + VT )/T and stepsize ╬Ě = ╬┤/(4L0 d). Then, the expected local regret satisfies
E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O(d (1 + VT )T ).
The result in Theorem 6 indicates that our one-point running difference gradient estimator (when
applied to OGD) achieves the regret lower bound that a generic stochastic gradient oracle can best
achieve (i.e., Theorem 3), where the variance of our gradient estimator is at the order of O(d2 ). We
will also show below that our one-point estimator yields the same regret as the standard two-point
estimator. Both of the above facts indicate that Algorithm 3 achieves a desirable regret performance.

Proof Outline of Theorem 6. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix C.2. Differently from the
proof of Theorem 4, the main technical development here lies in upper-bounding the bias and
variance
  h      of our one-point
                i         running difference gradient estimator. More specially, the bias term satisfies
E Ôłçft (xt )|Ft = E ╬┤ ft (xt + ╬┤ut )ut |Ft = Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt ), which can be shown to be bounded by
                        d
    b
O(╬┤). The variance term has been bounded in Lemma 1. Then, the tradeoff between the bias, the
variance, and the tracking error of the stationary points via ╬┤ and ╬Ě provides the best regret bound.

Comparison to standard one-point and two-point estimators: Previous online optimization studies
(Flaxman et al., 2005) mainly adopted the conventional one-point gradient estimator, for which it
can be shown (see Appendix D.1) that the local regret of OSGD with such an estimator in online
nonconvex optimization is bounded as E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O(d(1 + VT ) 4 T 4 ). As a comparison, Theorem 6
                                                                1  3


obtained by our one-point running difference estimator achieves much smaller regret (note that VT
scales at most with the order of T , and can scale much slower than T ). Furthermore, it can be
shown that the local regret of OSGD
                                p with standard two-point gradient estimator (Agarwal et al.,
2010) satisfies E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O(d (1 + VT )T ) (in Appendix D.2). Clearly, Theorem 6 shows that
our one-point estimator achieves the same regret as the two-point estimator. This is the first result
in online nonconvex optimization that establishes that one function value oracle achieves the same
regret as two oracles.
Since Lemma 1 has already provided an upper bound on ÔłąÔłçf      b t (xt )Ôłą, we can further obtain the
following high probability upper bound on the local regret without making a further assumption on
the norm of ÔÇťgradientÔÇŁ as in Assumption 3.
Theorem 7. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Consider Algorithm 3 with initial point x1 = 0, pertur-
bation ╬┤ = (1 + VT )/T , and stepsize
                                 p ╬Ě = ╬┤/(4L0 d). Then,
                                                       for any 0 < ╬ż < 1, with probability at
least 1 Ôłĺ ╬ż we have R(T ) ÔëĄ O d T (1 + VT ) log (1/╬ż) .

Proof Outline of Theorem 7. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix C.3. Below we summarize
our main idea of the proof. In the proof of Theorem 6, we have obtained the following bound:
                                                                       h               i
               ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ ft (xt )Ôłĺf╬Ě t (xt+1 ) + L1 L0 d╬┤ + L21 ╬Ě E ÔłąÔłçf
                                                                         b t (xt )Ôłą2 Ft .

Based on the above bound, we construct the following super-martingale: Y0 = 0, and Yt+1 =
Yt + ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 + ft (xt+1╬Ě)Ôłĺft (xt ) Ôłĺ L1 L0 d╬┤ Ôłĺ L21 ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçf
                                                            b t (xt )Ôłą2 . We then construct a sequence of
scalar ct such that ct Ôëą |Yt+1 Ôłĺ Yt |. Finally, we obtain the probability bound on the local regret by
                                                                PT
applying Azuma-Hoeffding inequality and upper-bounding t=1 c2t .

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the online nonconvex optimization with a single oracle feedback per
time step. We take the local regret of original objective functions as performance metric and study
three single oracle settings: with an (exact) gradient oracle, with a stochastic gradient oracle, and
with a function value oracle. We provide the first regret lower bound for both the exact and stochastic
gradient oracles, and we show that the online (stochastic) gradient descent can achieve the optimal
local regret for the class of linear-span algorithms. For the setting with function value oracle, we
propose one-point running difference gradient estimator and show that incorporating such an estimator
into online gradient descent achieves a local regret that a generic stochastic gradient oracle can best
achieve for the class of linear-span algorithms.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of Z. Guan and Y. Liang was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation
under the grants CCF-1900145 and CCF-1761506.
Y. ZhouÔÇÖs work is supported by the National Science Foundation under grants CCF-2106216, DMS-
2134223, ECCS-2237830 (CAREER).

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Ofer Dekel, and Lin Xiao. Optimal algorithms for online convex optimization with
  multi-point bandit feedback. In Proc. Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 28ÔÇô40,
  2010.
Naman Agarwal, Alon Gonen, and Elad Hazan. Learning in non-convex games with an optimization
  oracle. In Proc. Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 18ÔÇô29. PMLR, 2019.
Yossi Arjevani, Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, Dylan J Foster, Nathan Srebro, and Blake Woodworth.
  Lower bounds for non-convex stochastic optimization. Mathematical Programming, pp. 1ÔÇô50,
  2022.
Sergul Aydore, Tianhao Zhu, and Dean P Foster. Dynamic local regret for non-convex online
  forecasting. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.
Xuanyu Cao and K. J. Ray Liu. On the time-varying constraints and bandit feedback of online convex
  optimization. In IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1ÔÇô6, 2018. doi:
 10.1109/ICC.2018.8422559.
Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, Oliver Hinder, and Aaron Sidford. Lower bounds for finding stationary
  points I. Mathematical Programming, 184(1):71ÔÇô120, 2020.
Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, Oliver Hinder, and Aaron Sidford. Lower bounds for finding stationary
  points II: first-order methods. Mathematical Programming, 185(1-2):315ÔÇô355, 2021.
Amit Daniely, Alon Gonen, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Strongly adaptive online learning. In Proc.
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2015.
Ofer Dekel, Ronen Eldan, and Tomer Koren. Bandit smooth convex optimization: Improving the
  bias-variance tradeoff. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 28,
  2015.
Abraham D. Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H. Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
  in the bandit setting: Gradient descent without a gradient. In In Proc.ACM-SIAM Symposium on
  Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 385ÔÇô394, 2005.
Xiand Gao, Xiaobo Li, and Shuzhong Zhang. Online learning with non-convex losses and non-
  stationary regret. In Proc. International Conference on Artifical Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
  TATS), pp. 235ÔÇô243. PMLR, 2018.
Dan Garber and Ben Kretzu. New projection-free algorithms for online convex optimization with
  adaptive regret guarantees. In Proc. Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 2326ÔÇô
  2359. PMLR, 2022.
Alexander V Gasnikov, Ekaterina A Krymova, Anastasia A Lagunovskaya, Ilnura N Usmanova, and
  Fedor A Fedorenko. Stochastic online optimization. single-point and multi-point non-linear multi-
  armed bandits. convex and strongly-convex case. Automation and remote control, 78:224ÔÇô234,
  2017.
Ziwei Guan, Yi Zhou, and Yingbin Liang. Online nonconvex optimization with limited instantaneous
  oracle feedback. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3328ÔÇô3355.
  PMLR, 2023.
Eric Hall and Rebecca Willett. Dynamical models and tracking regret in online convex programming.
  In Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 579ÔÇô587. PMLR, 2013.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nadav Hallak, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Volkan Cevher. Regret minimization in stochastic
  non-convex learning via a proximal-gradient approach. In Proc. International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 4008ÔÇô4017. PMLR, 2021.
Elad Hazan and Comandur Seshadhri. Efficient learning algorithms for changing environments. In
  Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 393ÔÇô400, 2009.
Elad Hazan, Karan Singh, and Cyril Zhang. Efficient regret minimization in non-convex games. In
  Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1433ÔÇô1441. PMLR, 2017.
Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends┬« in Optimiza-
  tion, 2(3-4):157ÔÇô325, 2016.
Ame╠ülie He╠üliou, Matthieu Martin, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Thibaud Rahier. Online non-convex
 optimization with imperfect feedback. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 33:17224ÔÇô17235, 2020.
Ame╠ülie He╠üliou, Matthieu Martin, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Thibaud Rahier. Zeroth-order non-
 convex learning via hierarchical dual averaging. In Proc. International Conference on Machine
 Learning (ICML), pp. 4192ÔÇô4202. PMLR, 2021.
Steven CH Hoi, Doyen Sahoo, Jing Lu, and Peilin Zhao. Online learning: A comprehensive survey.
  Neurocomputing, 459:249ÔÇô289, 2021.
Ali Jadbabaie, Alexander Rakhlin, Shahin Shahrampour, and Karthik Sridharan. Online optimization:
  Competing with dynamic comparators. In Proc. International Conference on Artifical Intelligence
  and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 398ÔÇô406. PMLR, 2015.
Yeongjong Kim and Dabeen Lee. Online convex optimization with stochastic constraints: Zero
  constraint violation and bandit feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11267, 2023.
Walid Krichene, Maximilian Balandat, Claire Tomlin, and Alexandre Bayen. The hedge algorithm
 on a continuum. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 824ÔÇô832. PMLR, 2015.
Antoine Lesage-Landry, Joshua A Taylor, and Iman Shames. Second-order online nonconvex
  optimization. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 66(10):4866ÔÇô4872, 2020.
Aryan Mokhtari, Shahin Shahrampour, Ali Jadbabaie, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Online optimization in
  dynamic environments: Improved regret rates for strongly convex problems. In 2016 IEEE 55th
  Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 7195ÔÇô7201. IEEE, 2016.
Julie Mulvaney-Kemp, SangWoo Park, Ming Jin, and Javad Lavaei. Dynamic regret bounds for con-
  strained online nonconvex optimization based on polyak-lojasiewicz regions. IEEE Transactions
  on Control of Network Systems, 2022.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2003.
Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 17:527ÔÇô566, 2017.
Francesco Orabona. A modern introduction to online learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13213,
  2019.
Ankan Saha and Ambuj Tewari. Improved regret guarantees for online smooth convex optimization
 with bandit feedback. In Proc. International Conference on Artifical Intelligence and Statistics
 (AISTATS), pp. 636ÔÇô642. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends┬«
  in Machine Learning, 4(2):107ÔÇô194, 2012. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000018. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000018.
Ohad Shamir. An optimal algorithm for bandit and zero-order convex optimization with two-point
  feedback. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 18(1):1703ÔÇô1713, 2017.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Arun Sai Suggala and Praneeth Netrapalli. Online non-convex learning: Following the perturbed
  leader is optimal. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 845ÔÇô861. PMLR, 2020.
Cong Wang, Shengyuan Xu, Deming Yuan, Baoyong Zhang, and Zhengqiang Zhang. Distributed
  online convex optimization with a bandit primal-dual mirror descent push-sum algorithm. Neuro-
  computing, 497:204ÔÇô215, 2022.
Lin Yang, Lei Deng, Mohammad H Hajiesmaili, Cheng Tan, and Wing Shing Wong. An optimal
  algorithm for online non-convex learning. Proc. of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of
  Computing Systems, 2(2):1ÔÇô25, 2018.
Xinlei Yi, Xiuxian Li, Tao Yang, Lihua Xie, Tianyou Chai, and Karl Henrik Johansson. Distributed
  bandit online convex optimization with time-varying coupled inequality constraints. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Automatic Control, 66(10):4620ÔÇô4635, 2020.
Lijun Zhang, Shiyin Lu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Adaptive online learning in dynamic environments.
  Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 31, 2018.
Lijun Zhang, Tie-Yan Liu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Adaptive regret of convex and smooth functions. In
  Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 7414ÔÇô7423. PMLR, 2019.
Yan Zhang, Yi Zhou, Kaiyi Ji, and Michael M Zavlanos. A new one-point residual-feedback oracle
  for black-box learning and control. Automatica, 136:110006, 2022.
Peng Zhao, Yu-Jie Zhang, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Dynamic regret of convex and smooth
  functions. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:12510ÔÇô12520,
  2020.
Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In
 Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 928ÔÇô936, 2003.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Supplementary Materials
A     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 3
In this section, we provide the proofs for Theorems 1 and 2 in Section 3.
A.1 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
The main idea of the proof is as follows. Given a total budget of VT on the function variation, the
objective function can have ÔäŽ(1 + VT ) rapid changes. Thus, we divide the total time steps into
ÔäŽ(1 + VT ) blocks, choose the same objective function within each block and change the objective
function across blocks. We then construct a series of functions whose gradients are orthogonal to each
other and assign them to these blocks, which hinders the agent from constructing Ôłçft (xt ) based on
feedback from previous blocks. This construction of {ft }Tt=1 forces the agent to restart the learning
process in each block. The agent suffers from a high value of ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 at the beginning of each
restart, and thus the local regret is doomed to be ÔäŽ(1 + VT ).
To present the detailed proof, we first specify the objective functions for each block. Define the
one-entry sigmoid functions as
                                                             c exp([x]k )
                                                  f╦ťk (x) =                ,                                                  (7)
                                                            1 + exp([x]k )
where c > 0 is a constant that will be determined later, and [x]k is the k-th entry of the vector x.
Clearly, we have, 0 ÔëĄ f╦ťk (x) ÔëĄ c, and
                                                                 c exp ([x]i )
                                            Ôłçf╦ťk (x) =                           ek ,
                                                              (1 + exp ([x]i ))2
with ek is the kth basis of the Euclidean space. Then we have, for every x and y,
                                                                       c
                                |f╦ťk (x) Ôłĺ f╦ťk (x)| ÔëĄ sup |Ôłçf╦ťk (x)| ÔëĄ
                                                      xÔłłRd             2
and
                                                                          ÔłÜ
                                                                               3c
                                     ÔłąÔłçf╦ťk (x) Ôłĺ Ôłçf╦ťk (y)Ôłą ÔëĄ                      Ôłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą.
                                                                              18
                                         ÔłÜ
Therefore, by taking c = min{M, 2L0 , 6 3L1 }, each f╦ťk (x) satisfies Assumption 1.
                                                                               j      k
We now divide the total T iterations into 1+V                                     cT

                                            c
                                              T
                                                  Ôłĺ  2 blocks, and   let B  =    VT +1 be the length of
each block. Within each block, we fix the objective function, i.e., for all k,
                         f(kÔłĺ1)B+1 (x) = f(kÔłĺ1)B+2 (x) = . . . = fkB (x) = f╦ťk (x).
Thus, due to our construction, we have
                                                                   l          m
                                                                       1+VT
                                                                                  Ôłĺ2
                       T
                       X +1                                             Xc

              VTf :=          sup |ftÔłĺ1 (x) Ôłĺ ft (x)| =                                sup |fkK+1 (x) Ôłĺ fkK (x)|
                                 d                                                     xÔłłRd
                       t=2 xÔłłR                                          k=1

                              1 + VT
                    ÔëĄc                     Ôłĺ2         ÔëĄ VT .
                                 c
Due to our construction, for the k-th block, the gradients received from the previous k Ôłĺ 1 block
reveal only the first k Ôłĺ 1 dimensions. Thus, by Definition 1, [xkB+1 ]k = 0 for all k. And we have
                                                                                       c2
                                              ÔłąÔłçfkB+1 (xkB+1 )Ôłą2 =                        .
                                                                                       4
Therefore, we have
                                       l          m
                                           1+VT
                                                      Ôłĺ2
              T                              c
              X
                                2
                                            X
                                                                              2         2        1 + VT
    R(T ) =         ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą Ôëą                          ÔłąÔłçfkB+1 (x)Ôłą = c                                   Ôłĺ 2 = ÔäŽ(1 + VT ).
              t=1
                                                                                                    c
                                            k=1


                                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
The main idea for this proof is to leverage the Lipschitz smoothness of each objective function to
                                                       PT
connect the local regret to the cumulative difference t=1 ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 ) that is upper-
bounded by VT . By the L1 -gradient Lipshitz condition of ft (x), we have
                                                                     L1
                  ft (xt+1 ) ÔëĄ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), xt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôčę +     Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą2
                                                                     2
                                                 L1 ╬Ě 2

                             (i)
                             = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłĺ             ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
                                                   2
                             (ii)           1
                              = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ      ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 ,                                         (8)
                                           2L1
where (i) follows from the update rule in eq. (3) and (ii) follows because ╬Ě = L11 .
Rearranging eq. (8) and telescoping, we have
                         T
                         X
            R(T ) =            ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
                         t=1
                               T
                               X
                   ÔëĄ 2L1         (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 ))
                               t=1
                                                                  T
                                                                  X
                   = 2L1 (f1 (x1 ) Ôłĺ fT +1 (xT +1 )) + 2L1              (ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 ))
                                                                  t=1
                   (i)
                   ÔëĄ 4L1 M + 2L1 VT ,
where (i) follows from the upper bound of the function value and the definition of VT .

B     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 4
In this section, we first introduce the hard-to-learn nonconvex function constructed by Carmon et al.
(2020). This function is utilized next in the proof of Theorem 3. We then provide the proofs of
Theorems 3 to 5.
B.1 H ARD - TO - LEARN N ONCONVEX FUNCTION
In Carmon et al. (2020), the authors constructed a special nonconvex function that is hard for a
gradient-based algorithm to learn. The function FK : RK Ôćĺ R is defined as
                                              K
                                              X
            FK (x) = Ôłĺ╬Ę(1)╬Ž([x]1 ) +                [╬Ę(Ôłĺ[x]iÔłĺ1 )╬Ž(Ôłĺ[x]i ) Ôłĺ ╬Ę([x]iÔłĺ1 )╬Ž([x]i )],       (9)
                                              i=2

where K is a certain integer, [x]i denotes the ith entry of x, and the ╬Ę(z) and ╬Ž(z) are defined as

                                     ´ú▓0                           z ÔëĄ 1/2
                                     ´ú▒

                          ╬Ę(z) :=

                                                       1                  ,
                                     ´ú│ exp 1 Ôłĺ              2
                                                                  z > 1/2
                                                   (2z Ôłĺ 1)
and
                                                       Z z      2
                                                  ÔłÜ              t
                                        ╬Ž(z) :=       e    exp Ôłĺ   .
                                                        ÔłĺÔł×       2

The hard function satisfies the following properties (Carmon et al., 2020).
                                     |FK (x)| ÔëĄ 24K                                                   (10)
                                                   ÔłÜ
                                     ÔłąÔłçFK (x)Ôłą ÔëĄ 23 K                                                 (11)
                                     ÔłąÔłçFK (x) Ôłĺ ÔłçFK (y)Ôłą ÔëĄ 152Ôłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą.                                (12)


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Rather than taking the sigmoid function as the basic example function in the proof of Theorem 1, we
adopt the components of the aforementioned hard-to-learn function in eq. (9) to construct the hard
case here, to capture how the randomness of the stochastic gradient can hinder the learning process.
                                                                  l           m
We divide the iterations into blocks with size B, and we set B = 2M1+V (T +1)
                                                                          T
                                                                                . Denote Tk to be the
k-th block containing the iterations (k Ôłĺ 1)B + 1, (k Ôłĺ 1)B + 1, . . . , kB. Moreover, the objective
functions ft within Tk+1 are fixed to be a same function f╦ćk (x), i.e., for all k,
                               fkB+1 (x) = fkB+2 (x) = ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě = f(k+1)B (x) = f╦ćk (x),

where f╦ćk (x) is defined as
  f╦ćk (x)

            2           [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}
     = c╬╗ FK
                                 ╬╗
     = Ôłĺc╬╗2 ╬Ę(1)╬Ž([x](kÔłĺ1)B+1 )
                       K
                       X
            + c╬╗2            [╬Ę(Ôłĺ[x](kÔłĺ1)B+iÔłĺ1 )╬Ž(Ôłĺ[x](kÔłĺ1)B+i ) Ôłĺ ╬Ę([x](kÔłĺ1)B+iÔłĺ1 )╬Ž([x](kÔłĺ1)B+i )],
                       i=2
                                                                                                       (13)
                                         n             q       o
          L1                                 152L0
              , ╬╗ = ÔłÜ1K min                                19M
                                                                                                 2 2
where c = 152                                 23L1 ,       3L1 , and K is an integer satisfying ¤âg K  = B.
Moreover, [x]i denotes the i-th entry of x, and [x]{a,...,b} denotes the (b Ôłĺ a + 1)-dimensional vector
consisting of the entries [x]a , . . . , [x]b .
We now verify that f╦ćk (x) satisfies Assumption 1. Using eq. (10), we obtain

                                     [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}     2
                         c╬╗2 FK                             ÔëĄ c╬╗2 K ÔëĄ M.                                       (14)
                                              ╬╗               4
Next, by eq. (11), we have

                  2      [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}               [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}
           Ôłç c╬╗ FK                               = c╬╗ ÔłçFK
                                  ╬╗                                  ╬╗
                                                      ÔłÜ
                                                 ÔëĄ 23c K╬╗ ÔëĄ L0 ,                                               (15)
which implies the L0 -Lipschitz continuous property.
Moreover, by eq. (12), we obtain

                        [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}                   [y]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}
         Ôłç c╬╗2 FK                               Ôłĺ Ôłç c╬╗2 FK
                                 ╬╗                                      ╬╗

                          [x]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}           [y]{(kÔłĺ1)B+1,...,kB}
           = c╬╗ ÔłçFK                              Ôłĺ ÔłçFK
                                   ╬╗                               ╬╗
           ÔëĄ 152cÔłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą
           ÔëĄ L1 Ôłąx Ôłĺ yÔłą.                                                                                       (16)
The eqs. (14) to (16) prove that every ft satisfies Assumption 1. We next show that our choice of the
length B of each block ensures that the function variation does not exceed VT . The function variation
VTf of our construction is upper-bounded as follows:
                T +1                                   ÔîŐXB Ôîő
                                                        T +1
                                                                                        (i)

                X                                                                                   T +1
    VTf :=             sup |ftÔłĺ1 (x) Ôłĺ ft (x)| =               sup |fkK+1 (x) Ôłĺ fkK (x)| ÔëĄ 2M              ,
                t=2 xÔłłR
                          d                                    d                                      B
                                                        k=1 xÔłłR
                                                                   l     m
                                                   2M (T +1)
where (i) follows from eq. (14). Since we set B =            , we have VTf ÔëĄ VT . And, the choice
                                                    1+V  T

of K is determined immediately by the relationship ¤âg2 K 2 = B.


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lastly, we let the stochastic gradient oracle gt (x) be
                                                     n            o  z
                    [gt (x)]i = [Ôłçft (x)]i ┬Ě 1 + 1 i > proj 14 (x)
                                                                      t
                                                                        Ôłĺ1   ,             (17)
                                                                     p
                                                                                n     2 2 2
                                                                                             o
where proj 41 (x) := max i Ôëą 0 |[x]i | Ôëą 14 , and zt Ôł╝ Bernoulli(p) with p = min 1, 23 ¤âc2 ╬╗ .

                                                                                                     g
Clearly gt (x) is unbiased and, by Arjevani et al. (2022, Lemma 3), the variance of gt (x) is smaller
than ¤âg . Hence, the construction of gt (x) here satisfies Assumption 2.
Based on our designed functions ft and the stochastic gradient oracles gt , we next prove the regret
lower bound. At each block k, the stochastic gradient oracle feedback obtained from the previous
k Ôłĺ 1 blocks all lie in the first (k Ôłĺ 1)K dimensions of x. Therefore, due to Definition 1, we have
[x(kÔłĺ1)K ](kÔłĺ1)K+1,...,kK = 0. And the objective function within the k-th block depends only on the
(k Ôłĺ 1)K + 1-th of x up to its kK-th entry. Thus, the optimization within the k-th block equals the
offline optimization with total K iterations of updates. Applying Arjevani
                                                                        n et al. (2022,
                                                                                      o Lemma 1),
with probability greater or equal to 21 , for all kB + 1 ÔëĄ t ÔëĄ kB + min KÔłĺlog(2)
                                                                             2p   , B  , we have

                                                              1
                                     ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą Ôëą c╬╗ = ÔäŽ ÔłÜ        .                            (18)
                                                               K

We then conclude from eq. (18) that
          " B                         #
                                         1          K Ôłĺ log(2)
        E
           X                        2
                                                               , B = ÔäŽ ¤âg2 K .

                ÔłąÔłçfkB+i (xkB+i )Ôłą Ôëą ÔäŽ       ┬Ě min                                                        (19)
            i=1
                                         K             2p
We next derive the following bound on the expected value of the local regret:
                                        " T              #
                         E [R(T )] = E
                                         X
                                                       2
                                             ÔłąÔłçft (x)Ôłą
                                             t=1
                                            ´ú«j                               ´ú╣
                                                 T +1
                                                      k
                                                  B     +1
                                                           K
                                      = E´ú»
                                         ´ú»         X X                      2´ú║
                                         ´ú░                      ÔłąÔłçfkB+i (x)Ôłą ´ú║
                                                                             ´ú╗
                                                  k=1     i=1

                                      (i)

                                                     T +1
                                      Ôëą ÔäŽ(¤âg2 K) ┬Ě
                                                       B
                                             p
                                      = ÔäŽ(¤âg T (1 + VT )).                                               (20)
where (i) follows from eq. (19).
B.3 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
The main step lies in decomposing
                                     the regret into the tracking error of the stationary points which
                    1+VT
is bounded by O       ╬Ě     , and the variance of the stochastic gradient (by taking the conditional

expectation given the history information) which is bounded by O ╬Ě¤âg2 . Then, the final regret bound
can be obtained by the best tradeoff between the tracking error and the variance via the stepsize ╬Ě.
To proceed the proof, following from the L1 -gradient Lipshitz condition of ft (x), we have
                                                   L1
 ft (xt+1 ) ÔëĄ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), xt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôčę +      Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą2
                                                    2
           (i)                                   L1 ╬Ě 2
           = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), gt (xt )Ôčę +        Ôłągt (xt )Ôłą2
                                                  2
           (ii)
           ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), gt (xt )Ôčę + L1 ╬Ě 2 Ôłągt (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt )Ôłą2 + L1 ╬Ě 2 ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 , (21)
where (i) follows from the update rule in eq. (4) and (ii) follows from the YoungÔÇÖs inequality.
Taking expectation conditioned on xt on both sides of eq. (21) and applying Assumption 2, we have
                  E [ft (xt+1 )|xt ] ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě (1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě) ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 + L1 ╬Ě2 ¤âg2 .                (22)


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taking expectation on eq. (22), rearranging and telescoping, we have
  E [R(T )]
           T
                 E ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
           X
     =
           t=1
                    T
            1                                       ╬Ě¤âg2 T
                       E [ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 )] +
                   X
     ÔëĄ
       ╬Ě(1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě) t=1                             1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě
                                                               T
                                                                                                 !
            1                                                                                           ╬Ě¤âg2 T
                             E [f1 (x1 ) Ôłĺ fT +1 (xT +1 )] +         E [ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 )] +
                                                               X
     =
       ╬Ě(1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě)                                             t=1
                                                                                                       1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě
     (i)    1                     ╬Ě¤âg2 T
     ÔëĄ             (2M + 2VT ) +          ,                                                                   (23)
       ╬Ě(1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě)               1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě
where (i) follows from the upper bound of the function value and the definition of VT . Applying the
definition of ╬Ě, we complete the proof.
B.4 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5
Define a sequence of random variable {Zt }Ôł×
                                          t=1 as
                                               ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )
         Z0 = 0         and Zt+1 = Zt +                              + (1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě)ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě¤âg2 .
                                                         ╬Ě
Define Ft = ¤â(x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ). Due to eq. (22), we have
                                                 E [Zt+1 |Ft ] ÔëĄ Zt .
Moreover,
                                         ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )
                       |Zt+1 Ôłĺ Zt | =                          + (1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě)ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 Ôłĺ ╬Ě¤âg2
                                                   ╬Ě
                                   (i)
                                   ÔëĄ L0 G + L21 + ¤âg L1 M,
where (i) follows because
                        |ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )| ÔëĄ L0 Ôłąxt Ôłĺ xt+1 Ôłą = L0 ╬ĚÔłągt (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ L0 G╬Ě,
and ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 ÔëĄ L21 , and ╬Ě ÔëĄ ¤âMg .
Therefore, {Zt }Ôł×
                t=1 is a super-martingale with a bounded difference. Applying the AzumaÔÇôHoeffding
inequality to ZT +1 , we have
                                                                 ¤Á2

                 Pr (ZT +1 Ôłĺ Z0 Ôëą ¤Á) ÔëĄ 2 exp Ôłĺ                                    .
                                                    2T (L0 G + L21 + ¤âg L1 M )2
               r
By taking ¤Á = 2T (L0 G + L21 + ¤âg L1 M )2 log 2╬ż , we have, with probability greater or equal to
1 Ôłĺ ╬ż,
                                          s
                                                                                  2
                               ZT +1 ÔëĄ        2T (L0 G + L21 + ¤âg L1 M )2 log       .
                                                                                  ╬ż
Using the definition of ZT +1 and rearranging the terms, we have, with probability great or equal to
1 Ôłĺ ╬ż,
            T
            X
R(T ) =           ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
            t=1
                                                                       s
                                               ╬Ě¤âg2 T

                1                       1                                                                     2
         ÔëĄ             (2M + 2VT ) +                   +                   2T (L0 G + L21 + ¤âg L1 M )2 log      .
           ╬Ě(1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě)               1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě 1 Ôłĺ L1 ╬Ě                                                        ╬ż
Substituting the definition of ╬Ě into the above inequality completes the proof.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     P ROOFS OF S ECTION 5
C.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
                                  b t (xt )Ôłą2 defined in eq. (5) as follows.
We upper-bound the variance term ÔłąÔłçf
                2
    Ôłçf
    b t (xt )

      d2                                           2
     =   (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 ))
      ╬┤2
      d2
     = 2 ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) + ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ) + ftÔłĺ1 (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 )
      ╬┤
                                                       2
              + ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 )
         4d2                                  2   4d2                            2   4d2
     ÔëĄ        (ft (x t +  ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ f t (x t ))   +     (f t (x t ) Ôłĺ f tÔłĺ1 (x t ))  +      (ftÔłĺ1 (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 ))2
          ╬┤2                                       ╬┤2                                 ╬┤2
                     4d2
                 + 2 (ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 + ╬┤utÔłĺ1 ))2
                       ╬┤
     (i) 4L2 d2 ╬Ě 2                        2       2
     ÔëĄ       0           b tÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 ) + 4d (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ))2 + 8d2 L2 ,
                        Ôłçf                                                                                        (24)
                                                                                         0
             ╬┤2                                  ╬┤2
where (i) follows because ft and ftÔłĺ1 are L0 -Lipschitz continuous, and xt Ôłĺ xtÔłĺ1 = ╬Ě Ôłçf
                                                                                      b tÔłĺ1 (xtÔłĺ1 ).
                                    4L20 d2 ╬Ě 2
Since ╬Ě ÔëĄ 4L╬┤0 d , we have             ╬┤2       ÔëĄ 12 . Iteratively applying eq. (24), we obtain
                                                                 t
                            2       1 b            2   4d2 X (f¤ä (x¤ä ) Ôłĺ f¤ä Ôłĺ1 (x¤ä ))2
                Ôłçf
                b t (xt )       ÔëĄ      Ôłçf 0 (x 0 )   +                                 + 16d2 L20 .              (25)
                                    2t                  ╬┤ 2 ¤ä =1       2tÔłĺ¤ä

C.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
Differently from the proof of Theorem 4, the main technical development here lies in upper-bounding
the bias and variance
                 h    of our one-point
                              i        running difference gradient estimator. More specially, the bias
term satisfies E Ôłçft (xt )|Ft = E ╬┤ ft (xt + ╬┤ut )ut |Ft = Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt ), which can be shown to be
                                      d
                   b
bounded by O(╬┤). The variance term has been bounded in Lemma 1. Then, the tradeoff between the
bias, the variance, and the tracking error of the stationary points via ╬┤ and ╬Ě provides the best regret
bound.
To proceed the proof, following from the Lipschitz-smooth condition, we have
                                                                           L1
                     ft (xt+1 ) ÔëĄ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), xt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôčę +         Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą2
                                                                            2
                                                                               2
                                                              b t (xt )Ôčę + L1 ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçf
                                    = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçf                  b t (xt )Ôłą2 .                  (26)
                                                                             2
Taking expectation on both sides of eq. (26) conditioned on Ft := ¤â (u1 , . . . , utÔłĺ1 ), we obtain
E [ft (xt+1 )|Ft ]
                                                            2
                                    b t (xt ) Ft + L1 ╬Ě E ÔłąÔłçf
                    D             h              iE             h                i
     ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłçft (xt ), E Ôłçf                               b t (xt )Ôłą2 Ft
                                                          2
                                                                                     2
                                                 b t (xt ) Ft Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt ) + L1 ╬Ě E ÔłąÔłçf
                    D                          h              i           E              h                  i
     = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłçft (xt ), Ôłçft (xt ) + E Ôłçf                                             b t (xt )Ôłą2 Ft
                                                                                  2
     (i)                                                                           2
                                              h             i                 L  ╬Ě     h                  i
     ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą + ╬ĚL0 E Ôłçf      b t (xt ) Ft Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt ) + 1 E ÔłąÔłçf
                               2                                                           b t (xt )Ôłą2 Ft
                                                                                2
     (ii)                            L1 L0 d╬┤╬Ě L1 ╬Ě 2 h b                     i
                                2
      ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą +               +         E ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą Ft ,
                                                                        2
                                                                                                        (27)
                                          2           2
where (i) follows from the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality and because ÔłąÔłçft (x)Ôłą ÔëĄ L0 , and (ii)
follows from the following Lemma 2.


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. For every t, we have
                                       h                    i                   L1 d╬┤
                                     E Ôłçf
                                       b t (xt ) Ft Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt ) ÔëĄ                     .
                                                                                 2

Proof. Using the definition of Ôłçf e t (xt ), we have
                h                i
              E Ôłçf b t (xt ) Ft Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt )

                         dut
               = E            ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ft Ôłĺ Ôłçft (xt )
                           ╬┤

                          dut
               = E
               (i)
                               (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut )) Ôłĺ dÔčĘÔłçft (ut ), ut Ôčęut Ft
                          2╬┤

                   d             ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut )
               ÔëĄ E ut                                            Ôłĺ ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę
                   ╬┤                            2
                 (ii) L d╬┤
                       1
                  ÔëĄ              ,
                             2
 where (i) follows from Agarwal et al. (2010, Lemma 7) and (ii) follows because |ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ
                                    2                                                        2
ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę| ÔëĄ L12╬┤ , |ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę| ÔëĄ L12╬┤ , and
   ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut )
                                    Ôłĺ ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę
                  2
         ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę
     =                                             Ôłĺ
                             2                                            2
         ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę    ft (xt Ôłĺ ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), ╬┤ut Ôčę
     ÔëĄ                                                  +                                               .
                               2                                               2



Rearranging eq. (27), we obtain
                         1                                   L1 L0 ╬┤   L1 ╬Ě h b             i
                           (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ E [ft (xt+1 )|Ft ]) +               E ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 Ft .
                 2
     ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ                                                   +                                   (28)
                         ╬Ě                                      2       2

Taking expectation on both sides of eq. (28) and telescoping, we obtain
                     T
                                                                      " T              #
                  1X                                L1 L0 ╬┤T   L1 ╬Ě
     E [R(T )] ÔëĄ        E [ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 )] +                 E
                                                                       X
                                                             +              b 0 (x0 )Ôłą2 .
                                                                           ÔłąÔłçf                           (29)
                  ╬Ě t=1                                 2       2      t=1

To upper-bound the last term of eq. (29), we take a summation of eq. (25) over t = 1 to T and obtain
   T                                               T                  T   t
   X                 2                     2       X4d2 X X (f¤ä (x¤ä ) Ôłĺ f¤ä Ôłĺ1 (x¤ä ))2
                                                     1
         Ôłçf
         b t (xt )       ÔëĄ Ôłçf
                           b 0 (x0 )
                                              t
                                               ┬Ě +     2                       tÔłĺ¤ä
                                                                                             + 16d2 L20 T
   t=1                                  t=1
                                            2        ╬┤    t=1 ¤ä =1
                                                                              2
                                                                                     Ôłĺt
                                                  T                                T
                                                                                           !
                                      2        2 X
                                           4d                                   2
                                                                                   X
                                                                                         ¤ä
                         ÔëĄ 2 Ôłçf
                             b 0 (x0 ) +                 (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt )) ┬Ě      2    + 16d2 L20 T
                                            ╬┤ 2 t=1                                ¤ä =0
                                                             T
                                               2       8d2 X
                         ÔëĄ 2 Ôłçf
                             b 0 (x0 )             +            (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ))2 + 16d2 L20 T.   (30)
                                                        ╬┤ 2 t=1

Substituting eq. (30) into eq. (29), we obtain
                         T
                     1X                               L L d╬┤T
    E [R(T )] ÔëĄ            E [ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 )] + 1 0           b 0 (x0 )Ôłą2
                                                              + L1 ╬ĚÔłąÔłçf
                     ╬Ě t=1                               2


                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   T
                                 2   2    4L1 ╬Ěd2 X
                          + 8L1 L0 ╬Ěd T +             (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ))2
                                            ╬┤2    t=1
                                                     T
                       f1 (x1 ) Ôłĺ fT +1 (xT +1 ) 1 X                                   L L d╬┤T
                   =                            +       E [ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt+1 )] + 1 0
                                   ╬Ě              ╬Ě t=1                                   2
                                                                               T
                                                                             2 X
                                 b 0 (x0 )Ôłą2 + 8L1 L20 ╬Ěd2 T + 4L1 ╬Ěd
                          + L1 ╬ĚÔłąÔłçf                                                  (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ))2
                                                                 ╬┤2            t=1
                   (i) 2MVT   L1 L0 d╬┤T   4L1 d2 M 2 ╬Ě         2   2     8M L1 ╬Ěd2 VT
                   ÔëĄ   +    +           +              + 8L1 L 0 ╬Ěd  T +              ,                             (31)
                     ╬Ě    ╬Ě       2           ╬┤2                             ╬┤2
                           b 0 (x0 )Ôłą ÔëĄ 2M d and
where (i) follows because ÔłąÔłçf            ╬┤
                    T
                    X                                      T
                                                           X
                          (ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt ))2 ÔëĄ 2M          |ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ftÔłĺ1 (xt )| ÔëĄ 2M VT .
                    t=1                                    t=1


Substituting the definition of ╬Ě and ╬┤ into eq. (31), we obtain
                                                    p
                                  E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O d (1 + VT )T .

C.3 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7
Define a sequence of random variable {Yt }Ôł×
                                          t=1 as

                                                         ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) L1 L0 d╬┤   L1 ╬Ě b
 Y0 = 0     and Yt+1 = Yt + ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 +                                    Ôłĺ         Ôłĺ     ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 .
                                                                   ╬Ě              2        2
Define the filtrations Ft = ¤â(x1 , . . . , xt ). By eq. (28), we have {Yt } is a super-martingale. Moreover,
we have
                                       ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) L1 L0 d╬┤     L1 ╬Ě b
         |Yt+1 Ôłĺ Yt | = ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 +                       Ôłĺ         Ôłĺ        ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
                                                 ╬Ě                2         2
                      (i)

                            2                    L1 L0 d╬┤     L1 ╬Ě b         2
                      ÔëĄ L1 + L0 ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą +
                                    b                       +     ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą := ct .
                                                    2          2
where (i) follows because ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ L0 and

                            ft (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ) ÔëĄ L0 Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą = ╬ĚL0 ÔłąÔłçf
                                                                           b t (xt )Ôłą.

Applying the AzumaÔÇôHoeffding inequality to YT +1 , we have, for every ¤Á > 0,
                                                                  !
                                                            ¤Á2
                             Pr (YT +1 Ôëą ¤Á) ÔëĄ 2 exp Ôłĺ PT            .                                               (32)
                                                                2
                                                           t=1 ct
                                   PT
We next provide an upper bound on t=1 c2t .
     T         T                                                        2
                             b t (xt )Ôłą + L1 L0 d╬┤ + L1 ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçf
    X         X
        c2t =      L21 + L0 ÔłąÔłçf                            b t (xt )Ôłą2
    t=1       t=1
                                             2        2
            (i)                   T
                                  X                                                 T
                                                                                    X                     2
            ÔëĄ 4L41 T + 4L20              b t (xt )Ôłą2 + L21 L20 d2 ╬┤ 2 T + L21 ╬Ě 2
                                        ÔłąÔłçf                                                b t (xt )Ôłą2
                                                                                          ÔłąÔłçf
                                  t=1                                               t=1
                                   T                                                  T
                                                                                                           !2
            (ii)                   X                                                  X
             ÔëĄ 4L41 T + 4L20              b t (xt )Ôłą2 + L21 L20 d2 ╬┤ 2 T + L21 ╬Ě 2
                                         ÔłąÔłçf                                                 b t (xt )Ôłą2
                                                                                            ÔłąÔłçf                 ,   (33)
                                   t=1                                                t=1

                                   b + c + d)2 P
where (i) follows by applying (a + P           ÔëĄ 4a2 + 4b2 + 4c2 + 4d2 to every term in the
                                     n           n
summation, and (ii) follows because i=1 xi ÔëĄ ( i=1 xi )2 when xi ÔÇÖs are all positive.
                                          2



                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying Lemma 1, we have
T                                            T
                                                         !            T   t
X
        b t (xt )Ôłą2 ÔëĄ Ôłçf
                                       2    X     14d2 X X (f¤ä (x¤ä ) Ôłĺ f¤ä Ôłĺ1 (x¤ä ))2
       ÔłąÔłçf            b 1 (x1 )                  + 2
                                                 tÔłĺ1
                                                                                          + 16d2 L20 T
 t=1                                        t=1
                                                2   ╬┤ t=1 ¤ä =2             2tÔłĺ¤ä
                                     T                               t
                                                                             !
                        4M 2 d2  4d2 X                           2
                                                                   X      1
                      ÔëĄ         + 2     (f¤ä (x¤ä ) Ôłĺ f¤ä Ôłĺ1 (x¤ä ))                + 16d2 L20 T
                          ╬┤2      ╬┤ t=1                            ¤ä =2
                                                                        2tÔłĺ¤ä

                            4M 2 d2   8d2 M VT
                      ÔëĄ         2
                                    +          + 16d2 L20 T
                              ╬┤          ╬┤2
                      (i)
                      ÔëĄ 16d2 (L20 + M 2 )T,                                                                       (34)
                                                    q
                                                        1+VT
where (i) follows from the facts that ╬┤ =                 T    and VT ÔëĄ M T .
Substituting eq. (34) into eq. (33), we obtain
    T
    X                                                                         16L21 2 2
          c2t ÔëĄ(4L41 + 64L20 d2 (L20 + M 2 ))T + L21 L20 (1 + VT ) +               d (L0 + M 2 )2 T (1 + VT ).
    t=1
                                                                               L20

Therefore, there exist a constant C > 0, such that
                                              T
                                              X
                                                    c2t ÔëĄ Cd2 T (1 + VT ).                                        (35)
                                              t=1
                                                             r
                                                                                         2
Substituting eq. (35) into eq. (32) and taking ¤Á =                Cd2 T (1 + VT ) log    ╬ż    , we have, with probabil-
ity greater or equal to 1 Ôłĺ ╬ż
                                                     s
                                                                  2
                                      YT +1 ÔëĄ d CT (1 + VT ) log     .                                            (36)
                                                                  ╬ż
Substituting the definition of YT +1 into eq. (36) and rearranging, we obtain, with probability greater
or equal to 1 Ôłĺ ╬ż
                      T
                      X
           R(T ) =           ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
                      t=1
                    2M    VT   L1 L0 d╬┤T    4L1 d2 M 2 ╬Ě                   8M L1 ╬Ěd2 VT
                  ÔëĄ    +     +           +        2
                                                         + 8L1 L20 ╬Ěd2 T +
                     ╬Ě     ╬Ě       2            ╬┤                              ╬┤2
                          s
                                             2
                       + d CT (1 + VT ) log
                                             ╬ż
                        s                  !
                                         1
                  = O d T (1 + VT ) log       .                                                                   (37)
                                         ╬ż

D      C ONVENTIONAL O NE - POINT AND T WO - POINT G RADIENT E STIMATORS
In this section, we introduce the conventional one-point and two-point gradient estimators, and
provide the corresponding regret bounds if these estimators are adopted by OGD. These results serve
as comparison to the new running difference gradient estimator that we propose in Section 5.
D.1 R EGRET OF C ONVENTIONAL O NE - POINT G RADIENT E STIMATOR
Consider the following one-point gradient estimator (Flaxman et al., 2005), which has been used in
online convex optimization and is also widely adopted in offline gradient-free algorithms.

                                            e t (xt ) := d ft (xt + ╬┤ut )ut ,
                                            Ôłçf                                                                    (38)
                                                         ╬┤

                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ut is drawn independently from the uniform distribution over the unit sphere in Rd . It has been
shown that
                                     h          i
                                   E Ôłçfe t (xt ) = Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt ),

where ft,╬┤ (x) = Eu [ft (x + ╬┤u)] with u be uniformly distributed on the unit sphere. Although the
expected value of such a one-point gradient estimator is close to the true gradient, i.e.,
                     ÔłąE[Ôłçf
                        e t (x)] Ôłĺ Ôłçft (x)Ôłą = ÔłąÔłçft,╬┤ (x) Ôłĺ Ôłçft (x)Ôłą ÔëĄ L1 ╬┤,

its variance explodes in the order of O( ╬┤12 ). The trade-off between the bias and variance prohibits
us to choose a small ╬┤, and hence as we show below that the regret of OGD with such a one-point
gradient estimator can be large.
Consider the OGD algorithm with the above one-point gradient estimator as described in Algorithm 4.
The regret of such an algorithm is characterized in the following theorem.

Algorithm 4 OGD with Conventional One-point Gradient Estimator
  Input: Initial point x1 , stepsizes ╬Ě and parameter ╬┤
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
    Draw ut from the uniform distribution over the unit sphere
    Observe ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) and let Ôłçfe t (xt ) = dut ┬Ě ft (xt + ╬┤ut )
                                                  ╬┤
    Let xt+1 = xt Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłçf  e t (xt )
  end for


Theorem 8. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Consider Algorithm 4 with x0 = 0, perturbation
            14                             34
╬┤ = 1+V
      T
        T
               and stepsize ╬Ě = d1 1+V
                                     T
                                       T
                                              . Then, the expected local regret satisfies

                                       E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O(d(1 + VT ) 4 T 4 ).
                                                                    1   3


Clearly, the regret of OGD using the conventional one-point gradient estimator is much larger than
that of OGD using our running difference gradient estimator given in Theorem 6 (note that VT scales
at most with the order of T , and can scale much slower than T ). The main reason is because the
conventional one-point estimator has a much larger variance and hence the tradeoff between the bias
                                                                                              1
and the variance requires a much large perturbation parameter ╬┤ which is chosen to be ( 1+V
                                                                                          T ) . This
                                                                                            T 4

consequently leads to a worse regret than our one-point estimator.

Proof of Theorem 8. By the Lipschitz-smooth condition, we have
                                                     L1
    ft (xt+1 ) ÔëĄ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), xt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôčę +    Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą2
                                                      2
                                                         2
                                        e t (xt )Ôčę + L1 ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçf
              = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçf                  e t (xt )Ôłą2
                                                       2
                                                                             L1 d2 ╬Ě 2 M 2
              ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 + ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçft (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçf
                                                                    e t (xt )Ôčę +           .      (39)
                                                                                 2╬┤ 2
Rearranging and taking expectation on both sides of eq. (39) conditioned on Ft = ¤â(u1 , . . . , utÔłĺ1 ),
we obtain
                 (i) f (x ) Ôłĺ
                      t t       E [ft (xt+1 )|Ft ]                                               L1 d2 M 2 ╬Ě
   ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 ÔëĄ                                     + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçft (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt )Ôčę +
                                   ╬Ě                                                                2╬┤ 2
                 (ii) f (x ) Ôłĺ
                       t t       E [ft (xt+1 )|Ft ]       L0 L1 d╬┤   L1 d2 M 2 ╬Ě
                 ÔëĄ                                    +            +             ,                             (40)
                                   ╬Ě                         2          2╬┤ 2
where (i) follows from the steps similar to those in the proof of Lemma 2 and (ii) follows from the
Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, and because ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ L0 , and ÔłąÔłçft (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt )Ôłą ÔëĄ L1 ╬┤.
Taking expectation on both sides of eq. (40) and telescoping, we obtain
 E[R(T )]

                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         T
               E ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
         X
     =
         t=1

         f1 (x1 ) Ôłĺ E [fT +1 (xT +1 )] 1 X
                                           T
                                                                           L L d╬┤T   L1 d2 M 2 ╬ĚT
     ÔëĄ                                +       E [ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )] + 0 1    +
                      ╬Ě                 ╬Ě t=1                                 2          2╬┤ 2
         2M + VT   L0 L1 d╬┤T   L1 d2 M 2 ╬ĚT
     ÔëĄ           +           +
            ╬Ě          2           2╬┤ 2
                        1   3
     ÔëĄ O(d(1 + VT ) 4 T 4 ).



D.2 R EGRET OF T WO - POINT G RADIENT E STIMATOR
Although the two-point gradient estimator is not applicable to our setting with only a single function
value feedback, it serves as a desirable comparison benchmark for our designed one-point estimator.
In the literature, the standard two-point gradient estimators have been shown to achieve much better
performance than the conventional one-point estimator as well as a recently developed one-point
estimator in Zhang et al. (2022) in both online and offline optimization. In this section, by establishing
the regret of OGD with the standard two-point estimator, we will show that our running difference
one-point estimator can achieve the same performance as the standard two-point estimator.
Consider the standard two-point gradient estimator (Agarwal et al., 2010) given as follows:

                                    ┬» t (xt ) := d (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt ))ut .
                                    Ôłçf                                                               (41)
                                                 ╬┤
Compared to eq. (38), the two-point estimator in eq. (41) has the same expected value, but its variance
is bounded by L20 d2 , which is much smaller.
Now consider OGD with the above two-point gradient estimator as described in Algorithm 5. The
regret of such an algorithm is characterized in the following theorem.

Algorithm 5 OGD with Standard Two-point Gradient Estimator
  Input: Initial point x1 , stepsizes ╬Ě and parameter ╬┤
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
    Draw ut from the uniform distribution over the unit sphere
    Observe ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) and ft (xt )
         ┬» t (xt ) = dut ┬Ě (ft (xt + ╬┤ut ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )
    Let Ôłçf               ╬┤
    Let xt+1 = xt Ôłĺ ╬Ě Ôłçf   ┬» t (xt )
  end for


Theorem
   q 9. Suppose Assumption    q 1 holds. Consider Algorithm 5 with x0 = 0, perturbation
╬┤ = 1+VT
         T
           and stepsize ╬Ě = 1
                            d
                               1+VT
                                 T . Then, the expected local regret satisfies

                                        E [R(T )] ÔëĄ O(d (1 + VT )T ).
                                                            p


Clearly, comparison of Theorem 6 and Theorem 9 shows that our one-point estimator achieves the
same regret as the two-point estimator, and they both outperform the conventional one-point estimator.
This is the first result in online nonconvex optimization that establishes that one function value oracle
achieves the same regret as two oracles.

Proof of Theorem 9. By the Lipschitz-smooth condition, we have
                                                        L1
     ft (xt+1 ) ÔëĄ ft (xt ) + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), xt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôčę +      Ôłąxt+1 Ôłĺ xt Ôłą2
                                                         2
                                                            2
                                           ┬» t (xt )Ôčę + L1 ╬Ě ÔłąÔłçf
                 = ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçf                  ┬» t (xt )Ôłą2
                                                          2

                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                2 2
                                                                       ┬» t (xt )Ôčę + L1 L0 d ╬Ě .
                 ÔëĄ ft (xt ) Ôłĺ ╬ĚÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 + ╬ĚÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçft (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçf                                 (42)
                                                                                        2
Rearranging and taking expectation on both sides of eq. (42) conditioned on Ft = ¤â(u1 , . . . , utÔłĺ1 ),
we obtain
                         ft (xt ) Ôłĺ E [ft (xt+1 )|Ft ]                                          L1 L0 d2 ╬Ě
    ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2 ÔëĄ                                     + ÔčĘÔłçft (xt ), Ôłçft (xt ) Ôłĺ Ôłçft,╬┤ (xt )Ôčę +
                                      ╬Ě                                                             2
                     (i) f (x ) Ôłĺ E [f (x                                      2
                          t t            t t+1 )|Ft ]     L0 L1 d╬┤    L1 L0 d ╬Ě
                     ÔëĄ                                 +           +             ,                         (43)
                                       ╬Ě                     2             2
where (i) follows from the steps similar to those in the proof of Lemma 2 and Cauchy-Schwartz
inquality.
Taking expectation on both sides of eq. (43) and telescoping, we obtain
  E[R(T )]
         T
               E ÔłąÔłçft (xt )Ôłą2
         X
     =
         t=1

       f1 (x1 ) Ôłĺ E [fT +1 (xT +1 )] 1 X
                                         T
                                                                         L L d╬┤T   L1 L20 d2 ╬ĚT
     ÔëĄ                              +       E [ft+1 (xt+1 ) Ôłĺ ft (xt )] + 0 1    +
                    ╬Ě                 ╬Ě t=1                                 2           2
            p
     ÔëĄ O(d T (1 + VT )).


                                                       24
