Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H I FA: H IGH - FIDELITY T EXT- TO -3D GENERATION
WITH A DVANCED D IFFUSION G UIDANCE

 Junzhe Zhu∗1 , Peiye Zhuang∗ 1,2 , Sanmi Koyejo1
 1                        2
   Stanford University,     Snap Inc.
 1
   {josefzhu, peiye, sanmi}@stanford.edu, 2 pzhuang@snapchat.com



                                               A BSTRACT
             The advancements in automatic text-to-3D generation have been remarkable.
             Most existing methods use pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models to opti-
             mize 3D representations like Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) via latent-space
             denoising score matching. Yet, these methods often result in artifacts and incon-
             sistencies across different views due to their suboptimal optimization approaches
             and limited understanding of 3D geometry. Moreover, the inherent constraints of
             NeRFs in rendering crisp geometry and stable textures usually lead to a two-stage
             optimization to attain high-resolution details. This work proposes holistic sam-
             pling and smoothing approaches to achieve high-quality text-to-3D generation,
             all in a single-stage optimization. We compute denoising scores in the text-to-
             image diffusion model’s latent and image spaces. Instead of randomly sampling
             timesteps (also referred to as noise levels in denoising score matching), we intro-
             duce a novel timestep annealing approach that progressively reduces the sampled
             timestep throughout optimization. To generate high-quality renderings in a single-
             stage optimization, we propose regularization for the variance of z-coordinates
             along NeRF rays. To address texture flickering issues in NeRFs, we introduce a
             kernel smoothing technique that refines importance sampling weights coarse-to-
             fine, ensuring accurate and thorough sampling in high-density regions. Extensive
             experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method over previous approaches,
             enabling the generation of highly detailed and view-consistent 3D assets through
             a single-stage training process.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The task of automatic text-to-3D generation aims to create 3D assets based on a text description
and has gained significant attention due to its wide-ranging applications in digital content genera-
tion, film-making, and Virtual Reality (VR) (Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b). Initial efforts in
this domain centered on unconditional 3D asset generation, experimenting with various 3D repre-
sentation modalities presented in explicit formats such as meshes (Achlioptas et al., 2018; Luo &
Hu, 2021; Smith & Meger, 2017; Xie et al., 2018), as well as implicit formats such as fields (Chen
& Zhang, 2019; Mittal et al., 2022; Zhuang et al., 2023). Following this, the field has progressed
towards conditional 3D generative models, e.g., with text-based guidance (Cheng et al., 2023). How-
ever, these studies have been limited to relatively simple 3D assets, primarily due to the scarcity of
large-scale annotated 3D datasets.
The availability of ample image datasets and the success of text-to-image generation have paved the
way for lifting pre-trained text-to-image models to the 3D domain. Specifically, recent studies focus
on optimizing a 3D representation for an asset, using pre-trained text-to-image generative models by
providing a denoising score for rendered images (Khalid et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022; Poole et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Lin et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023b). Poole et al. (2022) proposed a loss from the distillation of a text-to-image
diffusion model. They minimized the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between a family of Gaus-
sian distributions based on the forward diffusion process and the denoising scores acquired from
the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. The proposed Score Distillation Sampling (SDS)
method combined with a NeRF enables 3D asset generation from given text prompts. Subsequent
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           ``A sea turtle”            ``A tarantula, highly detailed”          ``A parrot”


  ``A pair of pink fluffy slippers”     ``A wooden buddha head”         ``Robotic bee, high detail”


   ``A bagel filled with cream         ``Dragon wings and unicorn
                                          head hybrid creature”         ``A car made out of sushi”
         cheese and lox”

Figure 1: Examples of multiple views of 3D objects generated by from our model given text
prompts (below each object).
research has improved generation quality through various approaches including the adoption of two-
stage optimization frameworks (Lin et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Chen et al.,
2023c), alterations to the original SDS formulation (Wang et al., 2023a;b), and the disentanglement
of geometry and appearance (Chen et al., 2023b).
In this work, we revisit the integration of the SDS approach with NeRFs, aiming to achieve photo-
realistic and high-quality text-to-3D generation through a single-stage optimization. In contrast to
existing text-to-3D generation work, we distill the score in the text-to-image diffusion model’s la-
tent and image spaces for enhanced supervision. Moreover, we observe that the efficacy of the
diffusion prior is limited in previous works (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023) when timesteps
(also referred to as noise levels in denoising score matching) are randomly sampled during opti-
mization. Specifically, we observe that toward the end of the training process, the NeRF becomes
almost determined in representing a particular 3D asset. Thus, we find that randomly sampling a
large timestep drives the diffusion model to produce a denoised image that is distinct and unrelated
to the original input rendering. This yields inconsistent distillation from the diffusion model and
compromised optimization of NeRFs. To address this, we introduce a timestep annealing approach
where the timestep in the forward diffusion process inversely correlates with the square root of the
number of training iterations. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that the proposed timestep an-
nealing approach effectively enhances generation quality. We also show that the square root timestep
annealing consistently outperforms other annealing methods, such as linear and cosine ratios.
Moreover, generating a detailed 3D asset through single-stage optimization is challenging. Specif-
ically, explicit 3D representations, such as meshes, struggle to capture intricate topology, such as
those with holes. Implicit 3D representations (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2022) may lead
to cloudy geometry and flickering textures. For instance, when NeRFs are employed to represent
highly detailed 3D geometries like human bodies (Hong et al., 2023), Moiré patterns are notica-
ble. To this end, prior works (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) adopted two-stage optimization
techniques. In these approaches, explicit 3D representations, such as Deep Marching Tetrahedra
(DMTet) (Shen et al., 2021), are used to extract textured meshes from the implicit representations in


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the first stage and are subsequently fine-tuned in the second stage to capture high-quality geometry.
However, these mesh representations forfeit the ability to produce detailed appearances such as fur –
a tradeoff we wish to avoid. Differently, we aim to maintain the flexibility and photo-realism offered
by the NeRF representation while at the same time achieving high-quality text-to-3D generation
through a single-stage training.
To this end, we propose two techniques to advance NeRF optimization. Specifically, to address the
cloudy geometry issue in NeRFs, we propose a variance regularization that minimizes the variance of
sampled z-coordinates distributed along NeRF rays. We observe that this technique enables NeRFs
to more accurately represent crisp geometrical surfaces, thereby effectively mitigating the cloudiness
issue. Additionally, we verify that our proposed z-variance regularization outperforms alternative
spatial regularization proposed in previous methods (Barron et al., 2022).
Moreover, texture flickering or shimmer effects often result from inaccuracies in estimating the im-
portance sampling weights across different rendering views. However, existing solutions, such as
increasing the number of sampling points along the rays or deploying separate density estimation
networks for each coarse and refined stage, come with increased computational demands. Instead,
we propose a kernel smoothing technique tailored for coarse-to-fine importance sampling along
NeRF rays without an increase in the computational cost. This technique is inspired by the inte-
grated positional encoding for spatial points within a cone, previously proposed to tackle aliasing
issues in a single image view (Barron et al., 2021). In our case, the goal is to mitigate flickering
issues across multiple views. Specifically, we use a kernel to refine the probability density function
(PDF) estimated in the coarse sampling stage along a ray, which enables more comprehensive sam-
pling near asset surface regions in the refined stage. This technique notably enhances the fidelity of
importance sampling.
We summarize our technical contributions for two crucial components of text-to-3D generation: (1)
3D representation and (2) optimization, which are outlined below:
      • To achieve photo-realistic and highly-detailed text-to-3D generation, we propose score
        distillation in both the latent and image space of the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
        models. Moreover, we introduce a timestep annealing approach for score distillation from
        text-to-image diffusion models.
      • To achieve sharp geometry quality through a single-stage training, we present a regulariza-
        tion method applied to the variance of z-coordinates along NeRF rays.
      • To address flickering issues in NeRFs, we propose a kernel smoothing technique that refines
        the PDF estimation in coarse-to-fine importance sampling.

Taken together, we show how these holistic modifications address existing shortcomings and im-
prove the quality of 3D synthesis.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Unconditional 3D asset generation involves the learning of 3D asset data distributions. Explicit ap-
proaches employ representations including point clouds (Achlioptas et al., 2018; Luo & Hu, 2021),
voxel grids (Lin et al., 2022; Smith & Meger, 2017; Xie et al., 2018) and meshes (Zhang et al., 2021).
In contrast, implicit methods utilize representations such as signed distance functions (SDFs) (Chen
& Zhang, 2019; Cheng et al., 2023; Mittal et al., 2022), tri-planes (Chen et al., 2023a), multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) weights (Erkoç et al., 2023), and radiance fields (Lorraine et al., 2023). How-
ever, due to the limited availability of diverse 3D assets, these works primarily focus on generating
class-specific and small-scale 3D datasets.
Text-to-3D asset generation refers to the creation of 3D assets based on text descriptions. Instead
of depending on limited text-annotated 3D datasets, the availability of ample text-image data pairs
and the success of text-to-image generative models have inspired recent research to lift pre-trained
text-to-image models into the 3D domain. Generally, these approaches can be categorized into two
groups: (i) CLIP-guided text-to-3D approaches (Khalid et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022) that utilize
pre-trained cross-modal matching models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), and (ii) 2D diffusion-
guided text-to-3D approaches (Poole et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023b) that rely on text-to-image diffusion-based generative models such as Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022) and StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). We follow the diffusion-guided methods due to
their superior performance in text-to-3D generation.

                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, Poole et al. (2022) first introduced a Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) approach,
where noise is added to an image rendered from NeRFs and subsequently denoised by a pre-trained
text-to-image generative model (Saharia et al., 2022). SDS minimizes the KL divergence between
a prior Gaussian noise distribution and the estimated noise distribution. SDS is widely adopted
in follow-up works (Lin et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b). For example, Score-
Jacobian-Chaining (Wang et al., 2023a) proposed a Perturb-and-Average Scoring method to aggre-
gate 2D image gradients of StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) over multiple viewpoints into a
3D asset gradient. Wang et al. (2023b) introduced a variational formulation of the SDS approach for
diverse generation of 3D assets, yet it needs to train a low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022)
for each individual 3D asset to provide the score function of the distribution. Moreover, two-stage
optimization frameworks are proposed (Wang et al., 2023b; Lin et al., 2023) that initially extract 3D
meshes from implicit representations and then fine-tune them in the second stage to achieve high-
resolution details. In this work, we propose refining of the SDS approach and improving the implicit
representation to achieve high-quality 3D asset generation in a single-stage optimization process.
Image-to-3D reconstruction refers to 3D reconstruction from a provided single image. Typically,
as proposed in prior works (Zhou & Tulsiani, 2023; Gu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b;a), pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion-based models are used to provide a 2D prior via the SDS approach plus an
image reconstruction loss. In a two-stage optimization process, Qian et al. (2023) employs 2D and
3D diffusion priors. In the first stage, they optimize a NeRF representation, and in the second stage,
they extract a DMTet mesh from the NeRF for fine-tuning. Haque et al. (2023) propose an iterative
dataset update strategy for editing NeRFs, leveraging text-to-image diffusion models. Alternatively,
Liu et al. (2023c) hallucinates 16 normal view images and directly optimizes a NeRF representation
based on them. We extend our work on the image-to-3D reconstruction task and compare to these
methods in Sec. 5.4.
3 P RELIMINARIES : S CORE D ISTILLATION S AMPLING (SDS)
The SDS approach in diffusion models is proposed in recent work (Poole et al., 2022) using a pre-
trained text-to-image diffusion model to guide the 3D representation parameterized by θ. An image
x is generated based on a given camera pose via a differentiable rendering function g, denoted
as x = g(θ). The pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model is employed to ensure the rendered
images align with its learned image distribution. This work uses a latent diffusion model to reduce
computational complexity.
Specifically, a latent diffusion model such as Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022), consists
of an encoder E, a decoder D, and a denoising function ϵϕ , parameterized by ϕ. The encoder E
compresses the input image x into a low-resolution latent vector z, written as z = E(x). Conversely,
the decoder D reconstructs the image from the latent vector as x = D(z). The denoising score
function ϵϕ estimates the given noise as ϵ̂ := ϵϕ (zt ; y, t), where zt is a noisy latent vector, formally
written as zt = αt z+σt ϵ. Here, αt and σt define a schedule for adding Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
to the latent vector z given a text embedding y at timestep t. Subsequently, the SDS loss is used to
provide gradients for optimizing the 3D representation θ, written as
                                                                     ∂z
                              ∇θ LSDS (ϕ, z) = Et,ϵ [ω(t)(ϵ̂ − ϵ) ],                                   (1)
                                                                     ∂θ
where ω(t) is a weighting function.

4    A PPROACH
We aim to generate high-quality 3D assets in a single-stage approach driven by text prompts. For
this, we propose our method as illustrated in Fig. 2. We present our technical contributions in two
parts. In Sec. 4.1, we compute the SDS loss in both the latent and image spaces of the pre-trained
SD model (Rombach et al., 2022). Unlike previous works (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2023b), we propose a simple yet effective timestep annealing approach that gradually reduces
timesteps (noise levels) throughout the optimization process. In Sec. 4.2, we introduce our variance
regularization loss for z-coordinates along NeRF rays. Additionally, we present a kernel smoothing
technique for importance sampling, enabling NeRFs to produce crisp geometry and maintain a view-
consistent appearance.
4.1 A DVANCING SDS- BASED OPTIMIZATION
Augmenting the SDS approach in both the image and latent spaces. In our work, we employ a
pre-trained SD model (Rombach et al., 2022) to optimize NeRFs. We extend the score distillation


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Latent diffusion prior
           ``Game asset of a                        𝒙                                          𝝐~𝒩(𝟎, 𝑰)
          leather shoe made
          from dragon skin”                                                         𝒛
                                                               ℰ

                                                             Encoder
                                                ℒ#$#%                                                𝒛𝒕
                                  Back
                               propagation
                                                               𝒟
                                                                       𝒛* = 𝒛* 𝟎
                    𝑔(𝜃)
                                                                                   Denoising
                                                    0
                                                    𝒙        Decoder                 step

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed method for text-to-3D generation. We aim to optimize a
3D model g(θ) using a pre-trained 2D latent diffusion prior . To achieve this, we employ a latent
diffusion model for score distillation. Specifically, the diffusion model takes a rendered image x as
input and provides the estimate of the input rendered image, denoted as x̂. We utilize LSDS+ loss
that computes reconstruction loss in both the latent and image spaces.


to both the latent and image spaces of the SD model. For this, we first reformulate the original SDS
loss (as described in Eq. 1) in terms of the latent vector residual instead of the noise residual:

                                             ∂z
       ∇θ LSDS (ϕ, z) = Et,ϵ ω(t)(ϵ̂ − ϵ)
                                             ∂θ
                                                                                                    (2)
                        1                 1                ∂z                    αt         ∂z
       = Et,ϵ ω(t)         (zt − αt ẑ) − (zt − αt z)             = Et,ϵ ω(t) (z − ẑ)            ,
                        σt                σt                ∂θ                   σt          ∂θ

where ẑ := α1t (zt − σt ϵ̂) represents the estimate of the latent vector z using the denoising function
ϵϕ , and (ẑ −z) is referred to as the latent vector residual. Note that due to the difficulty of recovering
an explicit loss formulation LSDS for the gradients in Eq. 1, Poole et al. (2022), directly compute
the gradients to optimize 3D representations. In contrast, our reparameterization of the gradients as
shown in Eq. 2 allows us to explicitly formulate the LSDS loss, thus simplifying the loss visualization
and analysis process. Formally, we have

                                    LSDS (ϕ, z) =       Et,ϵ ω(t)∥z − ẑ∥2 ,                               (3)

where we incorporate those coefficients related to t into ω(t).
Subsequently, we further adapt the loss by incorporating supervision for high-resolution images.
Formally, we define the adapted loss LSDS+ as

                                             Et,ϵ ω(t) ∥z − ẑ∥2 + λrgb ∥x − x̂∥2 ,

                       LSDS+ (ϕ, z, x) =                                                                   (4)

where x̂ is an recovered image obtained through the decoder D, formally denoted as x̂ = D(ẑ) and
λrgb is a scaling parameter. We note that a similar image reconstruction loss is employed in recent
image-to-3D reconstruction works (Zhou & Tulsiani, 2023). Our approach is different in two ways.
First, we observe that it is inadequate only to use the image residual, i.e., ∥x − x̂∥2 , without the
incorporation of the latent residual ∥z − ẑ∥2 , resulting in color bias issues in text-to-3D generation.
We will present the ablation experiments in Sec. 5.2. Second, using a random timestep sampling
approach in previous works (Zhou & Tulsiani, 2023; Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023) during
the denoising process limits the guidance of text-to-image diffusion models. In the following, we
analyze this in detail and introduce a novel timestep annealing approach designed to enhance the
SDS performance.
A timestep annealing approach offers a more effective alternative to random timestep sampling
used in previous works (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023). To be concrete, our observations
suggest that random sampling can introduce divergence issues in the denoised images. As training
nears completion, a NeRF renders images representing an almost determined 3D asset. In this case,


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Coarse         (b) Refined (w/o and w/ KS)          (c) w/o KS (d) Flickering (e) w/ KS
Figure 3: Visualization of the flickering issue. We display the sampled z-coordinates along the
ray for the rendered pixel (marked in the red square in (c) and (e)). Specifically, In (a), the ground-
truth PDF is shown in blue, while the estimated PDF is shown without (yellow) and with (green)
the kernel smoothing (KS) approach. In (b) we show the sampled z-coordinates in the refined stage,
without KS (left) or with KS (right). Their corresponding rendered image is presented in (c) and (e),
respectively. In (d), we overlay the difference of the two renderings (i.e. the flickering) on (c).

if a large timestep t is randomly sampled, the denoising function might predict an image that is
distinct and unrelated to the given input rendering. This can produce inaccurate gradients from the
diffusion model, thereby negatively impacting the optimization of the 3D model.
To circumvent this issue, we propose a timestep annealing approach. Specifically, we use a high
value of timestep t for the rendered image during the initial training iterations. This intentional
noise allows the image to align more closely with the distribution characterized by the text-to-image
diffusion prior. As training proceeds, we gradually reduce the timestep t, thereby capturing finer
details through more stable and lower variance gradients.
A question follows: what is the suitable annealing rate? We investigated several options, including
linear, cosine, and square root schedules. Empirical evaluation (details in Sec. 5) suggests that square
root scheduling yields superior results in our scenario, formally written as
                                                              r
                                                                     iter
                               t = tmax − (tmax − tmin )                    ,                        (5)
                                                                 total iter
where timestep t decreases steeply during the initial training process and decelerates as the training
progresses. This scheduling allocates more training iterations to lower values of timestep t, ensuring
that fine-grained details are sufficiently captured in the latter iterations of training.

4.2   A DVANCING REGULARIZATION IN N E RF REPRESENTATION
We introduce two techniques to improve NeRF representations, including a regularization method
for the variance of z-coordinates (a.k.a. z-variance) sampled along NeRF rays and a novel kernel
smoothing approach for importance sampling during rendering.
                                                                     PN
A NeRF renders a pixel color Ĉr of an image, denoted as Ĉr = i=1 νi ci , where νi and ci are
respectively estimated weights and colors of the sampled coordinate zi along a ray r (Mildenhall
et al., 2020). N refers to the number of sampled points along the ray r. Accordingly, the depth value
µzr and the disparity value dzr of the ray r are written as
                                        X       νi                   1
                               µzr =        zi P , and dzr =            ,                         (6)
                                          i      i νi               µzr
where Pνiνi can be considered as a sampled PDF.
         i

Regularization for z-variance aims to minimize variance in the distribution of sampled z-
coordinates zi along the ray r. A reduced variance indicates crisper surfaces in geometry. For
instance, in an extreme case where the rendering weights of a ray follow a Dirac delta function, the
z-variance will be zero, resulting in an extremely sharp surface. Formally, we denote the z-variance
along the ray r as σz2r :
                                                       X                 νi
                          σz2r = Ez [(zi − µzr )2 ] =      (zi − µzr )2 P .                      (7)
                                                         i                i νi

The regularization loss Lzvar for the variance σz2r is defined as
                                                           X
                       Lzvar = Er [δr σz2r ], δr = 1 if        νi > 0.5, else 0.                    (8)
                                                           i


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Dreamfusion                    Magic3D                   Fantasia3D                    Ours
Figure 4: Visual comparisons to baseline methods. We visualize rendered images and extracted
meshes, and compare with Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), and Fan-
tasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b). Prompts: “A plate piled high with chocolate chip cookies” (top) and
“An ice cream sundae” (bottom).


     LSDS+          LSDS-Latent       LSDS-Image          LSDS+          LSDS-Latent       LSDS-Image
Figure 5: Ablation study of LSDS+ with (1) the full SDS loss LSDS+ , (2) the SDS loss in latent
space only, denoted as LSDS-Latent , and (3) the SDS loss in image space only, denoted as LSDS-Image .
Prompts are: (a) “A baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes” and (b) “A peacock on a
surfboard”.


Here, δr acts as an indicator function (or binary weight) to filter out background rays. We find
this loss remarkably useful for ensuring geometrical consistency and eliminating cloudy geometri-
cal artifacts in our 3D model. In Fig. 6, we also compare the regularization loss Lzvar to existing
regularization strategies (Barron et al., 2022).
Consequently, the total loss function is defined as,

                                      L=      LSDS+ + λzvar Lzvar ,                                       (9)

where λzvar is the loss weight. We present our training procedure in the appendix, Algorithm 1.
Kernel smoothing for coarse-to-fine importance sampling. We observed that while integrating
the z-variance loss Lzvar sharpens the density distribution along the rays, it also intensifies the flick-
ering appearance. We consider the issue arising from the increased challenges of estimating the
PDF of volume density along these rays. To address this, we propose a simple yet effective kernel
smoothing (KS) technique for coarse-to-fine importance sampling during rendering. Specifically,
the KS approach involves a weighted moving average of neighboring PDF values estimated during
the coarse stage. The weight is defined by a sliding window kernel. This ensures a broader sam-
pling scope near the high-density regions in the refined stage. Formally,Pin the coarse stage, for
                                                                                 N
                                                                                 j=1 Kj ·vi+j−⌊ N ⌋
each weight vi along a ray r, the KS approach flattens the weight as vi =           PN          2
                                                                                                      , where
                                                                                      j=1 Kj
       N
K ∈ R is the kernel. In practice, we set K = [1, 1, 1]. In Fig. 3, we visualized in (a) the ground
truth and the estimated distribution of volume density along a NeRF ray in the coarse stage. In (b),
we display the sampled z-coordinates in the refined stage, either without (on the left) or with (on the
right) the KS approach. Their corresponding rendered images are shown in (c) and (e). Fig. 3 shows
that the KS approach ensures comprehensive sampling near the peak of the density distribution,
achieving multi-view consistent renderings and eliminating flickering issues.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Full L        w/o Lzvar + distortion loss          Full L         w/o Lzvar + distortion loss
Figure 6: Ablation study of the z-variance loss Lzvar . We experiment with (1) the full loss L,
(2) the loss without the z-variance loss Lzvar , and (3) the loss where the z-variance loss is replaced
with an alternative distortion loss (Barron et al., 2022). We show a rendered example on the left, a
zoomed-in result at the top right and the corresponding depth image at the bottom right.


    Sqrt (Ours)   Random     Linear      Cosine        Sqrt (Ours)    Random      Linear     Cosine

Figure 7: Ablation study of timestep annealing. We experiment various timestep annealing
schemes including square root, random sampling, linear and cosine. The results suggest that the
square root annealing rate yields supiror performance w.r.t. photo-realism and reasonable geometry.


5     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method to generate 3D assets from text prompts in Sec. 5.1. Specifically, we
compare our method with popular text-to-3D generation methods, Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022),
Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), and Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b). Additional comparisons to the
concurrent work ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b) are presented in Appendix A.4. Moreover, we
conduct extensive ablation studies in Sec. 5.2 to verify the effectiveness of each proposed technique.
We present experiments with an alternative text-to-image diffusion model in Sec. 5.3. In Sec. 5.4, we
extend our method on the image-to-3D reconstruction task, compared with baseline methods (Liu
et al., 2023b; Qian et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c). Implementation details are in Appendix A.1.

5.1    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Qualitative rendered results of the 3D assets generated by our approach are depicted in Fig. 1. Our
proposed approach generates high-fidelity 3D assets, with photo-realism and multi-view consistency.
Additional results are shown in Appendix A.3.
Qualitative comparisons to baseline methods are shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, in Fig. 4, we
compare our method with Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), and Fanta-
sia3D (Chen et al., 2023b) for text-to-3D generation. We observe that our rendered images exhibit
enhanced photo-realism, improved texture details of the 3D assets, and more natural lighting effects.
Additional comparisons are shown in Appendix A.4.

5.2    A BLATION STUDY

Ablation on image-space regularization. Fig. 5 compares results of three different SDS loss set-
tings: (1) the full SDS loss LSDS+ , (2) the SDS loss in latent space only, denoted as LSDS-Latent , and
(3) the SDS loss in image space only, denoted as LSDS-Image . The results indicate that incorporat-
ing the image-space regularization contributes to a more natural appearance and enhanced texture
details, as exemplified by the peacock images. However, relying solely on the image-space loss
LSDS-Image results in color bias issues, regardless of the guidance scale used.
Ablation on the z-variance loss Lzvar is shown in Fig. 6. In this case, we compare the results
obtained using (1) the full loss, (2) the loss without the z-variance loss Lzvar , and (3) the loss where
z-variance loss Lzvar is replaced with an alternative distortion loss introduced by Barron et al. (2022),
originally for outdoor scene reconstruction. Notably, the absence of the z-variance loss, Lzvar , leads
to the generation of assets with cloudy artifacts. While the distortion loss mitigates this cloudiness
issue, it occasionally compromises appearance details and hollow geometry. In comparison, our
proposed z-variance loss Lzvar consistently yields photo-realistic results with crisp geometry.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           SD                       IF            SD         IF             SD            IF
Figure 8: Experiments with alternative Deep Floyd IF model. We experiment with the stage-1
model in IF, which employs a T5-XXL (Raffel et al., 2020) text encoder, and provides guidance in
64 × 64 resolution. Prompts: (a) “a tiger dressed like a doctor”, (b) “a wide angle zoomed out DSLR
photo of a skiing penguin wearing a puffy jacket”, and (c) “a roast turkey on a platter with only one
pair of legs and one pair of wings”.
                       Novel view


    Input view                      Zero-1-to-3   Magic123    SyncDreamer         Ours
Figure 9: Novel view image generation given a single view image. We compare our method
with concurrent works, including Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023b), Magic123 (Qian et al., 2023), and
SyncDreamer (Liu et al., 2023c).


Ablation on timestep annealing. Fig. 7 shows rendering images using different timestep sampling
schemes. These include our proposed square root annealing rate, the random sampling adopted in
prior works Poole et al. (2022); Lin et al. (2023), and both the linear and cosine annealing rates. We
observe that the square root timestep annealing scheme outperforms the other baseline schemes in
capturing detailed appearance and geometry.

5.3       O PTIMIZATION WITH GUIDANCE FROM AN ADVANCED TEXT ENCODER
In addition to using the SD model (Rombach et al., 2022), we also employ diffusion guidance from
the Deep Floyd IF model 1 . The IF model employs an advanced text encoder, T5-XXL (Raffel et al.,
2020). In Fig. 8, we show difficulties in generating content for the terms “doctor” and “jacket”
and the Janus problems (i.e., multi-face issues) when using the SD model. These challenges can
be addressed using the IF model. Here, we only use the stage-1 model in IF, generating images at
64 × 64 resolution. A future direction would be to use the full model for high-resolution guidance.

5.4       I MAGE - TO -3D RECONSTRUCTION
Our method also enables the reconstruction of 3D assets from a single image. To achieve this, we
follow the concurrent work, SyncDreamer (Liu et al., 2023c), which involves hallucinating 16-view
images for auxiliary image reconstruction. Then, we incorporate an image (or latent) reconstruc-
tion loss for the given view(s) and utilize our score distillation method to optimize the remaining
randomly sampled views. Visual comparisons with the baseline methods are in Fig. 9. We observe
that our method can produce advancing photo-realistic images from novel views with reasonable de-
tails. We also conduct an image-guided hallucination experiment where we initially use the image
reconstruction loss, transitioning to exclusively use our proposed loss L throughout all views. See
Appendix A.5 for additional results.

6       C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel approach for high-quality text-to-3D generation in a single-stage training.
Specifically, we distill denoising scores from the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models in both
the image and latent spaces, paired with a novel timestep annealing approach. Moreover, we propose
two general improvements for NeRFs, including a z-variance loss and a kernel smooth approach, en-
suring 3D representation with consistent appearance and sharp geometry.
    1
        https://www.deepfloyd.ai/deepfloyd-if


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is partially supported by NSF III 2046795, IIS 1909577, CCF 1934986, NIH
1R01MH116226-01A, NIFA award 2020-67021-32799, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and Google
Inc.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Panos Achlioptas, Olga Diamanti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Leonidas Guibas. Learning representa-
  tions and generative models for 3d point clouds. In ICML, 2018.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In ICCV, 2021.
Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. CVPR, 2022.
Hansheng Chen, Jiatao Gu, Anpei Chen, Wei Tian, Zhuowen Tu, Lingjie Liu, and Hao Su. Single-
  stage diffusion nerf: A unified approach to 3d generation and reconstruction. In ICCV, 2023a.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13873, 2023b.
Yiwen Chen, Chi Zhang, Xiaofeng Yang, Zhongang Cai, Gang Yu, Lei Yang, and Guosheng Lin.
  It3d: Improved text-to-3d generation with explicit view synthesis, 2023c.
Zhiqin Chen and Hao Zhang. Learning implicit fields for generative shape modeling. In CVPR,
  2019.
Yen-Chi Cheng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tuyakov, Alex Schwing, and Liangyan Gui. SDFusion:
  Multimodal 3d shape completion, reconstruction, and generation. CVPR, 2023.
Ziya Erkoç, Fangchang Ma, Qi Shan, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Hyperdiffusion: Generat-
  ing implicit neural fields with weight-space diffusion, 2023.
Jiatao Gu, Alex Trevithick, Kai-En Lin, Josh Susskind, Christian Theobalt, Lingjie Liu, and Ravi
   Ramamoorthi. Nerfdiff: Single-image view synthesis with nerf-guided distillation from 3d-aware
   diffusion. In ICML, 2023.
Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Instruct-nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In ICCV, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.              Classifier-free diffusion guidance.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Fangzhou Hong, Zhaoxi Chen, Yushi Lan, Liang Pan, and Ziwei Liu. Eva3d: Compositional 3d
  human generation from 2d image collections. ICLR, 2023.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 2022.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T. Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. CVPR, 2022.
Nasir Mohammad Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Popa Tiberiu. Clip-mesh: Gen-
  erating textured meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. SIGGRAPH Asia 2022
  Conference Papers, December 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR, 2015.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In CVPR, 2023.
Chieh Hubert Lin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Willi Menapace, Menglei Chai, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Ming-
  Hsuan Yang, and Sergey Tulyakov. Infinicity: Infinite-scale city synthesis. ICCV, 2022.
Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Haian Jin, Linghao Chen, Mukund Varma T, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su.
 One-2-3-45: Any single image to 3d mesh in 45 seconds without per-shape optimization, 2023a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object, 2023b.
Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
  Syncdreamer: Learning to generate multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.03453, 2023c.
Jonathan Lorraine, Kevin Xie, Xiaohui Zeng, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Towaki Takikawa, Nicholas Sharp,
  Tsung-Yi Lin, Ming-Yu Liu, Sanja Fidler, and James Lucas. Att3d: Amortized text-to-3d object
  synthesis. ICCV, 2023.
Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In CVPR,
  2021.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. ECCV, 2020.
Paritosh Mittal, Yen-Chi Cheng, Maneesh Singh, and Shubham Tulsiani. AutoSDF: Shape priors
  for 3d completion, reconstruction and generation. In CVPR, 2022.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Trans. Graph., 2022.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-Ying
  Lee, Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, and Bernard Ghanem. Magic123: One
  image to high-quality 3d object generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.17843, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NeurIPS, 2022.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Edward J Smith and David Meger. Improved adversarial systems for 3d object generation and
  reconstruction. In CoRL, 2017.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. ICLR,
   2021.
Junshu Tang, Tengfei Wang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Ran Yi, Lizhuang Ma, and Dong Chen.
  Make-it-3d: High-fidelity 3d creation from a single image with diffusion prior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.14184, 2023.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. CVPR, 2023a.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Pro-
  lificdreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation.
  NeurIPS, 2023b.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jianwen Xie, Zilong Zheng, Ruiqi Gao, Wenguan Wang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu. Learn-
   ing descriptor networks for 3d shape synthesis and analysis. In CVPR, 2018.
Jiale Xu, Xintao Wang, Weihao Cheng, Yan-Pei Cao, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Shenghua Gao.
   Dream3d: Zero-shot text-to-3d synthesis using 3d shape prior and text-to-image diffusion models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14704, 2022.
Song-Hai Zhang, Yuan-Chen Guo, and Qing-Wen Gu. Sketch2model: View-aware 3d modeling
  from single free-hand sketches. In CVPR, 2021.
Zhizhuo Zhou and Shubham Tulsiani. Sparsefusion: Distilling view-conditioned diffusion for 3d
  reconstruction. In CVPR, 2023.
Peiye Zhuang, Samira Abnar, Jiatao Gu, Alex Schwing, Joshua M Susskind, and Miguel Ángel
  Bautista. Diffusion probabilistic fields. In ICLR, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A PPENDIX

We present our implementation details in Sec. A.1. Our training algorithm is shown in Sec. A.2.
Further 3D asset generation results can be viewed in Sec. A.3, and additional comparisons to text-
to-3D baseline methods are available in Sec. A.4. In Sec. A.5, we show additional image-to-3D
reconstruction results and experiments with an image-guided hallucination task where we generate
3D assets that are hallucinated from the given input image (rather than reconstruction). Please refer
to our video demo in the supplementary material for a comprehensive overview.

A.1     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Model setup. Our approach is implemented based on a publicly available repository 2 . In this im-
plementation, a NeRF is parameterized by a multi-layer perception (MLP), with instant-ngp (Müller
et al., 2022) for positional encoding. To enhance photo-realism and enable flexible lighting mod-
eling, instead of using Lambertian shading as employed in (Poole et al., 2022), we encode the ray
direction using spherical harmonics and utilize it as an input to NeRF. Additionally, we incorporate
a background network that predicts background color solely based on the ray direction. We employ
a pre-trained SD model 3 as diffusion prior, as well as a pre-trained dense prediction model 4 to
predict disparity maps.
Training setup. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 10−2 for instant-
ngp encoding, and 10−3 for NeRF weights. In practice, we choose total iter as 104 iterations.
The rendering resolution is 512 × 512. We employ DDIM (Song et al., 2021) with empirically
chosen parameters r = 0.25, and η = 1 to accelerate training. We choose the hyper-parameters
λrgb = 0.1, λd = 0.1, and λzvar = 3. Similar to prior work (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023a), we use classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) of 100 for our diffusion
model.

A.2     T RAINING ALGORITHM

We present our training procedure in Algorithm 1. In step 5, either a single-step or multi-step
denoising approach can be used to estimate the latent vector z. Here, the multi-step denoising refers
to the iterative denoising of ẑt , until t = 0.

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure
Input: A pre-trained SD Rombach et al. (2022) consisting of an encoder E, a decoder D, and a
    denoising autoencoder ϵϕ ; a rendering x = g(θ); a latent vector z = E(x); a number of total
    training steps total iter; range of the diffusion time steps [tmax , tmin ]; a conditioning y; scaling
    coefficients αt and σt .
 1: for iter = [0, total iter] do   q
 2:     t = tmax − (tmax − tmin ) totaliteriter
 3:     zt = αt z + σt ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
 4:     Estimating noise ϵ̂ = ϵϕ (zt ; y, t)
 5:     Estimating the latent vector ẑ = α1t (zt − σt ϵ̂) via either single- or multi-step denoising
 6:     Estimating the image x̂ = D(ẑ)
 7:     Compute the loss gradient ∇θ L and update θ
 8: end for
Return: θ


A.3     A DDITIONAL RESULTS OF TEXT- TO -3D GENERATION

We provide more generated 3D assets given text prompts in Fig. 10- 12.
    2
      https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion/tree/main.
    3
      We use the pre-trained SD in https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers.
    4
      https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   A DDITIONAL COMPARISONS TO THE BASELINE METHODS

We present additional comparisons to the baseline methods in Fig 13- 18, following the rendering
settings used in ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b).
Specifically, in Fig. 13, we present results only using NeRF representation, comparing them to two
baseline methods, namely ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b) and DreamFusion (Poole et al.,
2022). In this case, no fine-tuning stage for 3D asset generation is applied in these baseline methods
as illustrated in Fig. 13; our method allows the generation of high-fidelity details and natural colors
through only a single-stage optimization. We observe flickering issues and improper geometries
when using only the NeRF representation in ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b). In contrast, our
method consistently provides view and geometry-consistent results without flickering.
In Fig. 17, we present additional visual results, comparing them to the baseline methods, including
ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b), Fantasia3D Chen et al. (2023b), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023)
and DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022). In this case, the baseline methods (Wang et al., 2023b; Lin
et al., 2023) employ the full training pipeline, which includes NeRF representation followed by
fine-tuning.
Additional comparisons with Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b) and Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) are
shown in Fig. 14- 16, and comparisons with DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) in Fig. 18.
In Fig. 19, we integrate the z-variance loss into ProlificDreamer. We observe that incorporating
the z-variance loss results in sharper textures. In Fig.20, we present the results of ProlificDreamer
both without and with our proposed method, which includes the z-variance loss, the image-space
loss, and the square root time-step annealing schedule. From the results, our method enhances the
baseline approach, enabling it to generate superior renderings with detailed textures.

A.5   A DDITIONAL RESULTS OF IMAGE - TO -3D RECONSTRUCTION

In Fig. 21, we present additional image-to-3D reconstruction results. Additionally, we conduct
image-guided 3D hallucination experiments. Specifically, we execute image-to-3D reconstruction
at early training iterations, and then optimize the NeRF representation only using our proposed
distillation loss, omitting the image reconstruction loss. We show these results in Fig. 22.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 ``A ladybug”                               ``A low-poly tree”


       ``A model of the Eiffel Tower           ``A model of the Eiffel Tower, aerial view”
          made out of toothpicks”


        ``A high detailed octopus, 4k”                  ``A delicious croissant”


       ``An astronaut is riding a horse”               ``A broken old clay vessel”


Figure 10: Additional 3D asset generation results with the corresponding normal map given
text prompts (below each object).

                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      ``Gold skull, 4k, highest quality” ``The leaning tower of Pisa, aerial view”


            ``A pomeranian dog”                           ``A watermelon”


       ``A DSLR photo of Cthulhu”               ``A wooden medieval shipping barrel”


      ``Pumpkin head zombie, skinny,           ``A high detailed pumpkin, style cartoon,
      highly detailed, photorealistic”         front view, 4k, orange, funny and cute,
                                               HDR, Halloween”


Figure 11: Additional 3D asset generation results with the corresponding normal map given
text prompts (below each object).

                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  ``A tulip”                     ``Neuschwanstein Castle, aerial view”


                 ``A big coral”                  ``A pink cherry blossom shaped cake”


          ``An ice cream sundae”                              ``A ripe strawberry”


                  ``A shell”                   ``A stylized witch pot made of stone or mud with a wide
                                               base and a narrow neck, decorated with intricate carvings
                                               of runes and symbols, and is filled with a bubbling, green
                                               liquid. The pot is surrounded by a cloud of steam”


Figure 12: Additional 3D asset generation results with the corresponding normal map given
text prompts (below each object).

                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Ours                                        ProlificDreamer            DreamFusion
                                        ``A baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes”


                         Ours                                        ProlificDreamer            DreamFusion
                                                      ``A delicious croissant”


Figure 13: Additional visual comparisons using NeRF representation only. We compare visually
with the baseline methods, ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b) and DreamFusion (Poole et al.,
2022), specifically after the first training stage. In this case, 3D assets are represented by NeRF, with
no additional fine-tuning applied in the baselines.


                  Ours                                                     Fantasia3D                         Magic3D
                                ``A baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes”


                  Ours                                               Fantasia3D                               Magic3D
                                                 ``A ripe strawberry”


Figure 14: Additional visual comparisons with Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b) and Magic3D (Lin
et al., 2023).


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Ours                                           Fantasia3D
                                     ``a beagle eating a donut”


                       Ours                                           Fantasia3D
                      ``A blue jay standing on a large basket of rainbow macarons”


                       Ours                                          Fantasia3D
                          ``a Christmas tree with donuts as decorations”


                       Ours                                         Fantasia3D
                         ``a brightly colored mushroom growing on a log”


                       Ours                                          Fantasia3D
                       ``an orangutan making a clay bowl on a throwing wheel”


        Figure 15: Additional visual comparisons with Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b)



                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Ours                                              Fantasia3D
                                   ``a dalmatian wearing a fireman's hat”


                       Ours                                                Fantasia3D
                              ``an unstable rock cairn in the middle of a stream”


                       Ours                                              Fantasia3D
                                            ``a red-eyed tree frog”


                        Ours                                              Fantasia3D
                                           ``a dragon-cat hybrid”


                        Ours                                              Fantasia3D
                                       ``an amigurumi motorcycle”


        Figure 16: Additional visual comparisons with Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023b)



                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Ours


                ProlificDreamer                                  Fantasia3D


                   Magic3D                                      DreamFusion
                                 ``A car made out of sushi”


Figure 17: Additional visual comparisons with the baseline methods, including Prolific-
Dreamer (Wang et al., 2023b), Fantasia3D Chen et al. (2023b), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) and
DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022). In this case, the baseline methods (Wang et al., 2023b; Lin
et al., 2023) employ the full training pipeline, which includes NeRF representation followed by fine-
tuning.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Ours                                    DreamFusion
                                         ``A ladybug”


                    Ours                              DreamFusion
               ``A 3d model of an adorable cottage with a thatched roof”


                    Ours                               DreamFusion
           ``Michelangelo style statue of dog reading news on a cellphone”


                     Ours                                    DreamFusion
                                         ``A lionfish”
       Figure 18: Additional visual comparisons with DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022).
                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             4K iters                         7K iters                  10K iters

Figure 19: Visual results of incorporating the z-variance loss to ProlificDreamer (Wang et al.,
2023b) throughout the training process. We show rendered results w/o (left) and w/ (right) the
z-variance loss after 4K, 7K and 10K training iterations.


 Baseline     w/ our method        Baseline      w/ our method   Baseline      w/ our method

Figure 20: The baseline results, ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b), without and with our
proposed method. This includes the z-variance loss, the image-space loss, and the square root
time-step annealing schedule.
                                Novel views


              Input view
                                Novel views


              Input view
                Figure 21: Additional results of image-to-3D reconstruction.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Novel views


              Input view
                     ``A toy grabber with dinosaur head”
                               Novel views


              Input view
                    ``Hircine's Ring from Elder Scrolls Online”
                               Novel views


               Input view
                        ``A colorful painted teapot”
Figure 22: Visual results of image-guided 3D hallucination. We hallucinate the 3D asset from a
single given image using the prompt below the object.


                                               25
