Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S POKEN Q UESTION A NSWERING AND
S PEECH C ONTINUATION USING
S PECTROGRAM -P OWERED LLM
 Eliya Nachmani1,∗, Alon Levkovitch1,3,∗,†, Roy Hirsch2 , Julian Salazar1 ,
 Chulayuth Asawaroengchai1 , Soroosh Mariooryad1 , Ehud Rivlin2 ,
 RJ Skerry-Ryan1 , Michelle Tadmor Ramanovich1
 1
   Google Research, 2 Verily AI, 3 Tel-Aviv Univeristy
 {eliyn, alevkovitch, royhirsch}@google.com



                                               A BSTRACT
           We present Spectron, a novel approach to adapting pre-trained large language mod-
           els (LLMs) to perform spoken question answering (QA) and speech continuation.
           By endowing the LLM with a pre-trained speech encoder, our model becomes able
           to take speech inputs and generate speech outputs. The entire system is trained end-
           to-end and operates directly on spectrograms, simplifying our architecture. Key
           to our approach is a training objective that jointly supervises speech recognition,
           text continuation, and speech synthesis using only paired speech-text pairs, en-
           abling a ‘cross-modal’ chain-of-thought within a single decoding pass. Our method
           surpasses existing spoken language models in speaker preservation and semantic
           coherence. Furthermore, the proposed model improves upon direct initialization in
           retaining the knowledge of the original LLM as demonstrated through spoken QA
           datasets. We release our audio samples and spoken QA dataset via our website.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
The goal of natural language processing (NLP) is to develop computational models that can understand
and generate human language. By capturing the statistical patterns and structures of text-based natural
language, language models can predict and generate coherent and meaningful sequences of words.
Combined with the Transformer model architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), large language models
(LLMs) trained on web-scale amounts of text, with proportionate compute and size, have demonstrated
remarkable success in NLP tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022a; Scao et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023). However, transferring these abilities to
spoken human language remains a challenging frontier. Spoken dialog systems remain a cascade
of separately trained automatic speech recognition (ASR), natural language understanding (NLU)
and generation (NLG), and text-to-speech (TTS) systems (Gorin et al., 1997; Jokinen & McTear,
2009), with LLMs now playing the role of a combined NLU and NLG system. However, such
cascades introduce latency and additional mechanisms for propagating and rendering non-verbal
cues like speaker identity and prosody. Recently, spoken language models (Lakhotia et al., 2021;
Kharitonov et al., 2022) and other generative audio models (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Hawthorne et al.,
2022; Borsos et al., 2023; Agostinelli et al., 2023) have emerged as a promising avenue for generative
speech modeling. These works quantize audio representations (Hsu et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2021;
Zeghidour et al., 2022; Défossez et al., 2022) into learned discrete tokens compatible with the same
next-token cross-entropy objective as text LLMs, a step that (Nguyen et al., 2022) argued as necessary
for generative quality. In this paper, we introduce Spectron, a novel spoken language model that:

         • Directly process spectrograms as both input and output. Spectron leverages the audio
           capabilities of a pre-trained speech encoder through the use of intermediate projection
           layers.
    ∗
      Equal contribution.
    †
      Work done during an internship at Google.
    1
      https://michelleramanovich.github.io/spectron/spectron


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Spectron connects the encoder of a speech recognition model with a pre-trained Transformer
decoder language model. At training time, we take speech utterances and split their audio into a
prompt and its continuation. From the prompt speech features, the full (prompt and continuation’s)
transcript must be reconstructed, as well as the continuation’s speech features via newly introduced
pre- and post-net speech modules. At inference time, only a prompt is provided; the prompt’s
transcription, text continuation, and speech continuations are all generated by the model.


      • Demonstrably transfer generative ability from a pre-trained LLM, as shown by competitive
        performance in semantic coherence and spoken question answering over other end-to-end
        spoken language models.

To quantify this transfer of knowledge, we also introduce two benchmarks for the nascent spoken QA
task, which we synthesize from Web Questions (Berant et al., 2013) and generations from LLaMA
(Touvron et al., 2023). Audio samples and our LLaMA dataset can be found on the project website
given on the first page.
Our work shows that the inductive biases from a pre-trained speech encoder and a language model
decoder enable end-to-end training and state-of-the-art performance without sacrificing representa-
tional fidelity. Key to this is a novel end-to-end training objective which implicitly supervises speech
recognition, text continuation, and conditional speech synthesis in a joint manner. The language
model transcribes and generates text continuations, acting as an ‘intermediate scratchpad’ (Nye et al.,
2021; Wei et al., 2022) to be conditioned on for audio generation. A novel spectrogram regression
loss also supervises the model to match the higher-order temporal and feature deltas of the ground
truth, based on the idea that the derivatives of the ground truth express rich, longer-range information
about the shape of the signal. Our overall scheme is summarized in Figure 1 and described in the rest
of this work.

2   R ELATED WORK

The dominant approach to spoken language modeling is to use compact discrete speech represen-
tations. This allows the application of text-based language models to speech data. Typically, these
representations are created by clustering the outputs of a speech encoder using K-means and taking
the centroids as tokens. The resulting discrete sequences can be easily modeled using Transformer
architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). Below are notable examples of works using this approach; a
comparison table is also presented in Appendix A.2.
Generative Spoken Language Modeling (GSLM; Lakhotia et al., 2021) offers a baseline system
that operate on units quantized from pre-trained audio representations, such as HuBERT (Hsu et al.,
2021). The quantized units are processed by a Transformer-based model. An additional unit-to-speech


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decoder converts the generated units into spectrograms. Spectron’s approach is more simple and
explicit, where a single model is input with spectrograms and outputs raw spectrograms.
TWIST (Hassid et al., 2023) uses the same unit-to-speech and speech-to-unit systems as GSLM,
but warm-starts the spoken language model from a text-based language model. They show that
this warm-start improves overall metrics and convergence speed, with reasonable performance on
StoryCloze tasks (though notably degraded from the text model). For the textual language model, they
use the state-of-the-art and open-weight OPT (?) and LLaMA models up to 7B (13B at camera-ready
time) and show that spoken language model improvements scale.
AudioLM (Borsos et al., 2023) utilizes two kinds of quantized representations: w2v-BERT (Chung
et al., 2021) as semantic tokens, and SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) as acoustic tokens.
SoundStream embeddings undergo discretization using residual vector quantization (RVQ), resulting
in a hierarchy of vector quantizers. AudioLM utilizes three transformer models, each corresponding
to a different layer of token generation. As Spectron does not involve any quantization, our method
naturally preserves the input’s semantic and acoustic characteristics. Furthermore, Spectron offers a
single model trained with a unified objective, as opposed to the multiple components of AudioLM.
SpeechGPT (Zhang et al., 2023a) adapts LLaMA-7B to perform speech tasks by using both discrete
speech representations and text. They introduce the SpeechInstruct dataset which they use for
instruction tuning. SpeechGPT is trained in 3 different steps: modality adaptation, cross-modal
instruction fine-tuning, and chain-of-modality instruction fine-tuning (using LoRA; Hu et al., 2022).
The obtained model is capable of generating both speech and text, as well as following instructions in
both modalities. Our method, in comparison, is trained using a single reconstruction step and uses
only public datasets for integration. Despite not using a curated dataset or specialized prompts, we
demonstrate competitive performance on spoken question answering and superior results for speech
continuation.
As for related works in other tasks: Spoken language understanding (SLU): A number of recent
studies explore the usage of pre-trained language models (LMs) for different SLU tasks. Gong
et al. (2023), Zhao et al. (2023), and Liu et al. (2023a) fine-tuned LMs on audio data to perform
speech-to-text question answering tasks, that is, answer textual questions about directly-input audio.
Fathullah et al. (2023) showed that adding an audio encoder to an LM and training with LoRA enables
the LM to perform automatic speech recognition (ASR). Zhang et al. (2022b) aligned text and audio
tokens to perform a large number of SLU tasks. Peng et al. (2023) showed that LMs can be used to
answer text questions about spoken properties of language. Spectron, in comparison, produces both
textual outputs and spectrograms using a single autoregressive decoder. Multi-modal text-speech
training: Ao et al. (2022) performed joint training on speech and text data to perform multiple tasks,
such as text-to-speech (TTS) and ASR. Ren et al. (2019) used unsupervised pre-training on text and
speech data to perform TTS for low-resource languages. Textual-guided audio generation: Liu
et al. (2023b) used LMs to generate audio scripts and interacting with audio-creation APIs. Huang
et al. (2023) augmented the ChatGPT input/output interface to invoke ASR / TTS tools.


3     A PPROACH

3.1     A RCHITECTURE

We propose a novel architecture for direct speech continuation. The architecture is initialized with a
pre-trained speech encoder denoted as E and a pre-trained language decoder denoted as LM. The
encoder is prompted with a speech utterance as input, which it encodes into continuous linguistic
features. These features are fed into the decoder as a prefix, and the whole encoder-decoder is
optimized to jointly minimize a cross-entropy loss (for speech recognition and transcript continuation)
and a novel reconstruction loss (for speech continuation). During inference, one provides a spoken
speech prompt, which is encoded and then decoded to give both text and speech continuations.

3.1.1    I NPUT PRE - PROCESSING

During training, the proposed model uses supervised speech utterances, which are pairs of speech x
and transcripts y for training. The speech input, denoted as x, is a spectrogram that is split into two


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


segments at position s:
                                      xp = x≤s , xc = x>s .                                         (1)
The first segment xp (which we call the prompt) is fed into the speech encoder E to give continuous
representations that condition the LM. The second segment xc (the continuation) is used later for a
spectrogram reconstruction loss. SpecAugment (Park et al., 2019) is applied for data augmentation.
The corresponding transcripts y can be also split at position φ(s):
                                    yp = y≤φ(s) , yc = y>φ(s) ,                                     (2)
where φ(s) maps the feature index s in x to its text token index in y. Note that φ(s) is not needed for
our training losses.

3.1.2   S PEECH ENCODER
The speech encoder E is a 600M-parameter Conformer encoder (Gulati et al., 2020) pre-trained on
web-scale data (12M hours; Zhang et al., 2023b). It takes the spectrogram of the source speech as
input, generating a hidden representation that incorporates both linguistic and acoustic information.
The input spectrogram is first subsampled using a convolutional layer and then processed by a series
of Conformer blocks. Each Conformer block consists of a feed-forward layer, a self-attention layer, a
convolution layer, and a second feed-forward layer. The outputs of the total encoder E are passed
through a layer P that projects the hidden representations into the embedding dimension of the
language model. We denote these final embeddings
                                         xlm
                                           p = P(E(xp )).                                         (3)
3.1.3   L ANGUAGE MODEL
We use prefix decoder language models with 350M or 1B parameters trained in the manner of PaLM 2
(Google, 2023), which we denote as LM(−). The LM receives the encoded features of the prompt
xlm
  p as a prefix. Note that this is the only connection between the speech encoder and the LM decoder;
i.e., there is no cross-attention between the encoder and the decoder. This late-stage integration is
consistent with work in ASR, which found that joint fine-tuning of a pre-trained speech encoder and
a pre-trained LM decoder into a sequence-to-sequence model can improve performance, even if the
integration occurs as a single final layer (Deng et al., 2021); more layers did not improve performance,
which they attribute to having sufficiently powerful text representations. During training, the decoder
is teacher-forced to predict the text transcription yp , text continuation yc , and speech embeddings xpc .
To convert the speech embeddings to and from spectrograms, we introduce lightweight modules hpre
and hpost , described in the next section. In all, we get next-step predictions for the concatenation of
these text tokens and embeddings:
                                    [ŷp , ŷc , x̂pc ] = LM(xlm              p
                                                              p , [yp , yc , xc ]).                   (4)
By having the same architecture decode the intermediate text and the spectrograms, we gain two
benefits. First, we benefit from the pre-training of the LM in the text domain to continue the prompt
in the text domain before synthesizing the speech. Secondly, the predicted text serves as intermediate
reasoning, enhancing the quality of the synthesized speech, analogous to improvements in text-based
language models when using intermediate scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021) or chain-of-thought (CoT;
Wei et al., 2022).

3.1.4   ACOUSTIC PROJECTION LAYERS
To enable the language model decoder to model speech features, we employ a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP), the pre-net hpre to project the ground truth spectrogram speech continuations xc to the
language model dimension xpc = hpre (xc ). This pre-net hpre compresses the spectrogram input
xc into a lower dimension, creating a bottleneck that aids the decoding process. This bottleneck
mechanism prevents the model from repetitively generating the same prediction in the decoding
process, as demonstrated in previous work (Shen et al., 2018). To project x̂pc from the language model
dimension to the spectrogram dimension, the model employs a post-net hpost , which is also an MLP.
This projection is represented by x̂c = hpost (x̂pc ).
Both hpre and hpost are two-layer MLPs. Additionally, the input text sequence [yp , yc ] is padded at
the beginning with a “start of sequence” (sos) token, while the output sequence is padded with an
“end of sequence” (eos) token at the final position.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2     T RAINING OBJECTIVE

The training methodology of the proposed approach is depicted in Figure 1. It uses two distinct loss
functions: (1) cross-entropy loss, employed for both speech recognition and transcript continuation,
and (2) regression loss, employed for speech continuation. During training, all parameters are updated
(speech encoder E, projection layer Ps , language model LM, pre-net hpre , and post-net hpost ).

3.2.1    S PEECH RECOGNITION AND TRANSCRIPT CONTINUATION
The first loss term is a combination of a speech recognition loss LASR and a transcript continuation
loss LLM , which are given by:
                      LASR (yp , ŷp ) = CE(yp , ŷp ),        LLM (yc , ŷc ) = CE(yc , ŷc ),         (5)
where CE denotes cross-entropy, which quantifies the dissimilarity between the predicted distribution
over ŷp , ŷc , and the corresponding ground truth distribution over yp , yc . This objective increases the
likelihood of the text [yp , yc ] under the conditional distribution modeled by the LM.

3.2.2    S PEECH CONTINUATION
The speech continuation objective is formulated as a regression task, predicting each frame’s spec-
trogram channels independently given previous frame spectrogram predictions and the ASR and
LM context. To promote convergence and improve modeling power, we apply `1 and `2 regression
losses on the spectrogram (Shen et al., 2020). These losses are applied to the feature-deltas of the
spectrogram, and to the time-deltas of the spectrogram up to order K, giving “(discrete) derivative
loss” terms. That is, for a tensor z of dimension T × F we define:
                   ∆time                              feat
                    k (z) = z[1:T −k,:] − z[k:T,:] , ∆k (z) = z[:,1:F −k] − z[:,k:F ] ,                 (6)
                   L1+2 (z, z ) = ||z − z ||1 + ||z − z 0 ||22 .
                               0              0
                                                                                                        (7)
For a ground truth spectrogram xc and the predicted spectrogram x̂c , the speech continuation loss is
a combination of three objectives:
                              Ls (xc , x̂c ) = L1+2 (xc , x̂c ),                                        (8)
                              Lf (xc , x̂c ) = L1+2 (∆feat      feat
                                                      1 (xc ), ∆1 (x̂c )),                              (9)
                                                  K
                                                  X
                              Lt (xc , x̂c ) =          L1+2 (∆time      time
                                                               k (xc ), ∆k (x̂c ))                     (10)
                                                  k=1

The overall speech continuation loss is thus given by:
                       LRecon. (xc , x̂c ) = Ls (xc , x̂c ) + Lf (xc , x̂c ) + Lt (xc , x̂c ).         (11)

3.2.3    OVERALL LOSS
Using the above notation, our objective is:
                     Ltotal (x, y) = LASR (yp , ŷp ) + LLM (yc , ŷc ) + LRecon. (xc , x̂c ).         (12)

Since LASR and LLM are cross-entropy losses and since y = [yp , yc ] (Eq.2), the overall speech
recognition and transcript continuation loss can be written as:
                         LASR (yp , ŷp ) + LLM (yc , ŷc ) = CE(y, ŷ) = LCE (y, ŷ)                  (13)
where ŷ is the concatenation of ŷp and ŷc . This simplifies the overall loss to:
                              Ltotal (x, y) = LCE (y, ŷ) + λr LRecon. (xc , x̂c ),                    (14)
where λr is a weighting coefficient. This simplification eliminates the necessity of the text-speech
time alignment φ(s). Our approach can be seen as jointly optimizing three capabilities:
Speech recognition (LASR ): The combined model learns to transcribe speech audio into text. As we
use a pre-trained speech encoder and a pre-trained language model, this objective encourages the
alignment and integration of each model’s functionality.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Transcript continuation (LLM ): This reuses, maintains, and leverages the language model’s ability
to generate natural text as learned from its training scheme, for example, dialogue for a chat-optimized
LM. Depending on the utterance, the decoder may further learn to use paralinguistic cues from the
prompt speech to favor certain completions.
Conditional speech synthesis (LRecon. ): We reuse the language model’s autoregressive generation
ability and direct it toward spectrogram reconstruction. As the teacher-forced transcript is available
and the most “accessible” feature, the decoder learns to perform text-to-speech. In this way, the model
can synthesize the LM’s arbitrary textual continuations at inference time, including words not found
in training. Finally, we expect that good spectrogram-level continuations require the preservation of
speaker, prosody, and channel effects from the original speech prompt.

3.3   I NFERENCE

In inference, the speech prompt xp is encoded by the speech encoder E, then projected by Ps
to the LM’s dimension to give xlm                            lm
                                       p (Eq. 3). Utilizing xp and the start-of-sentence (sos) token,
the language model decodes text in an autoregressive manner: ŷ = LM([xlm            p , sos]) until eos is
emitted, where ŷ is a concatenation of the predicted transcript and continuation [ŷp , ŷc ]. Following
this, the language model decodes a spectrogram in an autoregressive manner. It predicts the next
spectrogram feature estimate x̂c (t) using prompt features xlm  p , text prediction ŷ and past estimated
spectrogram features x̂c (≤ t − 1). Past spectrogram estimates x̂c (≤ t − 1) are projected to the
language model dimension: x̂pc (≤ t − 1) = hpre (x̂c (≤ t − 1)). Then, x̂pc (t) is predicted at step t:
x̂pc (t) = LM([xlm             p                                p
                p , sos, ŷ, x̂c (≤ t−1)]) The decoded output x̂c (t) is then projected to the spectrogram
                post               post p
domain using h : x̂c (t) = h (x̂c (t)). Finally, a vocoder converts the predicted spectrogram x̂c
into a waveform signal.


4     E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

4.1   DATA AND PRE - PROCESSING

To empirically evaluate the performance of the proposed approach, we conducted experiments on
the Libri-Light dataset (Kahn et al., 2020). Libri-Light is a 60k hour English dataset consisting
of unlabelled read speech from LibriVox audiobooks. For our training objective, the dataset was
transcribed using a NST (Park et al., 2020) model trained on LibriSpeech (960 hours). We used a
frozen neural vocoder, WaveFit (Koizumi et al., 2022), with its default hyperparameters to convert
the predicted spectrograms into raw audio. Our proposed model was trained using 64 TPUv4 chips
(Jouppi et al., 2023), over a duration of 48 hours. We give a comprehensive table of hyperparameters
in Appendix A.1. We consider a predetermined set of 3-second prefixes denoted as s = 3sec. During
training utterances with a length of less than 3 seconds are discarded. For Libri-Light, only 0.04% of
utterances are less than 3 seconds. To evaluate our model and the baseline models during testing, we
utilize the test-clean test set from LibriSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015). We employ the first 3 seconds
of each utterance in the test set as a prompt to the models, excluding the ground truth transcripts.
For semantic and acoustic quality, Spectron was trained with a LM of 350 million parameters, while
for the question answering task, Spectron was trained with an LM of 1 billion parameters. The two
models are identical except for the LM. In Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 a 350M LM was used; in Section
4.2.3 a 1B LM was used.

4.2   BASELINES

We compare our method against existing spoken language models:
GSLM: We evaluate their best model, the HuBERT-L6 configuration with 200 token units, for
conditional speech continuation. The model was trained on a filtered subset of Libri-Light (Rivière &
Dupoux, 2021). AudioLM: We utilize the Libri-Light trained model described in their work. The
two AudioLM models we compare against differ in the number of SoundStream residual vector
quantizer (RVQ) layers they generate. One model generates the top 3 layers (3-RVQ), while the other
model generates all 12 layers (12-RVQ). TWIST: We evaluate both the OPT-1.3B and LLaMA-7B-
initialized versions of their models, which were trained towards quantized HuBERT representations.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Their models were trained on Libri-Light, Spotify podcasts (Clifton et al., 2020), The People’s Speech
(Galvez et al., 2021) and VoxPopuli (Wang et al., 2021). SpeechGPT: We evaluate their open-sourced
model, which is based upon the LLaMA-7B model with HuBERT speech representations. This model
is termed SpeechGPT-7B-com, and was trained using all 3 training stages in SpeechGPT. The model
was trained using the Libri-Light and SpeechInstruct datasets.

4.2.1   S EMANTIC QUALITY

We employ the log-perplexity metric to evaluate the semantic quality of the speech output from
the models. We use a state-of-the-art Conformer ASR system (Zhang et al., 2023b) trained on a
proprietary English-only dataset to transcribe the speech continuation. Subsequently, we compute the
log-perplexity of the predicted transcripts using GPT-2 medium (Radford et al., 2019) via the open-
source transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020). The results presented in Table 1 demonstrate
the performance gains of our method compared to previous approaches such as GSLM, where our
method achieves an improvement of 170.91 in log-perplexity. Furthermore, when compared to the
state-of-the-art AudioLM method, our approach outperforms both the 3-RVQ and 12-RVQ variants,
exhibiting enhancements of 12.88 and 14.20 respectively. Moreover, the results in Table 1 reveal that
our method exhibits improved performance compared to existing cascade methods.

4.2.2   ACOUSTIC QUALITY

We consider two metrics to capture acoustic quality and speaker consistency, respectively: Natu-
ralness Mean Opinion Score (N-MOS; Nguyen et al., 2023): This is reported solely for speech
continuations. Human evaluators are tasked with assigning a rating on a five-point scale to denote the
perceived naturalness of a given speech utterance, spanning from 1 (indicative of poor quality) to 5
(indicative of excellent quality). Tests were conducted using 20 randomly sampled utterances from
the LibriSpeech test-clean test set. 30 raters participated in the tests. The prompts were not available
to the raters. Avg. speaker similarity: We compute the speaker similarity between the input prompt
and its generated continuation using the speaker encoder of the PnG-NAT TTS model (Morioka et al.,
2022). We compute the speaker embeddings of both and measure the cosine similarity between each
pair of embeddings. We report the average across the entire test set.
As seen in Table 2, our approach performs better than GSLM in terms of N-MOS with an improvement
of 0.55 absolute. When compared to AudioLM, our approach is comparable to the 3-RVQ version
and slightly inferior to the 12-RVQ version, with a decrease of 0.19 in N-MOS. One can see in
Table 2 that the results of TWIST are similar to those of GSLM, and that Spectron outperforms the
1.3B and 7B versions by 0.4 and 0.65 respectively. SpeechGPT performs slightly inferior to Spectron,
which outperforms it by a score of 0.3. Table 3 presents the results for average speaker similarity. Our
method demonstrates a significant improvement of 0.31 over the GSLM method. When compared to
AudioLM, our method outperforms both the 3-RVQ and 12-RVQ versions, with increases of 0.05 and
0.07 in average speaker similarity, respectively. Moreover, comparing to TWIST 1.3B and 7B, the
proposed method improve the average speaker similarity by 0.18 and 0.19, respectively. These results
indicate that comparable acoustic quality can be achieved with Spectron’s simpler approach. Our
model is trained end-to-end and utilizes the universal speech representation encoded by spectrograms.
Note that SpeechGPT does not intend to preserve speaker identity, which is why its average speaker
similarity is lower.

Table 1: Log-perplexity for completions of LibriSpeech utterances given a 3-second prompt. Lower
is better.
                            Method                     Log-perplexity (↓)
                            GSLM                            296.99
                            AudioLM (3-RVQ)                 138.96
                            AudioLM (12-RVQ)                140.28
                            TWIST (1.3B)                    229.53
                            TWIST (7B)                      170.81
                            SpeechGPT                       136.42
                            Spectron (350M)                 126.08


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 2: Naturalness Mean Opinion Score           Table 3: Average Speaker Similarity metric
     (N-MOS; Mean ± SE) for completions of             for completions of LibriSpeech utterances.
     LibriSpeech utterances.
                                                       Method                  Speaker Sim. (↑)
        Method                  N-MOS (↑)
                                                       GSLM                           0.11
        GSLM                    3.13 ± 0.32            AudioLM (3-RVQ)                0.37
        AudioLM (3-RVQ)         3.61 ± 0.29            AudioLM (12-RVQ)               0.35
        AudioLM (12-RVQ)        3.87 ± 0.32            TWIST (1.3B)                   0.24
        TWIST (1.3B)            3.28 ± 0.24            TWIST (7B)                     0.23
        TWIST (7B)              3.03 ± 0.22            SpeechGPT                      0.05
        SpeechGPT               3.38 ± 0.30
                                                       Spectron (350M)                0.42
        Spectron (350M)         3.68 ± 0.29
        Ground Truth            4.23 ± 0.33


4.2.3   Q UESTION A NSWERING
We propose examining whether the models can continue spoken sentences or questions with the
appropriate answer. This can can be viewed as spoken generative QA; the correct answer must be
produced out of infinite possible speech continuations. Note that except for SpeechGPT, all other
methods (including ours) have not seen instruction data and are thus evaluated in a zero-shot fashion
for spoken question answering. Given that the various spoken language models are evaluated with
3-second input contexts, we use TTS (via the publicly-available Google Cloud TTS service, voice
en-US-Neural2-C) to synthesize questions that fit within this duration. The questions are drawn
from an existing set and a new test set which we name LLaMA-Questions. WebQuestions (Berant
et al., 2013) is an open-ended text QA NLP dataset. The dataset contains open-ended questions that
are answerable via the Freebase database and are centered around a single named entity. LLaMA-
Questions is an open-domain world knowledge QA dataset that we synthesized using LLaMA-7B.
We prompted the model to provide questions and short answers regarding various topics. Overall, we
gathered 300 questions in this manner and generally verified the answers. Answer accuracy: We
use a Conformer ASR system (Zhang et al., 2023b) to transcribe the answers of the models. If the
text answer is contained in the transcript, we count the answer as being correct (as zero-shot models
are merely continuing the prefix audio).
The results presented in Table 4 demonstrate the performance of the proposed model in comparison
to other existing models. Specifically, the proposed model exhibits an accuracy of 22.9% on LLaMA-
Questions, while SpeechGPT achieves a comparable accuracy of 21.9%. Note that in contrast
to SpeechGPT’s utilization of a larger model architecture comprising 7 billion parameters, our
proposed method uses a more modest 1 billion parameter LM for comparable results. In contrast,
TWIST models with 1.3 billion and 7 billion parameters demonstrate lower accuracies of 1% and
0.5% respectively. Upon careful examination, it becomes evident that these models predominantly
generate completions of input questions rather than providing substantive answers. AudioLM 3-RVQ,
AudioLM 12-RVQ and GSLM achieved accuracy of 7%, 6.7% and 4%, respectability, which is likely
due to the fact that the underlying Transformer architecture is not pre-trained on a large language
model. Similarly, on the Web Questions test set, the proposed model attains an accuracy of 6.1%,
while SpeechGPT yields a comparable accuracy of 6.5%. Again, TWIST models with 1.3 billion
and 7 billion parameters achieve accuracies of 0.7% and 1.1% respectively, further reinforcing the
observed trend of completion-centric behavior rather than direct question answering. Additionally,
models such as AudioLM 3-RVQ, AudioLM 12-RVQ, and GSLM exhibit accuracies of 2.3%, 2.3%,
and 1.5% respectively, which can likely be attributed to the absence of pre-training on a large-scale
language model within the underlying Transformer architecture.
Audio samples and our spoken QA dataset can be found on the project website.

4.2.4   A BLATION ANALYSIS
To understand the individual impacts of various components within the proposed approach, an ablation
study was conducted. We measure the log-perplexity over the test-clean test set of the LibriSpeech


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 4: Accuracy (%) on spoken question answering datasets.
        Method                   Web Questions (↑)      LLaMA-Questions (↑)           Zero-Shot
        GSLM                             1.5                         4.0                 X
        AudioLM (3-RVQ)                  2.3                         7.0                 X
        AudioLM (12-RVQ)                 2.3                         6.7                 X
        TWIST (1.3B)                     0.7                         1.0                 X
        TWIST (7B)                       1.1                         0.5                 X
        SpeechGPT (7B)                   6.5                        21.9                 ×
        Spectron (1B)                    6.1                        22.9                 X

dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015). This study involved removing each specific component in isolation.
(i) Disabled intermediate loss on text (“-LCE ”) (ii) removed spectrogram derivative loss (“-(Lf + Lt )”)
(iii) removed pre-training of the language model LM, letting it train from scratch (iv) removed
pre-training of the speech encoder E and training it from scratch (v) removed pre-training of both
the speech encoder E and language model LM, training the entire model from scratch. The findings
are summarized in Table 5. The results demonstrate that each of the aforementioned components
contributes to the overall performance enhancement of the proposed approach. Notably, the ASR &
LM cross-entropy loss LCE and the spectrogram derivative loss Lf + Lt have the most significant
impact, leading to a degradation of 661.81 and 588.35 in the log-perplexity score, respectively.
Furthermore, the incorporation of the pre-trained speech encoder and pre-trained language model
exhibits a discernible decline in performance, resulting in a degradation of 87.17 and 75.63 in the
log-perplexity score, respectively. Notably, when both the speech encoder and pre-trained language
model are removed, a degradation of 118.31 in the log-perplexity score is observed.


                                      Table 5: Ablation analysis.
                     Model                                     Log-perplexity (↓)
                     Proposed Spectron (350M)                                126.08
                      − LCE                                                  714.43
                      − (Lf + Lt )                                           787.89
                      − Pre-trained LM                                       201.71
                      − Pre-trained speech encoder                           213.25
                      − Pre-trained LM & speech encoder                      244.39


5    L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The limitation of our work is the high time and space complexity of generating spectrogram frames.
Since spectrogram frames are computed with a rate of 12.5 ms, generation of long speech utterances is
not possible. We hypothesize that potential solutions include generating multiple spectrogram frames
from each hidden representation. Another limitation is that text and spectrogram decoding processes
are not parallelizable. This hinders the ability to use Spectron in streaming scenarios and introduces a
small latency between audio input and output. We leave the development of a parallelized decoding
algorithm for future work. We further recognize that biases in the pre-trained language model may be
sustained in our model, we refer to Google (2023) for a detailed discussion of ethical considerations
for text-based language models.


6    C ONCLUSION

We proposed Spectron, a neural direct speech continuation model that can be trained end-to-end and
operates in the spectrogram domain. We showed that a pre-trained language model can be given
speech recognition and generation capabilities post-hoc, by fine-tuning on continuation tasks using a
pre-trained speech encoder and a novel training objective. The result is a model that benefits from the
pre-training of both models and outperforms previous spoken language models on various metrics.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Heiga Zen, Neil Zeghidour, Eugene Kharitonov, Tal Schuster, Bryan
Richter, Christian Frank, Marco Tagliasacchi, Nadav Bar, and the rest of the Google Research team
for helpful discussions and previous work on data preparation. The contribution of Alon Levkovitch
is part of his Ph.D. thesis research conducted at Tel-Aviv University.

R EFERENCES
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse H. Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
  Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matthew Sharifi, Neil Zeghi-
  dour, and Christian Havnø Frank. MusicLM: Generating music from text. CoRR, abs/2301.11325,
  2023.
Junyi Ao, Rui Wang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Shuo Ren, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Tom Ko, Qing Li,
  Yu Zhang, Zhihua Wei, Yao Qian, Jinyu Li, and Furu Wei. SpeechT5: Unified-modal encoder-
  decoder pre-training for spoken language processing. In ACL (1), pp. 5723–5738. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Michael Henretty, Reuben
  Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis M. Tyers, and Gregor Weber. Common Voice: A massively-
  multilingual speech corpus. In LREC, pp. 4218–4222. European Language Resources Association,
  2020.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
  question-answer pairs. In EMNLP, pp. 1533–1544. ACL, 2013.
Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew
  Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour.
  AudioLM: A language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech
  Lang. Process., 31:2523–2533, 2023.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
  Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
  Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Re-
  won Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta,
  Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff
  Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. CoRR,
  abs/2204.02311, 2022.
Yu-An Chung, Yu Zhang, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Ruoming Pang, and Yonghui
  Wu. w2v-bert: Combining contrastive learning and masked language modeling for self-supervised
  speech pre-training. In ASRU, pp. 244–250. IEEE, 2021.
Ann Clifton, Aasish Pappu, Sravana Reddy, Yongze Yu, Jussi Karlgren, Ben Carterette, and Rosie
 Jones. The Spotify Podcasts dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04270, 2020.
Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio
  compression. CoRR, abs/2210.13438, 2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Keqi Deng, Songjun Cao, Yike Zhang, and Long Ma. Improving hybrid CTC/attention end-to-end
  speech recognition with pretrained acoustic and language models. In ASRU, pp. 76–82. IEEE,
  2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT (1), pp. 4171–4186.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Prafulla Dhariwal, Heewoo Jun, Christine Payne, Jong Wook Kim, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Jukebox: A generative model for music. CoRR, abs/2005.00341, 2020.
Yassir Fathullah, Chunyang Wu, Egor Lakomkin, Junteng Jia, Yuan Shangguan, Ke Li, Jinxi Guo,
  Wenhan Xiong, Jay Mahadeokar, Ozlem Kalinli, et al. Prompting large language models with
  speech recognition abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11795, 2023.
Daniel Galvez, Greg Diamos, Juan Torres, Keith Achorn, Juan Felipe Cerón, Anjali Gopi, David
  Kanter, Max Lam, Mark Mazumder, and Vijay Janapa Reddi. The People’s Speech: A large-
  scale diverse english speech recognition dataset for commercial usage. In NeurIPS Datasets and
  Benchmarks, 2021.
Yuan Gong, Hongyin Luo, Alexander H Liu, Leonid Karlinsky, and James Glass. Listen, think, and
  understand. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10790, 2023.
Google. PaLM 2 technical report, 2023.         https://ai.google/static/documents/
  palm2techreport.pdf.
Allen L. Gorin, Giuseppe Riccardi, and Jeremy H. Wright. How may I help you? Speech Commun.,
  23(1-2):113–127, 1997.
Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
 Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Ruoming Pang. Conformer: Convolution-augmented
  transformer for speech recognition. In INTERSPEECH, pp. 5036–5040. ISCA, 2020.
Michael Hassid, Tal Remez, Tu Anh Nguyen, Itai Gat, Alexis Conneau, Felix Kreuk, Jade Copet,
 Alexandre Défossez, Gabriel Synnaeve, Emmanuel Dupoux, Roy Schwartz, and Yossi Adi. Textu-
 ally pretrained speech language models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Curtis Hawthorne, Andrew Jaegle, Catalina Cangea, Sebastian Borgeaud, Charlie Nash, Mateusz
  Malinowski, Sander Dieleman, Oriol Vinyals, Matthew M. Botvinick, Ian Simon, Hannah Sheahan,
  Neil Zeghidour, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, João Carreira, and Jesse H. Engel. General-purpose,
  long-context autoregressive modeling with perceiver AR. In ICML, volume 162 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 8535–8558. PMLR, 2022.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., 29:3451–3460, 2021.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2022.
Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu,
  Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, et al. AudioGPT: Understanding and generating speech,
  music, sound, and talking head. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12995, 2023.
Kristiina Jokinen and Michael McTear. Spoken dialogue systems. Synthesis Lectures on Human
  Language Technologies, 2(1):1–151, 2009.
Norman P. Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter C. Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant
  Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, Cliff Young, Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou,
  and David A. Patterson. TPU v4: An optically reconfigurable supercomputer for machine learning
 with hardware support for embeddings. In ISCA, pp. 82:1–82:14. ACM, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacob Kahn, Morgane Rivière, Weiyi Zheng, Evgeny Kharitonov, Qiantong Xu, Pierre-Emmanuel
  Mazaré, Julien Karadayi, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Ronan Collobert, Christian Fuegen, Tatiana Likhoma-
  nenko, Gabriel Synnaeve, Armand Joulin, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Libri-
  Light: A benchmark for ASR with limited or no supervision. In ICASSP, pp. 7669–7673. IEEE,
  2020.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Eugene Kharitonov, Ann Lee, Adam Polyak, Yossi Adi, Jade Copet, Kushal Lakhotia, Tu Anh
  Nguyen, Morgane Rivière, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Wei-Ning Hsu. Text-
  free prosody-aware generative spoken language modeling. In ACL (1), pp. 8666–8681. Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015.
Yuma Koizumi, Kohei Yatabe, Heiga Zen, and Michiel Bacchiani. WaveFit: an iterative and non-
  autoregressive neural vocoder based on fixed-point iteration. In SLT, pp. 884–891. IEEE, 2022.
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. HiFi-GAN: Generative adversarial networks for
  efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis. Proc. NeurIPS, 33:17022–17033, 2020.
Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte,
 Tu-Anh Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux.
  On generative spoken language modeling from raw audio. Transactions of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics, 9:1336–1354, 2021. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00430. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.79.
Ann Lee, Hongyu Gong, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Holger Schwenk, Peng-Jen Chen, Changhan
 Wang, Sravya Popuri, Yossi Adi, Juan Miguel Pino, Jiatao Gu, and Wei-Ning Hsu. Textless speech-
  to-speech translation on real data. In NAACL-HLT, pp. 860–872. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2022.
Shansong Liu, Atin Sakkeer Hussain, Chenshuo Sun, and Ying Shan. Music understanding LLaMA:
  Advancing text-to-music generation with question answering and captioning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.11276, 2023a.
Xubo Liu, Zhongkai Zhu, Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Meng Cui, Qiushi Huang, Jinhua Liang, Yin Cao,
  Qiuqiang Kong, Mark D Plumbley, et al. WavJourney: Compositional audio creation with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14335, 2023b.
Nobuyuki Morioka, Heiga Zen, Nanxin Chen, Yu Zhang, and Yifan Ding. Residual adapters for
  few-shot text-to-speech speaker adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15868, 2022.
Tu Anh Nguyen, Benoît Sagot, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Are discrete units necessary for spoken
  language modeling? IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., 16(6):1415–1423, 2022.
Tu Anh Nguyen, Eugene Kharitonov, Jade Copet, Yossi Adi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Ali Elkahky, Paden
  Tomasello, Robin Algayres, Benoit Sagot, Abdelrahman Mohamed, et al. Generative spoken
  dialogue language modeling. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:
  250–266, 2023.
Maxwell I. Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and
 Augustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language
 models. CoRR, abs/2112.00114, 2021.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015
  IEEE International Conference on, pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D Cubuk, and
  Quoc V Le. SpecAugment: A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recognition.
  In INTERSPEECH, 2019.
Daniel S Park, Yu Zhang, Ye Jia, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Bo Li, Yonghui Wu, and Quoc V Le.
  Improved noisy student training for automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09629,
  2020.
Linkai Peng, Baorian Nuchged, and Yingming Gao. Spoken language intelligence of large language
  models for language learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14536, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Yi Ren, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Almost unsupervised text to
  speech and automatic speech recognition. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  5410–5419. PMLR, 2019.
Morgane Rivière and Emmanuel Dupoux. Towards unsupervised learning of speech features in the
 wild. In 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), pp. 156–163. IEEE, 2021.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilic, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexander M.
  Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang, Benoît
  Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas
  Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lucile Saulnier, Samson Tan,
  Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurençon, Yacine Jernite, Julien Launay, Margaret
  Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy,
  Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris Emezue, Christopher
  Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, and et al. BLOOM: A 176B-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. CoRR, abs/2211.05100, 2022.
Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J. Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng
  Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, RJ-Skerrv Ryan, Rif A. Saurous, Yannis Agiomyrgiannakis, and
  Yonghui Wu. Natural TTS synthesis by conditioning wavenet on Mel spectrogram predictions. In
  ICASSP, pp. 4779–4783. IEEE, 2018.
Jonathan Shen, Ye Jia, Mike Chrzanowski, Yu Zhang, Isaac Elias, Heiga Zen, and Yonghui Wu. Non-
  attentive Tacotron: Robust and controllable neural tts synthesis including unsupervised duration
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04301, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Changhan Wang, Morgane Rivière, Ann Lee, Anne Wu, Chaitanya Talnikar, Daniel Haziza, Mary
  Williamson, Juan Pino, and Emmanuel Dupoux. VoxPopuli: A large-scale multilingual speech
  corpus for representation learning, semi-supervised learning and interpretation. In ACL 2021-59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In EMNLP (Demos), pp. 38–45. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shu-Wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y. Lin,
  Andy T. Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, Tzu-Hsien Huang, Wei-Cheng Tseng,
  Ko-tik Lee, Da-Rong Liu, Zili Huang, Shuyan Dong, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdelrah-
  man Mohamed, and Hung-yi Lee. SUPERB: speech processing universal performance benchmark.
  In Interspeech, pp. 1194–1198. ISCA, 2021.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  Stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., 30:
  495–507, 2022.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
 Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, Weng Lam Tam, Zixuan Ma, Yufei Xue, Jidong Zhai, Wenguang Chen,
  Zhiyuan Liu, Peng Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. GLM-130B: an open bilingual pre-trained
  model. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Xin Zhang, Jun Zhan, Pengyu Wang, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu.
  SpeechGPT: Empowering large language models with intrinsic cross-modal conversational abilities.
  In EMNLP (Findings), pp. 15757–15773. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona T. Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language models. CoRR, abs/2205.01068, 2022a.
Yu Zhang, Wei Han, James Qin, Yongqiang Wang, Ankur Bapna, Zhehuai Chen, Nanxin Chen,
  Bo Li, Vera Axelrod, Gary Wang, Zhong Meng, Ke Hu, Andrew Rosenberg, Rohit Prabhavalkar,
  Daniel S. Park, Parisa Haghani, Jason Riesa, Ginger Perng, Hagen Soltau, Trevor Strohman,
  Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Tara N. Sainath, Pedro J. Moreno, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Johan Schalkwyk,
  Françoise Beaufays, and Yonghui Wu. Google USM: Scaling automatic speech recognition beyond
  100 languages. CoRR, abs/2303.01037, 2023b.
Ziqiang Zhang, Sanyuan Chen, Long Zhou, Yu Wu, Shuo Ren, Shujie Liu, Zhuoyuan Yao, Xun Gong,
  Lirong Dai, Jinyu Li, et al. SpeechLM: Enhanced speech pre-training with unpaired textual data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15329, 2022b.
Zihan Zhao, Yiyang Jiang, Heyang Liu, Yanfeng Wang, and Yu Wang. LibriSQA: Pioneering
  free-form and open-ended spoken question answering with a novel dataset and framework. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10390, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   TABLE OF HYPER - PARAMETERS


            Table 6: Model hyper-parameters used in the experiments. (“×n”: n layers)
                Input & Output
                Sample rate (Hz)                                      16,000
                Mel channels                                            128
                Mel lower band (Hz)                                      20
                Mel upper band (Hz)                                    8,000
                Frame size (ms)                                        50.0
                Frame step (ms)                                        12.5
                SpecAugment
                Freq blocks                                              2
                Time blocks                                             10
                Freq mask max bins                                      27
                Time mask max frames                                    40
                Time block max length ratio                            0.05
                Speech Encoder
                Conformer dims                                         1024
                Attention heads                                          8
                Conv kernal size                                       (3, 3)
                Conv stride size                                       (2, 2)
                Language Model
                Transformer (dim × layers)                            1024
                Dim per head                                           64
                Hidden dims                                           4096
                Num heads                                              16
                Vocab size                                           256,000
                WaveFit vocoder
                Iterations                                                 5
                UBlock upsampling factors                           [5, 5, 2, 2, 2]
                STFT loss resolutions                                      3
                Hann win size, frame shift, FFT size res 1         [160, 32, 512]
                Hann win size, frame shift, FFT size res 2        [400, 80, 1024]
                Hann win size, frame shift, FFT size res 3       [800, 160, 2048]
                Multi-period discriminator                       Kong et al. (2020)
                Multi-period discriminator loss weight                    1.0
                Training
                Optimizer                                    Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
                Learning rate schedule                          Vaswani et al. (2017)
                Learning rate (peak)                                3.5 × 10−4
                Warm-up steps                                           8K
                Batch size                                              128
                Continuation loss weight λr                             0.1
                Derivative loss order K                                  3



A.2   E XTENDED COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS METHODS

Given the variation in pre-trained models across the methods discussed in this paper, we find it fit
to conduct a more comprehensive comparison of their performance. This detailed comparison is
presented in Table 7. Regarding the Word Error Rate (WER) assessment for ASR systems, the WER
scores are sourced from the SUPERB benchmark paper (Yang et al., 2021). WERs are reported on
the LibriSpeech test-clean test set. It’s important to note that these scores rely solely on the speech
encoder type due to limited data availability for all utilized models. For instance, models such as
mHuBERT (Lee et al., 2022) employed in SpeechGPT and the New Frequency HuBert adapted and
trained within TWIST exist solely as tokenization models and lack dedicated ASR model forms.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The performance comparison of speech encoders referenced in various methods within this paper
is depicted in Table 7. Notably, the performance of the speech encoders on the LibriSpeech test set
is comparable. However, concerning the language models (LMs) utilized, more variation is evident
among the methods. LMs span a spectrum, ranging from larger models such as SpeechGPT and
TWIST employing 7B LMs, to intermediate-sized models like Spectron and AudioLM employing
approximately 1B LMs, and finally, GSLM utilizing a smaller 200M parameter LM. It is widely
acknowledged that LM performance is significantly influenced by model size (Kaplan et al., 2020).
Moreover, diverse datasets have been employed across these systems, including LibriSpeech, Libri-
Light, SpeechInstruct, VoxPopuli (Wang et al., 2021), Common-Voice (Ardila et al., 2020), Spotify
(Clifton et al., 2020), and The People’s Speech (People; Galvez et al., 2021).


                Table 7: Comparison of different models mentioned in this paper.
 Detail              Spectron       SpeechGPT          TWIST            GSLM           AudioLM
 LM #Params          1B / 350M      7B                 1B/7B            ∼200M          0.9B
 LM Type             PaLM-2         LLaMA              OPT/LLaMA        None           None
 Speech Encoder      USM            mHuBERT            T-HuBERT         HuBERT         Wav2Vec
 Speech Encoder
                     600M           317M               317M             317M           600M
 #Params
 WER of
                     3.1            2.94               2.94             2.94           3.1
 Speech Encoder
                                                       LibriSpeech
                                                       VoxPopuli
 Speech Encoder      Web-scale                                          LibriSpeech
                                    VoxPopuli 100k     CommonVoice                     Libri-Light
 Dataset             LibriSpeech                                        Libri-Light
                                                       Spotify
                                                       Fisher
                                                       LibriSpeech
                                    LibriSpeech        Spotify
 Training Dataset    Libri-Light                                        Libri-Light    Libri-Light
                                    Speech Instruct    People
                                                       VoxPopuli
 #Training
 Examples            60k            60k + 38k          150k             60k            60k


                                                16
