Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H OW DO SKIP CONNECTIONS AFFECT G RAPH C ONVO -
LUTIONAL NETWORKS WITH GRAPH SAMPLING ? A THE -
ORETICAL ANALYSIS ON GENERALIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Skip connections enable deep Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to overcome
         over-smoothing, while graph sampling reduces computational demands by select-
         ing a submatrix of the graph adjacency matrix during neighborhood aggregation.
         Learning deep GCNs with graph sampling has shown empirical success across
         various applications, but a theoretical understanding of the generalization guar-
         antees remains limited, with existing analyses ignoring either graph sampling or
         skip connections. This paper presents the first generalization analysis of GCNs
         with skip connections using graph sampling. Our analysis demonstrates that the
         generalization accuracy of the learned model closely approximates the highest
         achievable accuracy within a broad class of target functions dependent on the
         proposed sparse effective adjacency matrix, denoted by A∗ . Thus, graph sampling
         maintains generalization performance when A∗ accurately models data correla-
         tions. Notably, our findings reveal that skip connections lead to different sampling
         requirements across layers. In a two-hidden-layer GCN, the generalization is more
         affected by the sampled matrix deviations from A∗ of the first layer than the second
         layer. To the best of our knowledge, this marks the first theoretical characterization
         of skip connections’ role in sampling requirements. We validate our theoretical
         results on deep GCNs for benchmark datasets.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Graph neural networks (GNNs) outperform traditional machine learning techniques when learn-
ing graph-structured data, that comprises a collection of features linked with nodes and a graph
representing the correlation of the features. As one of the most popular variants of GNN, Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017) perform the convolution operations on
graphs by aggregating neighboring nodes to update the feature presentation of every node. GCNs
have demonstrated great empirical success such as text classification (Norcliffe-Brown et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018) and recommendation systems (Wu et al., 2019; Ying et al., 2018).
As the depth of vanilla GCNs increases, there is a tendency for the node representations to converge
toward a common value, a phenomenon known as “over-smoothing” (Li et al., 2018). A widely
adopted mitigation approach is to incorporate skip-connections, which allow features to bypass
intermediate layers and directly contribute to future layers’ output (Li et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018b).
Moreover, skip connections are shown to accelerate the training process (Xu et al., 2021). Skip
connections have thus become an essential component of deep GCNs.
Processing large-scale graphs can be computationally demanding, particularly when dealing with
the recursive neighborhood integration in deep GCNs. To alleviate this computational burden, graph
sampling or sparsification methods select a subset of nodes or edges from the original graph when
computing neighborhood aggregation. Various graph sampling approaches have been developed,
including node sampling methods like GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), layer-wise sampling like
FastGCN (Chen et al., 2018), subgraph sampling methods like Graphsaint (Zeng et al., 2020), and
other graph sparsification methods like (Li et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; You et al., 2020).
While GCNs have demonstrated empirical success, their theoretical foundation remains relatively
underdeveloped, particularly the generalization analysis for training GCNs with graph sampling.
Du et al. (2019a) provides a theoretical framework connecting graph neural networks and graph
kernels. Verma & Zhang (2019); Zhang et al. (2020a); Liao et al. (2020); Maskey et al. (2022);


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tang & Liu (2023) offer convergence and generalization guarantees for GCN without sampling. Xu
et al. (2021) proves the implicit acceleration achieved by skip connections in linearized graph neural
networks, ignoring graph sampling and non-linear activation. Li et al. (2022a); Zhang et al. (2023b)
provide theoretical generalization analyses of training GCNs with sampling. However, their network
architectures exclude skip connections and thus are oversimplified for deep GCNs.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first theoretical generalization analysis of
training GCNs with skip connections using graph sampling. We consider the semi-supervised node
regression problem, where given all node features and partial labels, the objective is to predict the
unknown node labels. Our major results include:
(1) We analyze training two-hidden-layer GCNs with a skip connection, using graph topology
sampling methods that prefer edges between low-degree nodes. Our analysis demonstrates that the
generalization accuracy of the learned model approximates the highest achievable accuracy within a
broad class of target functions, which map input features to labels. Each target function is a sum of a
simpler base function that contributes significantly to the output and a more complicated composite
function that has a comparatively smaller impact on the output. This class encompasses a wide range
of functions, including two-hidden-layer GCNs with skip connections.
(2) This paper proposes the concept of the sparse effective adjacency matrix, denoted as A∗ , to
characterize the influence of graph sampling in GCNs with skip connections. This is an extension
from the dense effective adjacency matrix introduced in (Li et al., 2022a) for GCNs lacking skip
connections, This work demonstrates that the target functions depend on A∗ rather than the original
graph’s adjacency matrix A. A∗ can be sparser than A. Consequently, even when the sampled
adjacency matrix is very sparse and significantly deviates from A, as long as it approximates A∗
closely enough to enable accurate feature-to-output mapping by the target functions, graph sampling
does not compromise the model’s generalization performance.
(3) This paper theoretically demonstrates that, owing to the presence of skip connections, sampling
in different layers has varying impacts on the model’s output. Specifically, the first layer connects
directly to the output through the skip connection, and as a result, the deviation of the sampled matrix
from the sparse effective matrix A∗ has a more significant effect than the sampling deviation of
the second layer. In contrast, the second layer influences the output through a composite function
that contributes less significantly, allowing for more substantial deviations from A∗ in the sampling
process without compromising error rates. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical
characterization of how skip connections influence sampling requirements, while previous analyses
such as (Li et al., 2022a) assumes that the sampling approach remains consistent across different
layers.

1.1   R ELATED WORKS

Other theoretical analysis of GNNs focus on expressive power and convergence analysis. Xu et al.
(2018a); Morris et al. (2019) show the power of 1-hop message passing is upper bounded by 1-WL
test. Feng et al. (2022); Wang & Zhang (2022) extend the analysis to k-hop message passing neural
networks and spectral GNNs. Zhang et al. (2023a) explores the expressive power of GNNs from
the perspective of graph biconnectivity. Oono & Suzuki (2020); Ramezani et al. (2020); Cong et al.
(2021) investigates the optimization of GNN training.
Generalization analyses of Neural Networks (NNs). Various approaches have been developed to
analyze the generalization of feedforward NNs. The neural tangent kennel (NTK) approach shows
that overparameterized networks can be approximated by kernel methods in the limiting case (Jacot
et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019b). The model estimation approach assumes the existence of a ground-truth
one-hidden-layer model with desirable generalization and estimates the model parameters using the
training data (Zhong et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020b; Li et al., 2022b). The feature learning approach
analyzes how a shallow NN learns important features during training and thus achieves desirable
generalization (Li & Liang, 2018; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2022; 2023). All works ignore the skip connection
except Allen-Zhu & Li (2019), which analyzes the generalization of two-hidden-layer ResNet. Our
analysis builds upon Allen-Zhu & Li (2019) and extends to GCNs with graph sampling.
Various GNN sampling methods. Node-wise sampling (Hamilton et al., 2017) randomly selects
nodes and their multi-hop neighbors to create a localized subgraph. Layer-wise sampling (Chen
et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2018) sample a fixed number of nodes in each layer.
Subgraph-based sampling (Zeng et al., 2020; Chiang et al., 2019) generates subgraphs by sampling
nodes and edges. As for graph sparsification, SGCN (Li et al., 2020) introduces the alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) to sparsify the adjacency matrix. UGS (Chen et al., 2021),
Early-Bird (You et al., 2020) and ICPG (Sui et al., 2022) design a sparsifying strategy to prune the
graph based on the lottery ticket hypothesis.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     T RAINING GCN S WITH L AYER - WISE G RAPH S AMPLING : S UMMARY OF
      M AIN C OMPONENTS

2.1   GCN L EARNING S ETUP

Let G = {V, E} represent an undirected graph, where V is the set of nodes with |V| = N nodes and
E is the set of edges. ∆ is the maximum degree of G. An adjacency matrix Ã ∈ RN ×N is defined to
describe the overall graph topology where Ã(i, j) = 1 if (vi , vj ) ∈ E else Ã(i, j) = 0. A denotes
                                                  1            1
the normalized adjacency matrix with A = D− 2 (Ã + I)D− 2 where D is the degree matrix with
                            P
diagonal elements Di,i = j Ã(i, j). Each element Aij of the matrix A represents the normalized
weight of the edge between nodes i and j. an denotes the nth column of the A. Let X ∈ Rd×N
denote the feature matrix of N nodes, where x̃n ∈ Rd denotes the feature of node n. Assume
∥x̃n ∥ = 1 for all n without loss of generality. yn ∈ Rk represents the label of node n. Let Ω ⊂ V
denote the set of labeled nodes. Given X and partial labels in Ω, the objective of semi-supervised
node-regression is to predict the unknown labels in V/Ω.
We consider training a two-hidden-layer GCN with a single skip connection, where the function
out : Rd×N × RN ×N → Rk×N with
                         out(X, A; W, U ) = Cσ(W XA) + Cσ(U σ(W XA)A)                                          (1)
                                                                                                      m×d
where σ(·) applies the ReLU activation ReLU(x) = max(x, 0) to each entry, W ∈ R             ,U ∈
Rm×m , and C ∈ Rk×m denote the first hidden-layer, second hidden-layer, and output layer weights,
respectively. We only train W and U . The output of the nth node can be written as outn : Rd×N ×
RN → Rk is
                    outn (X, A; W, U ) = Cσ(W Xan ) + Cσ(U σ(W XA)an )                        (2)
We focus on the ℓ2 regression task and the prediction loss of the nth node is defined as
                                              1
                                                ∥yn − outn (X, A; W, U )∥22
                         Objn (X, A, yn ; W, U ) =                                                             (3)
                                              2
The learning problem solves the following empirical risk minimization problem:
                                           1 X
                       min LΩ (W, U ) =           Objn (X, A, yn ; W, U )                                      (4)
                        W,U               |Ω|
                                                      n∈Ω



2.2   T RAINING WITH STOCHASTIC GRADIENT DESCENT AND GRAPH SAMPLING

(4) is solved by the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method starting from random initialization. In
each iteration, the gradient of the prediction loss of one randomly selected node is used to approximate
the gradient of LΩ . The recursive neighborhood aggregation through multiplying the feature matrix
with A is costly in both computation and memory. Graph sampling sparsify the adjacency matrix A
to reduce the computation and memory requirement. For example, edge sampling prunes a subset of
edges in E and the corresponding entries in A. One common theme of various edge sampling methods
is to keep the edge between nodes with smaller degrees while pruning edges between nodes with
larger degrees (Chen et al., 2018; Zeng et al., 2020). The intuition is that if two nodes with smaller
degrees are connected, they are more influential to each other, and therefore, the edge between them
should be sampled with a higher probability.
In this paper, we allow the sampling methods with different parameter settings in different layers
and will characterize how sampling in different layers affects generalization differently. In the tth
SGD iteration, let A1t and A2t denote the sampled A matrix in the first and second hidden layers,
respectively. Let W (t) and U (t) denote the current estimation of W and U . When computing the
stochastic gradient, instead of (2), we use1
          out(X, A1t , A2t ; W (t) , U (t) ) = Cσ(W (t) XA1t ) + Cσ(U (t) σ(W (t) XA1t )A2t )                  (5)

   1
     If different layers use different adjacency matrices, we specify both matrices in the function representation.
Otherwise, we use one matrix to simplify notations.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3       M AIN A LGORITHM AND T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

3.1     I NFORMAL K EY T HEORETICAL F INDINGS

We first summarize our major theoretical insights and takeaways before formally presenting them.
1. The first theoretical generalization guarantee of two-hidden-layer GCNs with skip-connection.
We demonstrate that training a single skip-connection two-hidden-layer GCN using our Algorithm 1
returns a model that achieves the label prediction performance almost the same as the best prediction
performance using a large class of target functions. We also characterize quantitatively the required
number of labeled nodes, referred to as the sample complexity, to achieve the desirable prediction
error. To the best of our knowledge, only Li et al. (2022a); Zhang et al. (2023b) provide explicit
sample complexity bounds for node classification using graph neural networks, but for shallow GCNs
with no skip connection. Our work is the first one that provides a theoretical generalization and
sample complexity analysis for the practical GCN architecture with skip connections.
2. Graph sampling affects generalization through the sparse effective adjacency matrix A∗ .
We show that training with edge sampling produces a model with the same prediction accuracy as
a model trained on a GCN with A∗ as the normalized adjacency matrix, i.e., replacing A with A∗
in (1). The effective matrix is first discussed in (Li et al., 2022a), in the setup of node sampling for
two-hidden-layer GCNs with no skip connection, but A∗ in (Li et al., 2022a) is dense. We show that
the effective matrix also exists for edge sampling on GCNs with skip connection and can be sparse,
indicating that the sampled matrices can be very sparse without sacrificing generalization.
3. Layer-Specific graph sampling due to skip connection. We show that in the two-hidden-
layer GCN with a single skip connection, the first hidden-layer learns a simpler base function that
contributes more to the output, while the second hidden-layer learns a more complicated function
that contributes less to the output. Therefore, compared with the first hidden-layer, the second
hidden-layer is more robust to graph sampling and can tolerate a deviation of the sampled matrix to
A∗ without affecting the prediction accuracy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical
characterization of how skip connections affect the sampling requirements in different layers, while
the previous analysis in (Li et al., 2022a) assumes the same matrix sampling deviations for all layers.

3.2     G RAPH T OPOLOGY S AMPLING S TRATEGY

Our sampling strategy differs slightly from existing edge sampling methods due to our adjustments
aiming to facilitate and simplify the theoretical analysis. Nevertheless, our core concept is still
sampling edges between lower-degree nodes with a higher probability, while sampling edges between
higher-degree nodes with a smaller probability. This approach aligns with practical edge sampling
strategies such as Zeng et al. (2020).
We follow the same assumption on node degrees as that in Li et al. (2022a). Specifically, the node
degrees in G can be divided into L (L ≥ 1) groups, with each group having Nl nodes (l ∈ [L]). The
degrees of all Nl nodes in group l are in the order of dl , i.e., between cdl and Cdl for some constants
c ≤ C. dl is order-wise smaller than dl+1 , i.e., dl = o(dl+1 ).
Let matrix ABij ∈ RNi ×Nj denote a submatrix of A with rows in group i and columns corresponding
to group j. Then all entries in ABij are in the order of √ 1 . Note that a relatively smaller entry in
                                                                  di dj
A corresponds to an edge between relatively higher-degree nodes. Let pkij in [0, 1] (k = 1, 2) reflect
the sampling weights on smaller entries in ABij in the first and second hidden layers, respectively.
Our sampling strategy can be described as follows: at each iteration, for each submatrix ABij ,
                                 q
(1) if i > j, each of the top2 d1 ddji largest edge weights Aij in ABij is sampled independently with
probability 1 − pkij . The remaining entries in ABij are sampled independently with a probability of
pkij .
(2) if i ≤ j, each of the top d1 largest Aij in ABij are sampled with probability 1 − pkij . The
remaining entries in ABij are sampled independently with a probability of pkij .
                    q
    The values d1 ddji and d1 for selecting the top largest entries in Aij are chosen to simplify our theoretical
    2

analysis. In fact, any values in these orders are sufficient for our theoretical analysis. Note that the main idea of
sampling edges between nodes of lower degrees with higher probability is preserved in our sampling strategy.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 SGD with Hierarchical Layer Sampling (HLS)
 1: Input: Graph G with normalized adjancey matrix A, node features X, known labels in Ω, step
      size ηw and ηv , number of iterations T .
 2: Initialize W (0) , V (0) , C. W0 = 0, V0 = 0
 3: for t = 0 to T − 1 do
 4:    Sample A1t using p1ij and sample A2t using p2ij .
 5:    Randomly sample n from Ω.
 6:    Calculate the gradient of L in (23) and update weight deviations through
        Wt+1 ← Wt − ηw ∂L(W,V)
                         ∂W                                 ,
                                        W=Wt ,V=Vt
        Vt+1 ← Vt − ηw ∂L(W,V)
                         ∂V
                                      W=Wt ,V=Vt
 7: end for
 8: Output: W (T ) = W (0) + WT , V (T ) = V (0) + VT .



We allow the sampling weights to vary in different layers and will quantify how these weights affect
generalization differently. When others are fixed, a small pkij indicates sampling primarily low-degree
degree nodes, while a large pkij indicates sampling more edges between high-degree nodes.
To see why this sampling strategy prioritizes low-degree edges, consider the sampled edges between
a fixed group i and other groups j. Assume pkij are the same for all groups for simplicity. If dj < dj ′
                                  q         q
for two groups j and j ′ , then d1 ddji > d1 ddi′ , indicating that more lower-degree edges connecting
                                                    j

groups i and j are sampled, compared with edges connecting groups i and j ′ .
To analyze the impact of this graph topology sampling on the learning performance, we define the
sparse effective adjacency matrix A∗ where in each submatrix A∗Bij :
                        q
(1) if i > j, the top d1 ddji largest values in ABij remain the same, while other entries are set to zero.

(2) if i ≤ j, the top d1 largest values in ABij remain the same, while other entries are set to zero.
One can easily check from the definition that ∥A∗ ∥1 = O(1), i.e., the maximum absolute column
sum of A∗ is bounded by a constant. Moreover, A∗ is sparse by definition.


3.3    C ONCEPT C LASS AND H IERARCHICAL L EARNING

Our theoretical generalization analysis shows that the returned GCN model achieves a prediction
error that is a small constant times the minimum prediction error achieved by the best target function
among a large concept class of functions. When the concept class characterizes the mapping function
from node features to labels, the minimum prediction error by that class is close to zero, and so is the
prediction error by the learned GCN model. Moreover, the concept class depends on the sparse A∗ ,
rather than the dense A. As long as the sampled matrices are close A∗ , despite being very sparse,
graph sampling does not degrade generalization.
Consider a concept class of target functions H consisting of two smooth functions F and G :
Rd×N × RN ×N → Rk×N and a constant α ∈ R+ :

                                HA∗ (X) = FA∗ (X) + αGA∗ (FA∗ (X))                                              (6)
                                                                        r           r   d×N        N ×N        1×N
where the rth (r ∈ [k]) row of FA∗ and GA∗ , denoted by F and G : R                           ×R          →R         ,
satisfy

                                             pF
                                             X
                                r
                                                   a∗F ,r,i · F r,i wr,i
                                                                     ∗T
                                                                         XA∗ ,

                               FA ∗ (X) =

                                             i=1
                                             pG                                                                 (7)
                                             X
                                 r
                                                   a∗G,r,i · G r,i    ∗T
                                                                          XA∗

                                GA ∗ (X) =                           vr,i
                                             i=1


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where pF , pG are positive integers. Given r, i, the scalers a∗F ,r,i , a∗G,r,i are in [−1, 1], the vectors wr,i
                                                                                                             ∗
            d      ∗         k                                      ∗             ∗       1
are in R , and vr,i are in R . For simplicity, we assume wr,i = vr,i = √2 for all r, i. All
F r,i , G r,i : R → R are smooth activation fuctions. We abuse notations in (7) to apply activations to
every entry of a 1 × N vector. The nth column of HA∗ , denoted by Hn,A∗ : Rd×N × RN ×N → Rk ,
represents the target function for node n.
F and G can both be viewed as one-hidde-layer GCNs with smooth activation functions and adjacent
matrix A∗ . The target function H includes the base signal F, which is less complex yet contributes
significantly to the target, and G, which is more complicated but contributes less. Intuitively, we will
show that using a two-hidden-layer GCN with a skip connection, the first hidden layer learns F and
the second hidden layer learns G(F).
To quantify the complexity of target functions, we define model complexity constants Cε and sample
complexity constants Cs , follow those in Li et al. (2022a) (Section 1.2) and Allen-Zhu & Li (2019)
(Section 4).
                                                                                         P∞
Formally, for any smooth function ϕ(z) with its power series representation as ϕ(z) = i=0 ci z i ,
define two useful parameters as follows,
                                     ∞                 p
                                    X
                                             ∗   i       log(1/ϵ) ∗ i
                       Cϵ (ϕ, R) =        (C R) + (        √      C R) |ci |                    (8)
                                    i=0
                                                             i
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                   Cs (ϕ, R) = C ∗         (i + 1)1.75 Ri |ci |                             (9)
                                                     i=0
where R ≥ 0 and C ∗ is a sufficiently large constant. Cε and Cs represent the required number of
model parameters and training samples to learn ϕ up to ϵ error, respectively. see Appendix B for
more discussion.
We will show that the learned GCN by our method performs almost the same as the best function
in the concept class in predicting unknown labels. Let Dx̃n and Dyn denote the distribution from
which the feature and label of node n are drawn, respectively. Let D denote the concatenation of
these distributions. Then the given feature matrix X and partial labels in Ω can be viewed as |Ω|
identically distributed but correlated samples (X, yn ) from D. The correlation results from the fact
that the label of node i depends on not only the feature of node i but also neighboring features.
To measure the label approximation performance of the target function, define

                                                           1                   2
                         min              En∈V,(X,yn )∼D     ∥H n,A∗ (X) − y  ∥
                                                                             n 2 = OPT                     (10)
               a∗        ∗       ∗    ∗
                F ,r,i ,aG,r,i ,wr,i vr,i                  2

as the minimum prediction error achieved by the best target function (over the choices of parameters
a∗F ,r,i , a∗G,r,i , wr,i
                      ∗ ∗
                          vr,i ) in the concept class. OPT decreases when the target functions are more
complex, or the concept class enlarges, or if A∗ characterizes the node correlations properly.


3.4   M ODELING THE PREDICTION ERROR OF UNKNOWN LABELS

To simplify the analysis and representation, we re-parameterize U in (1) and (2) as V C, where
V ∈ Rm×k . Then, (2) can be rewritten as follows:
              outn (X, A; W, V ) = out1n (X, A) + Cσ(V out1 (X, A)an )
                                                                                                           (11)
              where out1 (X, A; W ) = Cσ(W XA), out1n (X, A; W ) = Cσ(W Xan )

We follow the conventional setup for theoretical analysis that C is fixed at its random initialization,
and only W and V are updated during training. C, W (0) , V (0) are randomly initialized from Gaussian
                    i.i.d.   1
                                    (0) i.i.d.     2
                                                              (0) i.i.d.
distributions, Ci,j ∼ N 0, m     , Wi,j ∼ N 0, σw      and Vi,j ∼ N 0, σv2 /m , respectively. σw
and σv follow the parameter selection in Table 1.
The algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. When computing the stochastic gradient of a sampled
label yn , the loss is represented as a function of the weight deviations W, V from initiation W (0)
and V (0) , i.e.,
                      L(W, V) = Objn (X, A1t , A2t , yn ; W (0) + W, V (0) + V).               (12)


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wt and Vt denote the weight deviations of the estimated weights W (t) and V (t) in iteration
                                                                                             t from

   (0)       (0)      (t)      (0)          (t)    (0)                                     1
W and V , i.e., W = W + Wt , V = V + Vt . We assume 0 < α ≤ O Cs (G,∥A∗ ∥1 )     e
throught the training. We prove that ∥Wt ∥2 and ∥Vt ∥2 are bounded by Θ           e (Cs (F)) and
Θ (αCs (G, ∥A ∥1 )) during training, i.e., ∥Wt ∥2 ≤ Θ (Cs (F)), ∥Vt ∥2 ≤ Θ (αCs (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 )) < 1
e                ∗                                   e                   e
for all t. See Appendix C.5 for the proof.
The following lemma shows that graph sampling in different layers contributes to the output ap-
proximation differently. In other words, to maintain the same accuracy in the output, the tolerable
sampling rates in different layers are different.
                                                                                 1t         2t
Lemma 3.1 For  √ any given constant E, if the first and     √second layer A and A are sampled with
                 di dj E                                      di dj E
p1ij ≤ Θ(
       e                               2
          Ni Nj Cs (F ,∥A∗ ∥1 ) ) and pij ≤ Θ( Ni Nj αCs (F ,∥A∗ ∥1 )Cs (G,∥A∗ ∥1 ) ), respectively, then with the
                                            e
                                 √
probability over 1 − e−Ω(E di dj /Cs (F ))
                         E                                                    E
     A1t − A∗ 1 ≤                , and A2t − A∗ 1 ≤                                             .            (13)
                    Θ (Cs (F))
                    e                                   Θ (αCs (F, ∥A ∥1 )Cs (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 ))
                                                        e                   ∗

           outn X, A1t , A2t ; W (t) , V (t) − outn X, A∗ ; W (t) , V (t)       ≤ E, for all t.              (14)
                                                                                   2

          e (αCs (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 )) < 1, then the upper bound for p2 is higher than that for p1 in the
Note that Θ                                                     ij                           ij
assumption. That means the sampling for the first hidden layer must focus more on low-degree edges,
while such a requirement is relaxed in the second layer. Then, (13) indicates that a larger deviation
of the sampled matrix from A∗ can be tolerated in the second hidden layer compared with the first
layer. Lemma 3.1 reveals that the skip connection allows for a more flexible sampling strategy in
deeper layers.
We will show the learned model can achieve an error close to O(OPT). Our main theorem can be
sketched as follows,

Theorem 3.2 For ϵ0 = Θ(α   e 4 Cs (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 )4 ) < 1 and ϵ = 10 · OPT + ϵ0 , suppose sampling
                            √                                           √
                               di dj ϵ0                                    di dj ϵ0
probability p1ij ≤ Θ(
                    e                   ∗
                       Ni Nj Cs (F ,∥A ∥1 ) ) and p2
                                                   ij  ≤ Θ(
                                                         e
                                                            Ni Nj αCs (F ,∥A ∗ ∥ )C (G,∥A∗ ∥ ) ) , there exist
                                                                                1   s          1
                                                                                Cs (F ,∥A∗ ∥1 )2

                        ∗                   ∗        ∗    −1

M0 = poly Cs (F, ∥A ∥1 ), Cs (G, ∥A ∥1 ), ∥A ∥1 , α            , T0 = Θ e
                                                                             ∥A∗ ∥1 min{0.1,ϵ2 } and N0 =
                             4
e 4 Cs (F, ∥A∗ ∥1 )2 ∥A∗ ∥ log N ϵ−2 ) such that for every m ≥ M0 , T ≥ T0 and |Ω| ≥ N0 , with
Θ(∆                          1
high probability, the SGD algorithm satisfies

                       T −1
                    1 X                                                   2
                               E        yn − outn X, A1t , A2t ; Wt , Vt 2 ≤ ϵ                               (15)
                    T t=0 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D

As a sanity check, when the concept class enlarges, OPT decreases. Theorem 3.2 shows that the
required number of neurons M0 (model complexity) and labels N0 (sample complexity) both increase
accordingly. p1ij and p2ij decreasing means that we should sample more high-weight edges. Thus, our
theoretical bounds match the intuition that a larger model, more labels, and more high-weight edges
improve the prediction accuracy. N0 is in the order of log N , indicating that the unknown labels can
be accurately predicted from partial labels. Moreover, when ∥A∗ ∥1 increases, Cε and Cs , and ϵ0 all
increase. Theorem 3.2 indicates the model complexity M0 , N0 , and the generalization error ϵ all
increasing, indicating worse prediction performance.
This proof of Theorem 3.2 builds upon the proof of Theorem 1 in Allen-Zhu & Li (2019), which
analyzes the generalization of a three-layer ResNet for a supervised regression problem. We extend
the analysis to training GCNs with graph sampling for a semi-supervised node regression problem.
The main technical challenge is to handle the dependence of labels on neighboring features and
the error in adjacency matrices due to the sampling. Compared with Li et al. (2022a) which also
considers training GCN with graph sampling, we consider a different sampling method from that
in Li et al. (2022a). The resulting A∗ in Li et al. (2022a) is a dense matrix as A, while A∗ in our
paper is a sparse matrix. Our results thus allow the sampled matrices to be very sparse while still
maintaining the generalization accuracy. Moreover, the sampling method is the same for both hidden
layers in Li et al. (2022a), resulting the same deviation from A∗ in both layers. Our results indicate
that the skip connection allows a more flexible sampling method in the second layer.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E MPIRICAL E XPERIMENT
4.1   E XPERIMENT ON SYNTHETIC DATA
We generate a graph G with N = 2000 nodes. G has two-degree groups. Group
                                                                              1 has N1 = 200 nodes,
and the degree of each node follows a Gaussian distribution N d1 , σ 2 . Group  2 has N2 = 1800
nodes, and the degree of each node follows a Gaussian distribution N d2 , σ 2 . d1 = 200 and
σ = 20. The degrees are truncated to fall within the range of 0 to 500. Given A, the sparse A∗ is
obtained following the procedure in Section 3.2. The node labels are generated by the target function
                                       FA∗ (X) = CW ∗ XA∗                                          (16)
                                             ∗           ∗              ∗           ∗
                GA∗ (FA∗ (X)) = C (sin (V FA∗ (X)A ) ⊙ tanh (V FA∗ (X)A ))                         (17)
                            HA∗ (X) = FA∗ (X) + αGA∗ (FA∗ (X))                                     (18)
where X ∈ Rd×N , W ∗ ∈ Rr×d , V ∗ ∈ Rr×k , and C ∈ Rk×r are randomly generated with each
entry i.i.d. from N (0, 1). d = 100, k = 5, r = 30, α = 0.5. A two-hidden-layer GCN with a
single skip-connection as defined in (2) with m neurons in each hidden layer is trained on a randomly
selected set Ω of labeled nodes. The rest N −|Ω| labels are used for testing. The test error is measured
by the ℓ2 regression loss in (3).
Model and sample complexities with ∥A∗ ∥1 : In Figures 1 (a) (b), we vary A∗ by changing d2 and
the corresponding A . We directly train with A∗ to study the impact of A∗ on model and sample
complexities. In Figures 1 (a), |Ω| = 1200 and the number of neurons per layer m varies. To achieve
the same test accuracy, when ∥A∗ ∥1 increases, the number of neurons also increases, verifying our
model complexity M0 in Theorem 3.2. In Figures 1 (b), m = 50 and |Ω| varies. To achieve the same
test accuracy, when ∥A∗ ∥1 increases, the required number of labels also increases, verifying our
sample complexity N0 in Theorem 3.2.


               (a)                                (b)
                                                                                    (c)

Figure 1: Experiment on synthetic data (a) Test error with model complexity and ∥A∗ ∥1 . (b) Test
error with sample complexity and ∥A∗ ∥1 . (c) The second hidden layer tolerates more error than the
first hidden layer. See more details in Appendix D.

Layer-wise sampling impact on generalization: We fix Ω = 1200, m = 50, ∥A∗ ∥1 = 1.27. We
sample adjacency matrices during training. Figure 1 (c) shows the relationship between the test error
and the average deviation of sampled matrices (A1t and A2t in the first and second hidden layers)
from A∗ . One can see that sampling in the second hidden layer (yellow dashed line) contributes to
generalization degradation much milder than sampling in the first hidden layer (red solid arrow). This
verifies our Lemma 3.1 that the sampling requirements are more restrictive in the first layer than the
second layer to maintain the same generalization accuracy.

4.2   E XPERIMENT ON REAL DATA
We evaluate on the large-scale Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) datasets for node multi-class clas-
sification tasks. The results on Ogbn-Arxiv are reported here. The results on Ogbn-Products and
details of the datasets are in Appendix D. The task of Ogbn-Arxiv is to classify the 40 subject areas
of arXiv CS papers. We use 60% of the data for training, 20% for testing, and 20% for verification.
We deploy an 8-layer Jumping Knowledge Network (Xu et al., 2018b) GCN with concatenation layer
aggregation as a learner network. Each hidden layer consists of 128 neurons. We treat the first four
layers as shallow layers and the last four layers as deep layers. Shallow and deep layers are sampled


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differently. The generalization is evaluated by the fraction of erroneous predictions of unknown
labels.
Sampling in deep layers is more flexible with less generalization degradation. In this experiment,
we employ a simplified version of the graph sampling method discussed in Section 3.2. For the
shallow layers, at each iteration t, we obtain a sampled adjacency matrix A1t as follows: we sample
the top q1 fraction of the largest edge weights Aij from the adjacency matrix A with a 99% probability,
and sample the remaining entries with a 1% probability. For the deep layers, the sampled adjacency
matrix A2t is generated similarly, but we use the top q2 fraction of largest Aij , again sampling with
probabilities of 99% and 1% for the top and remaining entries, respectively.
Figure 2 (a) shows test error when q1 and q2 vary. One can see that the test error decreases more
drastically when only increasing q1 (yellow dashed arrow) compared with only increasing q2 (red
solid arrow), indicating that graph sampling in shallow layers has a more significant impact than
graph sampling in deeper layers. When both q1 and q2 are greater than 0.6, the test error is always
small (less than 0.29) for a wide range of q1 , q2 . That may suggest the existence of multiple sparse
A∗ such that sampled matrices with different q1 , q2 pairs approximate different A∗ , and all A∗ can
accurately represent the data correlations in the mapping function from the features to the labels.


                                                 -


                                (a)                                (b)

Figure 2: Learning deep GCNs on Ogbn-Arxiv (a) Deeper layers tolerate higher sampling rates
than shallow layers while maintaining accuracy. (b) Sampling more low-degree edges (small s1 , s2 )
outperforms sampling more high-degree edges (large s1 , s2 ). See 2D projection in Figure 4.


Lower-degree edges are more influential on generalization than high-degree edges. Note that
if nodes i and j have higher degrees, then Aij has a smaller value. We sample one matrix for the
shallow layers by keeping the values of Aij that are in the range of top s1 to s1 + 0.5 fraction and
setting all other values to zero. Similarly, we sample one matrix for the deep layers by keeping the
values in the range of top s2 to s2 + 0.5 fraction and setting all other values to zero. These two
sampled matrices are used during training. When s1 and s2 increase, the resulting matrices have the
same number of nonzero entries, and the sampled entries focus more on high-degree edges. Figure 2
(b) shows the test error indeed increases as s1 , s2 increase. This justifies the sampling strategy to
sample more low-degree edges.


5   C ONCLUSION

This paper provides a theoretical generalization analysis of training GCNs with skip connections
using graph sampling. To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first analysis of how
skip connection affects the generalization performance. We show that for a two-hidden-layer GCN
with a skip connection, the first hidden layer learns a simpler function that contributes significantly
to the output, making the choice of sampling more crucial in the first hidden layer. In contrast, the
second layer learns a composite function that contributes less to the output, allowing for a more
flexible sampling approach while preserving generalization. This insight is verified on deep GCNs
on benchmark datasets. Future works include generalization analysis of deep GCNs and designing
layer-specific sampling strategies that optimize generalization within the constraints of available
computational resources.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. What can resnet learn efficiently, going beyond kernels? In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pp. 977–988. IEEE, 2022.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and self-
  distillation in deep learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Uuf2q9TfXGA.

Jianfei Chen, Tianyi Ma, and Cao Xiao. Fastgcn: Fast learning with graph convolutional networks
   via importance sampling. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Ting Chen, Yidan Sui, Xiaohan Chen, Anima Zhang, and Zhihua Wang. A unified lottery ticket
  hypothesis for graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1695–1706. PMLR, 2021.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Cluster-gcn: An
 efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 257–266,
 2019.

Weilin Cong, Morteza Ramezani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. On provable benefits of depth in training
 graph convolutional networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9936–9949,
 2021.

Simon S. Du, Keyulu Hou, Ruslan R. Salakhutdinov, Barnabás Póczos, Ruosong Wang, and Keyulu
  Xu. Graph neural tangent kernel: Fusing graph neural networks with graph kernels. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5724–5734, 2019a.

Simon S. Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabás Póczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019b.

Jiarui Feng, Yixin Chen, Fuhai Li, Anindya Sarkar, and Muhan Zhang. How powerful are k-hop
   message passing graph neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
   4776–4790, 2022.

William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
 graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1024–1034, 2017.

Wenbing Huang, Tong Zhang, Yu Rong, and Junzhou Huang. Adaptive sampling towards fast graph
 representation learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4558–4567,
 2018.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gener-
  alization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning (ICLR), 2017.

Guohao Li, Matthias Muller, Ali Thabet, and Bernard Ghanem. Deepgcns: Can gcns go as deep
  as cnns? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
  9267–9276, 2019.

Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. Generalization guarantee of
  training graph convolutional networks with graph topology sampling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 13014–13051. PMLR, 2022a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hongkang Li, Shuai Zhang, and Meng Wang. Learning and generalization of one-hidden-layer neural
  networks, going beyond standard gaussian data. In 2022 56th Annual Conference on Information
  Sciences and Systems (CISS), pp. 37–42. IEEE, 2022b.
Jundong Li, Ting Zhang, Hanghang Tian, Shengnan Jin, Mingyi Fardad, and Reza Zafarani. Sgcn: A
  graph sparsifier based on graph convolutional networks. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 275–287. Springer, 2020.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Yuanzhi Li and Yingyu Liang. Learning overparameterized neural networks via stochastic gradient
  descent on structured data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Renjie Liao, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard Zemel. A pac-bayesian approach to generalization bounds
  for graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Sohir Maskey, Ron Levie, Yunseok Lee, and Gitta Kutyniok. Generalization analysis of message
  passing neural networks on large random graphs. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 35:4805–4817, 2022.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2019.
Will Norcliffe-Brown, Stathis Vafeias, and Sarah Parisot. Learning conditioned graph structures for
 interpretable visual question answering. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
 2018.
Kenta Oono and Taiji Suzuki. Optimization and generalization analysis of transduction through
  gradient boosting and application to multi-scale graph neural networks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:18917–18930, 2020.
Morteza Ramezani, Weilin Cong, Mehrdad Mahdavi, Anand Sivasubramaniam, and Mahmut Kan-
 demir. Gcn meets gpu: Decoupling “when to sample” from “how to sample”. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:18482–18492, 2020.
Yiding Sui, Xiaojie Wang, Ting Chen, Xiaoqiang He, and Tat-Seng Chua. Inductive lottery ticket
  learning for graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), pp. 1–18, 2022.
Huayi Tang and Yong Liu. Towards understanding the generalization of graph neural networks. In
 Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Saurabh Verma and Zhi-Li Zhang. Stability and generalization of graph convolutional neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
  Data Mining, pp. 1539–1548, 2019.
Xiyuan Wang and Muhan Zhang. How powerful are spectral graph neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23341–23362. PMLR, 2022.
Qitian Wu, Hengrui Zhang, Xiaofeng Gao, Peng He, Paul Weng, Han Gao, and Guihai Chen.
  Dual graph attention networks for deep latent representation of multifaceted social effects in
  recommender systems. In The world wide web conference, pp. 2091–2102, 2019.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018a.
Keyulu Xu, Chengtao Li, Yonglong Tian, Tomohiro Sonobe, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie
  Jegelka. Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 5453–5462. PMLR, 2018b.
Keyulu Xu, Mengshi Zhang, Stefanie Jegelka, and Kenji Kawaguchi. Optimization of graph neural
  networks: Implicit acceleration by skip connections and more depth. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In Proceedings of the
  24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 974–983,
  2018.
Haoxiang You, Changxiao Li, Pengcheng Xu, Yonggan Fu, Yang Wang, Xiaohan Chen, Richard G.
  Baraniuk, Zhihua Wang, and Yingyan Lin. Drawing early-bird tickets: Toward more efficient
  training of deep networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Hongyang Zeng, Hongyuan Zhou, Abhay Srivastava, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor Prasanna. Graph-
  saint: Graph sampling based inductive learning method. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Bohang Zhang, Shengjie Luo, Liwei Wang, and Di He. Rethinking the expressive power of gnns
  via graph biconnectivity. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023a.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. Fast learning of graph neural
  networks with guaranteed generalizability: one-hidden-layer case. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 11268–11277. PMLR, 2020a.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, Songtao Lu, and Miao Liu. Joint edge-model
  sparse learning is provably efficient for graph neural networks. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=4UldFtZ_CVF.
Sijia Zhang, Mengqi Wang, Shichao Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. Fast learning of graph neural
   networks with guaranteed generalizability: One-hidden-layer case. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 11268–11277, 2020b.
Yuhao Zhang, Peng Qi, and Christopher D Manning. Graph convolution over pruned dependency
  trees improves relation extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10185, 2018.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guarantees
  for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  4140–4149. PMLR, 2017.
D. Zou, Z. Hu, Y. Wang, S. Jiang, Y. Sun, and Q. Gu. Layer-dependent importance sampling
  for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 11249–11259, 2019.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P RELIMINARIES

Lemma A.1 If M ∈ Rn×m is a random matrix where Mi,j are i.i.d. from N (0, 1). Then,
                                                               2
         • For any t ≥ 1, with probability 1 − e−t , it satisfies
                                                        √       √
                                         ∥M ∥2 ≤ O n + m + t.
                                                                                           2
         • If 1 ≤ s ≤ O         m
                              log2 m
                                           , then with probability 1 − e−(n+s log m) it satisfies
                                                                √         p
                                              ∥M v∥2 ≤ O             n+    s log m ∥v∥2

          for all s-sparse vectors v ∈ Rm .

Proof: The statement can be found in Proposition B.2. from Allen-Zhu & Li (2019)

Lemma A.2 Suppose δ ∈ [0, 1] and g (0) ∈ Rm is a random vector g (0) ∼ N (0, Im ). With
                                2/3
probability at least 1 − e−Ω(mδ ) , for all vectors g ′ ∈ Rm with ∥g ′ ∥2 ≤ δ, letting D′ ∈ Rm×m be
                              ′
the diagonal matrix where (D )k,k = 1(g(0) +g′ )k − 1(g(0) )k for each k ∈ [m], we have

                               ∥D′ ∥0 ≤ O(m2/3 ) and ∥D′ g (0) ∥2 ≤ ∥g ′ ∥2 .

Proof: The statement can be found in Proposition B.4. from Allen-Zhu & Li (2019)

Lemma A.3 Given a sampling set X = {xn }N      n=1 that contains N partly dependent random vari-
ables, for each n ∈ [N ], suppose xn is dependent with at most dX random variables in X (including
                                                                             2
xn itself), and the moment generating function of xn satisfies E[esxn ] ≤ eCs for some constant C
                                                                  PN
that may depend on xn . Then, the moment generation function of n=1 xn is bounded as
                                                      PN                       2
                                               E[es    n=1 xn      ] ≤ eCdX N s .

Proof: The statement can be found in Lemma 7 from Zhang et al. (2020b)

Lemma A.4 ∥Xan ∥ ≤ ∥A∥1 .

Proof:

                                                      N
                                                      X
                                  ∥Xan ∥ = ∥                xk ak,n ∥
                                                      k=1
                                                      N                            N
                                                      X         ak,n               X
                                               =∥           PN            xk ∥ ·         ak,n
                                                      k=1      k=1 ak,n            k=1
                                                                                                    (19)
                                                   N
                                                   X     ak,n
                                               ≤       PN        ∥xk ∥ · ∥A∥1
                                                   k=1  k=1 ak,n
                                               = ∥A∥1

Lemma A.5 If F : Rd √  → Rk has general complexity (p, Cs (F), Cε√
                                                                 (F)) , then for every x, y ∈ Rd ,
it satisfies ∥F(x)∥2 ≤ kpCs (F) · ∥x∥2 and ∥F(x) − F(y)∥2 ≤ kpCs (F) · ∥x − y∥2 .

Proof: The boundedness of ∥F(x)∥2 is trivial so we only focus on ∥F(x) − F(y)∥2 . For each
                          ∗
                       ⟨w1,i ,(x,1)⟩    ∗
component g(x) = Fr,i    ∥(x,1)∥2    · w2,i , (x, 1) , denoting by w1∗ as the first d coordinate of
 ∗             ∗                                  ∗
w1,i , and by w2,i as the first d coordinates of w2,i , we have


                                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       !
                        ∗
 ′
                       w1,i , (x, 1)
g (x) = Fr,i                               · w2∗
                       ∥(x, 1)∥2
                                                                         !
                                                        ∗
                        ∗                 ′
                                                       w1,i , (x, 1)             w1∗ · ∥(x, 1)∥2 − w1,i
                                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                                        , (x, 1) · (x, 1)/∥(x, 1)∥22
                   +   w2,i , (x, 1)   · Fr,i                                ·
                                                       ∥(x, 1)∥2                                    ∥(x, 1)∥22

This implies
                                                            !                                        !
                                            ∗                                         ∗
               ′
                                           w1,i , (x, 1)                  ′
                                                                                     w1,i , (x, 1)
          ∥g (x)∥2 ≤ Fr,i                                       +2       Fr,i                            ≤ 3Cs (Fr,i )
                                           ∥(x, 1)∥2                                 ∥(x, 1)∥2

As a result, |Fr (x) − Fr (y)| ≤ 3pCs (Fr,i ) .

Lemma A.6 For every smooth function ϕ, every ϵ ∈ (0, C(ϕ,a)1√a2 +1 ), there exists a function
                       √                 √                              √
h : R2 → [−Cϵ (ϕ, a) a2 + 1, Cϵ (ϕ, a) a2 + 1] that is also Cϵ (ϕ, a) a2 + 1-Lipschitz continuous
on its first coordinate with the following two (equivalent) properties:
(a) For every x1 ∈ [−a, a] where a > 0:
                            h                                  i
                          E 1α x +β √a2 −x2 +b ≥0 h(α1 , b0 ) − ϕ(x1 ) ≤ ϵ
                                       1    1      1        1   0


where α1 , β1 , b0 ∼ N (0, 1) are independent random variables.
(b) For every w∗ , x ∈ Rd with ∥w∗ ∥2 = 1 and ∥x∥ ≤ a:

                            E 1wX+b0 ≥0 h(w⊤ w∗ , b0 ) − ϕ(w∗ ⊤ x) ≤ ϵ



where w ∼ N (0, I) is an d-dimensional Gaussian, b0 ∼ N (0, 1).
Furthermore, we have Eα1 ,b0 ∼N (0,1) [h(α1 , b0 )2 ] ≤ (Cs (ϕ, a))2 (a2 + 1).
        every w∗ , x ∈ Rd with ∥w∗ ∥2 = 1, let w̃ = (w, b0 ) ∈ Rd+1 , x̃ = (x, 1) ∈ Rd+1 with
(c) For √
∥x̃∥ ≤ a2 + 1, then we have
                    h                                        i
                                         ⊤
                  E 1w̃⊤ x̃≥0 h(w̃[1 : d] w∗ , w̃[d + 1]) − ϕ(w∗ ⊤ x̃[1 : d]) ≤ ϵ

where w̃ ∼ N (0, Id+1 ) is an d-dimensional Gaussian.
                                         ⊤
We also have Ew̃∈N (0,Id+1 ) [h(w̃[1 : d] w∗ , w̃[d + 1])2 ] ≤ (Cs (ϕ, a))2 (a2 + 1).

Proof: The statement can be found in Lemma B.1. from Li et al. (2022a)

B    CONCEPT CLASS

When the target function is more complex, Hn will approach yn , and OP T will be closer to zero.
To evaluate the complexity of the target function, we introduce model complexity constants Cε and
sample complexity constants Cs in (8) and (9) following the definitions in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2019; Li
et al., 2022a). Many population functions have bounded complexity. For instance, if ϕ(z) is exp(z),
sin(z), cos(z) or polynomials of z, then Cϵ (ϕ, O(1)) ≤ O(poly(1/ϵ)) and Cs (ϕ, O(1)) ≤ O(1).
                Cε (F, ∥A∗ ∥1 )            maxr,i Cε F r,i , ∥A∗ ∥1      and Cs (F, ∥A∗ ∥1 )

We define                           =                                                             =
                      ∗
                r,i
maxr,i Cs F , ∥A ∥1            as the model and sample complexity of F, respectively, and
similarly define Cε (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 ) and Cs (G, ∥A∗ ∥1 ) for G.
F and G are composed by pF and pG different smooth functions. The complexity of F is the most
complex sub-target function F r,i in the pF functions.
We define BF := maxn ∥Fn,A∗ (X)∥2 , BF ◦G := maxn ∥Gn,A∗ (FA∗ (X))∥2 for all X satisfy-
ing ∥xn ∥ = 1. Assume √      G(·) is LG Lipschitz continuous.
                                                          √ It is simple to ∗verify (see Lemma
A.5) that BF ≤          kpF Cs (F, ∥A∗ ∥1 ) ∥A∗ ∥1 , LG ≤   kpG Cs (G, BF ∥A ∥1 ) and BF ◦G ≤
kpF Cs (F, ∥A∗ ∥1 ) · pG Cs (G, BF ∥A∗ ∥1 )BF ∥A∗ ∥1 .


                                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C        T HEOREM 3.2 P ROOF D ETAILS
Let us define learner networks that are single-skip two-hidden-layer with ReLU activation outn :
Rd×N × RN → Rk with
                        outn (X, A; W, V ) = out1n (X, A) + Cσ(V out1 (X, A)an )                    (20)
and
                                out1 (X, A) = CDW ⊙ (W XA1 ) ∈ Rk×N ,                               (21)


                                       out1n (X, A) = CDW
                                                        n
                                                          W Xa1n ∈ Rk                               (22)
where

          • A = [a1 ,   a2 , · · · ,    aN ] ∈ RN ×N denotes the normalized adjacency matrix.
          • X ∈ Rd×N denotes the the matrix of d dimension features of N nodes.
          • W ∈ Rm×d denotes the first hidden layer weight.
          • V ∈ Rm×k denotes the second hidden layer weight.
          • C ∈ Rk×m denotes the output layer weight.
                                                                    n
          • DW = 1(W Xa1 ≥0) , 1(W Xa2 ≥0) , · · · , 1(W XaN ≥0) , DW    = diag{1(W Xan ≥0) }

          • DV = 1(V outn (X,A)a1 ≥0) 1(V outn (X,A)a2 ≥0) · · · 1(V out1n (X,A)aN ≥0) , DVn =
                               1                 1

            diag{1(V out1n (X,A)an ≥0) }

The l2 loss is represented as a function of the weight deviations W, V from initiation W (0) and V (0) ,
i.e.,
                     L(W, V) = Objn (X, A1t , A2t , yn ; W (0) + W, V (0) + V).                   (23)

                                                                                   1
Let W (t) = W (0) + Wt , V (t) = V (0) + Vt . We assume 0 < α ≤ O    e
                                                                         kpG Cs (G,BF ∥A∗ ∥ ) throught
                                                                                          1
the training. We prove that ∥Wt ∥2 and ∥Vt ∥2 are bounded by τw and τv in Table 1 during training,
i.e., ∥Wt ∥2 ≤ τw , ∥Vt ∥2 ≤ τv for all t. See Appendix C.5 for the proof.

                                          Table 1: Parameter choices
               1
    σw     m− 2 +0.01 ≤ σw ≤ m−0.01 σv                      σv = Θ(polylog(m))
                                                      1                    1          1
                                          ∗
    τw              τw = Θ (kpF Cs (F, ∥A ∥1 )) and m
                         e                            8 +0.001
                                                               σw ≤ τw ≤ m 8 −0.001 σw4
                                                                    3
                e (αkpG Cs (G, BF ∥A∗ ∥ )BF ∥A∗ ∥ ) and σv k 8 ≤ τv ≤             σv

    τv     τv = Θ                       1          1            m          polylog(m)∥A∗ ∥ < 1  1


C.1      P ROOF OVERVIEW

In practice, for computational efficiency, we use the sampled adjacency matrix At in the learning
network. Therefore, we should consider the discrepancy between the target function with A∗ and the
practical learning network:
    Hn,A∗ (X) − outn X, A1t , A2t ; Wt , Vt 2 ≤ ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2


                                                     + outn X, A1t , A2t − outn (X, A∗ ) 2 .

                                                                                              (24)
First, we prove the existence of W∗ and V∗ with m ≥ M0 , T ≥ T0 and Ω ≥ N0 such that
                              ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ ; W∗ , V∗ )∥2 ≤ ϵ0 .                         (25)

Second, we demonstrate that
 outn X, A1t , A2t − outn (X, A∗ ) 2 ≤ Cσ(W Xa1t           ∗

                                              n ) − Cσ(W Xan ) 2
                                                                                         ∗ ∗
                                                 + Cσ(V out1n (XA1t )a2t            1
                                                                      n ) − Cσ(V outn (XA )an ) 2 .


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            ∗                                            ∗
For the inequality Cσ(W Xa1t                                                         1t
                               n ) − Cσ(W Xan ) 2 ≤ ϵ0 to hold, it is required that A − A 1 ≤
    ϵ0                      2t     ∗             ϵ0
Θ(C   (F ))
            and similarly, A − A 1 ≤ Θ(αC    (F )C (G,∥A∗ ∥ ))
                                                               .
      s                                             s        s   1
e                                        e

Third, we establish that with appropriate sampling probabilities p1ij and p2ij , the norms A1t − A∗ 1
and A2t − A∗ 1 can be sufficiently small.

Finally, consider the definition of OPT, we can prove yn − outn X, A1t , A2t ; Wt , Vt 2 ≤ ϵ.

C.2       C OUPLING

Lemma C.1 We show that the weights after a properly bounded amount of updates stay close to the
initialization,
                and many good properties
                                          occur. Suppose that ∥W∥2 ≤ τw , ∥V∥2 ≤ τv , W0 from
         2
N 0, σw      and V0 from N 0, σv2 /m , we have that
          1.
                                      n         n            τw 2/3 2/3
                                     DW (0) − DW+W0 0 ≤ O  (    )  m                                (26)
                                                             σw
          2.                                                                   √
                                                                                          √

                  n              n                                               s
                CDW+W   WXan − CDW+W   (W + W0 ) Xan 2 ≤ O
                                                         e                     √ τw ∥A∥1 + kσw ∥A∥1
                      0              0
                                                                                m
                                                                                              (27)
          3.
                                           out1n (X, A; W ) 2 ≤ O(τ
                                                                e w ∥A∥ )
                                                                       1                            (28)
          4.
                                         n         n            τv 2/3
                                        DV (0) − DV+V0 0 ≤ O  (    )   m                            (29)
                                                                σv
          5.
                            n
                          CDV+V 0
                                  V out1 (X, A)an − CDV+V
                                                      n
                                                          0
                                                            (V + V0 ) out1 (X, A)an 2
                                                 √      √                          !
                                                   k       s        1
                                                                                                    (30)
                                          ≤O e ( √ σv + √ τv )∥ outn (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥1
                                                   m      m

          6.
                                                 n                   τv 1/3
                                               CDV+V  V0 2 ≤ τv (       )                           (31)
                                                    0
                                                                     σv
          7.
                           n
                                (V + V0 ) out1 (X, A)an ∥2 ≤ O
                                                             e τv ∥ out1n (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥

                        ∥CDV+V0                                                       1             (32)

Proof:
                                                                                      2       2
          1. ∥W Xan ∥2 ≤ ∥W ∥2 ∥Xan ∥2 ≤ τw ∥Xan ∥2 and ⟨W0 , Xan ⟩j ∼ N (0, ∥Xan ∥2 σw ), us-
             ing Lemma A.2, we have

                              n         n                τw ∥Xan ∥2    2/3
                             DW  (0) − DW+W0
                                             0
                                               ≤ O   (           √    )    m             (33)
                                                       σw ∥Xan ∥2 m
                         n
          2. We write CDW+W 0
                              WXa∗1           n
                                    n − CDW+W0 (W + W0 ) Xan = −CDW0 W
                                                                      ∗1       n    (0)
                                                                                        Xa∗1
                                                                                           n +
                  n       n           ∗1                          n
             C DW     − D      W 0 Xa    . For the first term,  D   W    Xa   ≤  ∥W  Xa  n 2 ≤
                                                                                          ∥
                    0
                        √
                         W+W0         n                     √    W0     0 n 2      0

             O (σw ∥A∥ m), so CDn W0 Xan ≤ O
                          1               W0
                                                         e
                                                         2
                                                              kσw ∥A∥         1
               For the second term, using Lemma A.2 again, we have
                                  n         n

                                 DW   0
                                        − DW+W   0
                                                     W0 Xan 2 ≤ ∥W Xan ∥2 ≤ τw ∥A∥1
                                                                                        √s
               Using Lemma A.1, for every s-sparse vector y, it satisfies ∥Ay∥2 ≤ eO( m ) ∥y∥2 with
               high probability. The sparsity of the second term is s = ( σwτ∥A∥
                                                                              w
                                                                                  )2/3 m2/3 , so we have
                                                                                 1
                                                          √                         √
                                                      e √ s · ∥WXan ∥2 ≤ O      e √ s τw ∥A∥ .
                      n        n

                C DW     0
                           − DW+W   0
                                        W 0 Xa n 2
                                                    ≤ O    m                         m         1



                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3.    out1n (X, A) 2 ≤ CDW+W
                                n
                                      0
                                        WXan 2 + CDW+W  n
                                                             0
                                                                        n
                                                               WXan − CDW+W  0
                                                                               (W + W0 ) Xan 2 .
                                                           n
           Using ∥C∥ ≤ 1 with high probability, we have CD
                     2                                          Xan ≤ O(τ
                                                                    W+W0
                                                                        e w ∥A∥ )
                                                                                    2            1
      4. Similar to (26), V out1 (X, A)an 2 ≤ τv out1 (X, A)an 2 and V0 , out1 (X, A)an j ∼
                                    2
           N (0, out1 (X, A)an 2 σv2 ), using Lemma A.2 we can prove it.
      5. We write CDV+V   n
                               0
                                 V out1 (X, A)an − CDV+V  n
                                                              0
                                                                (V + V0 ) out1 (X, A)an      =
                          1
         −CDV0 V out (X, A)an + C DV0 − DV+V0 V0 out1 (X, A)an . Similar to (27),
             n   (0)                           n      n

                                                         √
                            V(0) out1 (X, A)an ∥2 ≤ O(  e k/√m) · O σv ∥ out1 (X, A)an ∥2
                        n

         we have ∥CDV     0                                          √
                                      V0 out1 (X, A)an 2          e √ s τv ∥ out1 (X, A)an ∥2 .
                    n        n

         and   C DV   0
                        − DV+V    0
                                                            ≤    O    m
         ∥ out1 (X, A)an ∥2 ≤ ∥ out1n (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥1
      6. From 5, it is easy to get.
      7. From 3, it is easy to get.

C.3   E XISTANTIAL

Consider random function Sn ((X, A); W∗ ) = Sn1 ((X, A); W∗ ) , . . . , Snk ((X, A); W∗ ) in which

                                        m
                                 ∗ def
                                       X
                    r
                  Sn ((X, A); W ) =        ar,i · ⟨wi∗ , Xan ⟩ · 1Dw(0) ,Xa E≥0               (34)
                                                                        i       n
                                                i=1
                                                                        (0)
where W ∗ is a given matrix, W 0 is a random matrix where each wi                                 I

                                                                              is i.i.d. from N 0, m   and
ar,i is i.i.d. from N (0, 1).
Based on Lemma B.1. from Li et al. (2022a) and Lemma E.1. from Allen-Zhu & Li (2019), we have
Lemma C.2 Given any F                  :      Rd      →    R

                                                             k
                                                                with general  complexity
                                                                        1
(p, Cs (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 , Cε (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 ), for every ϵ ∈ 0, pkCs (F ,∥A∥ 1 )∥A∥1
                                                                                   , there exist
M = poly (Cε (F, ∥A∥1 ), ∥A∥1 , 1/ε) such that if m ≥ M , then with high probability there is a
construction W∗ = (w1∗ , . . . , wm
                                  ∗
                                    ) ∈ Rm×d with

                kpCε (F, ∥A∥1 ), ∥A∥1                       e kpCs (F,√∥A∥1 )∥A∥1
    ∥W∗ ∥2,∞ ≤                              and ∥W∗ ∥F ≤ O                                 (35)
                              m                                           m
                                                                                        √
satisfying, for every xn ∈ Rd and ∥xn ∥2 ≤ 1, with probability at least 1 − e−Ω( m)
                            k
                            X
                                   |Fnr (X, A) − Snr (X, A; W ∗ )| ≤ ε · ∥A∥1                        (36)
                             r=1

                          Sn (X, A; W ∗ )
                         1               

where Gn (X, A; W ∗ ) =         ..
                                           and Sn (X, A; W ∗ ) = CDW
                                                                    n      ∗
                                                                      +W0 W Xan
                                         
                                  .
                             Snk (X, A; W ∗ )
                                                   √ D          E
                                                       (0)
Proof: Define wj∗ = r∈[k] ar,j i∈[p] a∗r,i h(r,i)           ∗       ∗
                   P          P
                                                    m wj , w1,i    w2,i has the same distribution
with α1 in Lemma A.6.
Using Lemma A.6 we have h(r,i) ≤ Cε (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 and using Lemma E.1. from Allen-
Zhu & Li (2019), we have for our parameter choice of m, with probability at least 1 −
      2   4 2
e−Ω(mε /(k p Cε (F ,∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 ))
                                                                    ε
                                 |Fnr (X, A) − Snr (X, A; W ∗ )| ≤ .
                                                                    k

We have for each j ∈ [m], with high probability wj∗ 2 ≤ O        e kpCε (F ,∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 . This means
                                                                            m

∥W∗ ∥2,∞ ≤ O e kpCε (F ,∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 . As for the Frobenius norm,
                          m

                 2
                       X           2     X   k2 p   X                  √ D
                                                                              (0)
                                                                                      E 2
         ∥W∗ ∥F =             wj∗ 2 ≤        Oe
                                                     2
                                                        ·      h(r,i)   m wj , w1,i ∗
                                                                                               (37)
                                                   m
                         j∈[m]            j∈[m]             i∈[p]


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                               √
Applying Hoeffding’s concentration, we have with probability at least 1 − e−Ω( m)

                               √    D          E √       2
                                      (0)           (0)
              X
                                           ∗
                     h(r,i)        m wj , w1,i  , mbj      ≤ m · (Cs (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥21 ),
             j∈[m]
                                                                                                              (38)
                                                               + m3/4 · (Cε (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 )2 ,
                                                               ≤ 2m(Cs (F, ∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 )2 .
                                                        2 2
                                       2               k p (Cs (F ,∥A∥1 )∥A∥1 )2
Putting this back to (37) we have ∥W∗ ∥F ≤ O
                                           e
                                                                   m                   .

Lemma C.3 Under the assumptions of Lemma C.1, suppose α ∈ (0, 1) and α                                   e  =
                 α                                                                                      −1
k(pF Cs (F ,∥A∥1 )+pG Cs (G,∥A∥1 )) , there exist M  = poly   Cαe (F, ∥A∥ 1 ), C α
                                                                                 e (G, ∥A∥1 ), ∥A∥1 , α
                                                                                                      e    sat-
                                         ∗                               ∗
isfying that for every m ≥ M ,∥W ∥F ≤ O           e (kpF Cs (F)) and ∥V ∥ ≤ O
                                                                             F
                                                                                    e (e
                                                                                       αkpG Cs (G)) with high
probability

      1.
                                                   n
                                                       W∗ Xan − Fn (X, A) 2 ≤ α
                                                                              e2 ∥A∥1

                          En∈V,(X,yn )∼D         CDW 0
                                                                                                              (39)

      2.
               n
                   V∗ out1 (X, A)an − αGn out1 (X, A), A                   e2 ·        out1n (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥1 (40)

            ∥CDV 0                                                      2 ≤α


      3.
                                            n
                         En∈V,(X,yn )∼D [∥CDW W∗ Xan − Fn (X, A)∥2 ] ≤ O(e
                                                                         α2 ∥A∥1 )                            (41)

      4.
                                      n
                                         V∗ out1 (X, A)an − αGn out1 (X, A), A 2

                                    CDV
                                                     1/3 !!
                                       2           τv                                                         (42)
                                   ≤ α
                                     e + O τv                  out1n (X, A) 2 ∥A∥1
                                                   σv

      5.
                                     n
                                            (W∗ − W)Xan − (Fn (X, A) − out1n (X, A)) 2 ≤ α
                                                                                         e2 ∥A∥1

           En∈V,(X,yn )∼D          CDW 0 +W
                                                                                           (43)

Proof:

      1. Using Lemma C.2, we can find a W∗ satisfying CDW
                                                        n
                                                          0 +W
                                                               W∗ Xan − Fn (X, A) 2 small
                                                  √
         enough with probability at least 1 − e−Ω( m) .
      2. Using Lemma C.2 and out1 (X, A)an 2 ≤ ∥ out1n (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥1 , we can easily prove it.
      3. ∥W∗ Xan ∥2 ≤ O (∥W∗ ∥F ∥Xan ∥2 ) ≤ O (τw ∥A∥1 ). C(DW         n
                                                                         − DWn
                                                                                 )W∗ Xan 2 ≤
            √            √                                           n     n
                                                                               0
         O ( sτw ∥A∥1 / m) where s is the maximum sparsity of (DW − DW0 ). Using (26), we

         know s ≤ O ( στww )2/3 m2/3 . This, combining with (39) gives


                                                                                                τw 1/3 1/6
                              n
           En∈V,(X,yn )∼D [∥CDW W∗ Xan − Fn (X, A)∥2 ] ≤ α
                                                         e2 ∥A∥1 + O                        τw ( ) /m
                                                                                                σw
                                                                        α2 ∥A∥1 )
                                                                    ≤ O(e
                                                                                                              (44)
                                    ∗   1
                                                              τv ∥ out1n (X, A)∥2 ∥A∥1

      4. Using (29) and V out (X, A)an 2 ≤ O                                                   we can easily prove
         it.
      5. Using (27) and (41), with larger enough m, we can prove it.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4   O PTIMIZATION

We write the gradient of loss function as ∇W Objn (W) = ∇W Obj1n (W) + ∇W Obj2n (W),
where ∇W Obj1n (W) = ∇W out1n (X, A) and ∇W Obj2n (W) = ∇W CDVn V out1 (X, A)an , we
can write its gradient as follows.

              ∇W Obj1n (W), −W′ = tr(Xan (yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDW
                                                               n      ′
                                                                 +W0 W )

                                            = tr((yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDW
                                                                       n      ′
                                                                         +W0 W Xan )           (45)
                                                                    n      ′
                                            =   yn − outn (X, A), CDW +W0 W Xan


                                  N
                                  X
 ∇W Obj2n (W), −W′       = tr(          ani Xai (yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)CDW
                                                                                         i      ′
                                                                                           +W0 W )
                                  i=1
                                  N
                                  X
                         = tr(          ani (yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)CDW
                                                                                     i      ′
                                                                                       +W0 W Xai )
                                  i=1
                                                         N
                                                         X
                         = tr((yn − outn (X, A))⊤              ani CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)CDW
                                                                                        i      ′
                                                                                          +W0 W Xai )
                                                         i=1
                             D                                                                  E
                         =       yn − outn (X, A), CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)C(DW +W0 ⊙ W ′ XA)an
                                                                                               (46)

            ⟨∇V Objn (V), −V′ ⟩ = tr(out(X)an (yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDVn +V0 V′ )
                                        = tr((yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDVn +V0 V′ out(X)an )        (47)
                                        =   yn − outn (X, A), CDVn +V0 V′ out(X)an

Let us define f (W′ ) = CDW
                          n      ′        n
                            +W0 W Xan + CDV +V0 (V
                                                   (0)
                                                       + V)C(DW +W0 ⊙ W ′ XA)an and
    ′        n       ′
g(V ) = CDV +V0 V out(X)an . Therefore,

          ⟨∇W,V Objn (W, V), (−W′ , −V′ )⟩ = ⟨yn − outn (X, A), f (W′ ) + g (V′ )⟩             (48)

Claim C.4 We have that for all W and V satisfying ∥W∥F ≤ τw and ∥V∥F ≤ τv , it holds that
              ∥∇W Obj(W, V; (x, y))∥F ≤ ∥A∥1 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2 · O (σv + 1)                  (49)


               ∥∇V Obj(W, V; (x, y))∥F ≤ τw ∥A∥1 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2 · O (1)                   (50)

Proof:
   ∥∇W Obj(W, V; (x, y))∥F = ∥Xan (yn − outn (X, A))⊤
                                                 n         n        (0)       n
                                            × (CDW +W0 + CDV +V0 (V     + V)CDW +W0 )∥F
                                    ≤ ∥Xan ∥2 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2                              (51)
                                                 n         n        (0)       n
                                            × ∥CDW +W0 + CDV +V0 (V     + V)CDW +W0 ∥2
                                    ≤ ∥A∥1 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2 · O (σv + 1)

In (51), the last inequality uses ∥V (0) ∥2 = O(τv ) and ∥C∥2 ≤ 1.

      ∥∇V Obj(W, V; (x, y))∥F = ∥ outn (X, A)an (yn − outn (X, A))⊤ CDVn +V0 ∥F
                                     ≤ ∥ outn (X, A)an ∥2 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2 ∥CDVn +V0 ∥2     (52)
                                    ≤ τw ∥A∥1 ∥yn − outn (X, A)∥2 · O (1)
In (52), the last inequality uses (28) and ∥C∥2 ≤ 1.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Claim C.5 In the setting of Lemma C.1, we have f (W∗ − W) + g (V∗ − V) = Hn,A∗ (X, A) −
outn (X, A) + Errn with
      E         ∥Errn ∥2 ≤      E      [O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ∥A∥1 ) · ∥Hn,A∗ (X, A) − outn (X, A)∥2 ]
n∈V,(X,yn )∼D                n∈V,(X,yn )∼D

                                    2                2           2
                         + O τv2 ∥A∥1 BF + τv αe2 ∥A∥1 + ατv ∥A∥1 LG BF
                                                                                          (53)

Proof: Based on the definition of f (W′ ) and g(V′ ), we have
f (W∗ − W; X, a∗n ) + g (V∗ − V; X, a∗n ) = CDW
                                              n       ∗
                                                +W0 (W − W )Xan
                                                 + CDVn +V0 (V ∗ − V ) out(X)an
                                                 + CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)C(DW +W0 ⊙ (W ∗ − W )XA)an
                                                 = CDVn +V0 (V(0) + V)C(DW +W0 ⊙ (W ∗ − W )XA)an
                                                   |                     {z                    }
                                                                      ♣

                                                 + CDW +W0 W Xan + CDV +V0 V ∗ out1 (X, A)an
                                                     n      ∗        n
                                                   |                         {z                     }
                                                                              ♠
                                                      n                 n        1
                                                 − (CDW +W0 W Xan + CDV +V0 V out (X, A)an )
                                                   |                 {z                   }
                                                                             ♢
                                                                                                    (54)
1. For the ♣ term,

           ♣ ≤ CDVn +V0 V(0)              + ∥C∥22 ∥V∥2 ∥C(DW +W0 ⊙ (W ∗ − W )XA)an ∥2
                                      2
                                  N
                                  X
                                        ani ∥F(x) − out1n (X, A)∥2 + O α
                                                                       e2 ∥A∥1

             ≤ O(1) · O (τv ) ·                                                                     (55)
                                  i=1

                                                          2
             ≤ O (τv ) ∥F(x) − outi (x)∥2 ∥A∥1 + O αe2 ∥A∥1
                        1
together with τv ≤ polylog (m) σv .

2. For the ♠ term,
                                      n      ∗
   ♠ − (Fn (X, A) + αG(F(x), an ) = CDW +W0 W Xan − Fn (X, A)
                                           + CDVn +V0 V ∗ out1 (X, A)an − αG out1n (X, A), an

                                                                                                    (56)
                                           + αG out1n (X, A), an − αG (F(x), an )



The first term uses (39), the second term uses (40) and the third term uses the Lipscthiz continuity of
G, so we have

                                                τv
∥♠ − (F(x) + αG(F(x))∥2 ≤ O α          e2 + τv ( )1/3 · ∥out1n (X, an )∥2 ∥A∥1
                                                σv
                                   + O (αLG ) ∥F(X)an − out1n (X)an ∥2
                                 ≤O τv2 · ∥out1n (x)∥2 ∥A∥1 + O (αLG ) ∥Fn (x) − out1n (x)∥2 ∥A∥1

                                                                                             (57)
We use σ1v ≤ τv2 and definition of α
                                   e.
3. For the ♢ term,
                                                            ∥out1n (x)∥2 ∥A∥1 τv2

                           ∥♢ − outn (X)∥2 ≤ O                                                      (58)
where the inequality uses (27) and (30).
In sum, we have
                def
          Err = f (W∗ − W; x) + g (V∗ − V; x) − (F(x) + αG(F(x)) − outn (X, A)                      (59)


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


satisfy

                E          ∥Err∥2 ≤               E        O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ∥A∥1 )
          n∈V,(X,yn )∼D                   n∈V,(X,yn )∼D

                                        × ∥F(x) − out1n (X, A)∥2 + O ∥out1n (x)∥2 ∥A∥1 τv2           (60)



                                                  2
                                            e2 ∥A∥1
                                     + O τv α


Using ∥out1n (x) ∥2 ≤∥ out1n (X, A) − F(x)∥2 + BF , we have
          E      ∥Err∥2 ≤                 E[O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ∥A∥1 ) · ∥H(x) − outn (X, A)∥2 ]
 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D                 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D

                             + O τv2 ∥A∥1 BF + τv α
                                                         2
                                                   e2 ∥A∥1                                    (61)

                             + O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ∥A∥1 ) · (τv ∥A∥1 BF + αBF ◦G )
                    √
Using BF ◦G ≤           kpG Cs (G, ∥A∥1 BF )(∥A∥1 BF )2 BF ≤ ταv BF , so we have

          E      ∥Err∥2 ≤                 E[O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ∥A∥1 ) · ∥H(x) − outn (X, A)∥2 ]
 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D                 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D
                                                                                              (62)
                                        2                2           2
                             + O τv2 ∥A∥1 BF + τv αe2 ∥A∥1 + ατv ∥A∥1 LG BF

                                                         1
Claim C.6 In the setting of Lemma C.1, if τv ∥A∥1 ≤ polylog(m) , we have

   out1n (X, A) − Fn (X) 2 ≤ 2 out1n (X, A) − Hn (X, A) 2 + αBF ◦G + O
                                                                     e (τv ∥A∥ BF ) (63)
                                                                              1


Proof: Using 32 and ∥G(F(X), an )∥2 ≤ BF ◦G , we have

          out1n (X, A) − Fn (X) 2 ≤ out1n (X, A) − Hn (X, A) 2 + αBF ◦G
                                                                                                     (64)
                                               e τv ∥A∥ ∥out1 (X, an ) − Fn (X, A)∥2 + BF

                                              +O       1    n


Using τv ∥A∥1 small enough, we have

   out1n (X, A) − Fn (X) 2 ≤ 2 out1n (X, A) − Hn (X, A) 2 + αBF ◦G + O
                                                                     e (τv ∥A∥ BF ) (65)
                                                                              1


C.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Proof: Using (48) and Claim C.5, in iteration t, we have
                      ⟨∇W,V Objn (Wt , Vt )) , (Wt − W∗ , Vt − V∗ ))⟩
                    = ⟨yn − out (Wt , Vt ) , f (W∗ − W) + g (V∗ − V)⟩                                (66)
                    = ⟨yn − outn (Wt , Vt ) , Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (Wt , Vt ) + Errt ⟩

We also have
                                  2                                            2
                ∥Wt+1 − W ∗ ∥F = ∥Wt − ηw ∇W Objn (Wt ) − W ∗ ∥F
                                                         2
                                      = ∥Wt − W ∗ ∥F − 2ηw ⟨∇W Objn (Wt ), Wt − W ∗ ⟩                (67)
                                                 2                 2
                                              + ηw ∥∇W Objn (Wt )∥F ,
                                      2                                    2
                    ∥Vt+1 − V ∗ ∥F = ∥Vt − ηv ∇V Objn (Vt ) − V ∗ ∥F
                                                         2
                                          = ∥Vt − V ∗ ∥F − 2ηv ⟨∇V Objn (Vt ), Vt − V ∗ ⟩            (68)
                                                                    2
                                               + ηv2 ∥∇V Objn (Vt )∥F

                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using Algorithm 1, we have Wt+1 = Wt − ηw ∇W Objn (Wt , Vt ) and Vt+1 = Vt −
ηv ∇V Objn (Wt , Vt ), so we have
    ⟨∇W,V Objt (Wt , Vt ) , (W − W∗ , V − V∗ ))⟩
    ηw                       2    ηv                     2
 =     ∥∇W Objt (Wt , Vt )∥F +       ∥∇V Objt (Wt , Vt )∥F
    |2                         {z 2                       }
                                    ♡
       1            2    1              2    1            2    1              2
    +     ∥Wt − W∗ ∥F −     ∥Wt+1 − W∗ ∥F +     ∥Vt − V∗ ∥F −     ∥Vt+1 − V∗ ∥F
      2ηw               2ηw                 2ηv               2ηv
                                                                             (69)
Using Claim C.4 and change all A to A∗ , we have
   ♡ ≤ O ηw σv2 + ηv τw2 · ∥A∥21 ∥yn − outn (X, A∗ )∥22


                                                            2                    2
                                                                                              (70)
     ≤ O ηw σv2 + ηv τw2 · ∥A∥21 ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2 + ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − yn ∥2



Therefore, as long as O ηw σv2 + ηv τw2 ≤ 0.1, it satisfies
     1                                2           2                    2
       ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2 ≤2 ∥Errt ∥2 + 4 ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − yn ∥2
     4
                                             1                2    1              2
                                          +      ∥Wt − W∗ ∥F −        ∥Wt+1 − W∗ ∥F           (71)
                                            2ηw                   2ηw
                                             1              2    1              2
                                          +      ∥Vt − V∗ ∥F −      ∥Vt+1 − V∗ ∥F
                                            2ηv                 2ηv
After telescoping for t = 0, 1, . . . , T0 − 1,
                        2              2       T0 −1
             ∥WT0 − W∗ ∥F   ∥WT0 − V∗ ∥F    1 X
                          +              +           ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ ) ∥22
                2ηw T0        2ηv T0       2T0 t=0
                                                                                              (72)
                  2            2           T −1
           ∥W∗ ∥F    ∥V∗ ∥F         0
                               O(1) X         2                    2
         ≤         +         +         ∥Errt ∥2 + ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − yt ∥2 .
            2ηw T0    2ηv T0    T0 t=0

Using O (τv ∥A∥1 + αLG ) ≤ 0.1, we have
      T −1                                                           2         2
   1 X                                                2   ∥W∗ ∥F      ∥V∗ ∥F
              E        ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2 ≤               +         + O (OPT + ϵ0 )
  4T t=0 n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                     2ηw T       2ηv T
                                                                                          (73)
where                                                                       2
                                    2
              ϵ0 = Θ α   e2 τv ∥A∗ ∥1 + τv2 ∥A∗ ∥1 BF + ατv ∥A∗ ∥1 LG BF

                                    2
                 =Θ  e α e2 τv ∥A∗ ∥1 + α2 (kpG Cs (G, BF ∥A∗ ∥1 )2 (BF ∥A∗ ∥1 )3
                                                                                          (74)
                                                                        2
                       +α2 kpG Cs (G, BF ∥A∗ ∥1 )(BF ∥A∗ ∥1 )3 ∥A∗ ∥1

                 =Θ  e α4 (pG Cs (G, BF ∥A∗ ∥ ))4 (∥A∗ ∥ BF )6
                                                 1        1

In practice, for computational efficiency, we use the sampled adjacency matrix At in the learning
network, so we should consider the discrepancy between the target function and the practical output
                                            2                                2
          Hn,A∗ (X) − outn X, A1t , A2t 2 ≤ ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2
                                                                                          2
                                                                                               (75)
                                                + outn X, A1t , A2t − outn (X, A∗ ) 2


                                                              2
We have already considered ∥Hn,A∗ (X) − outn (X, A∗ )∥2 and
 outn X, A1t , A2t − outn (X, A∗ ) 2 ≤ Cσ(W Xa1t              ∗

                                                  n ) − CσW Xan 2
                                                                                          ∗ ∗
                                                  + Cσ(V out1n (XA1t )a2t            1
                                                                       n ) − Cσ(V outn (XA )an ) 2
                                                                                              (76)


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using (28), we have
                                           ∗                ∗
                        Cσ(W Xa1t                     1t
                               n ) − CσW Xan 2 ≤ τw Xan − Xan 2 ≤ ∥Errt ∥2                                                          (77)
For the above equation to hold, it requires
                                                                                    Errt
                                                             A1t − A∗ 1 ≤                                                           (78)
                                                                                     τw      2


Using ∥A∗ ∥1 ≤ O(1) and (32), we have
                                        ∗ ∗                                  ∗ ∗
  Cσ(V out1n (XA1t )a2t            1                     1    1t 2t     1
                     n ) − Cσ(V outn (XA )an ) 2 ≤ τv outn (XA )an − outn (XA )an 2

                                                                                    ≤ τv τw A2t − A∗ 1 ≤ ∥Errt ∥2
                                                                                                                                    (79)
                                                                   2t         ∗             Errt
For the above equation to hold, it requires A − A                                   1
                                                                                        ≤   τ v τw       .
                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                 Errt
Under assumptions of Lemma C.7, with high probability, we can ensure A1t − A∗ 2 ≤                                                 τw        ,
                                                                                                                                        2
                        Errt
 A2t − A∗ 1 ≤           τv τw            .
                                     2

Using ∥W∗ ∥F ≤ τw /10, ∥V∗ ∥F ≤ τv /10 and ϵ ≥ OPT + ϵ0 , we have
                         T −1
                   1 X                                                2
                              E        Hn,A∗ (X) − outn X, A1t , A2t 2 ≤ O(ϵ)                                                       (80)
                   T t=0 n∈V,(X,yn )∼D
                          2
                            τw /ηw +τv2 /ηv

as long as T ≥ Ω                   ϵ                    .

Finally, we should check ∥Wt ∥F ≤ τw and ∥Vt ∥F ≤ τv hold.
                            2                                 2           2                  2
      ∥WT0 − W∗ ∥F   ∥VT0 − V∗ ∥F   ∥W∗ ∥F    ∥V∗ ∥F                                                             τw ∥A∗ ∥1

                   +              ≤         +         + O(ϵ) + O
                                                               e                                                   √                (81)
         2ηw T0         2ηv T0       2ηw T0    2ηv T0                                                                T0
                                    τ2         τ2
Using the relationship ηww = ηvv , we have
                2           2            2           2                      √
                                 4 ∥W∗ ∥F     4 ∥V∗ ∥F             ηw ∥A∗ ∥1 T0

         ∥WT0 ∥F     ∥VT0 ∥F
                   +          ≤             +          + 0.1 + O
                                                               e                      (82)
            τw2        τv2           τw2         τv2                    τw
                                     2

                                    τw
Therefore, choosing T = Θ e    ∗          2   and ηw = Θ(min{1,
                                                         e        ϵ}) ≤ 0.1, we can ensure
                                                    ∥A ∥1 min{1,ϵ }
        2               2
∥WT0 ∥F         ∥VT0 ∥F
    2
   τw       +     τv2           ≤ 1.

C.6     G RAPH SAMPLING
                                                             τw
Lemma C.7 Given a graph G with the minimum degree δ(G) ≥ Ω( Err t
                                                                                                                 ), in iteration t, for
                                                                                                             2
the first layer A1t is generated from the sampling strategy with the sampling probability p1ij ≤
   √
      di dj ∥Errt ∥2
O(       nij τw      ) and for the second layer A2t is generated from the sampling strategy with the
                                   √
                                     di dj ∥Errt ∥
sampling probability p2ij ≤ O( nij τw τv 2 ), we have


                                                                   Errt
                                                                                                  √
                        Pr           A −A 1t         ∗
                                                            1
                                                              ≤ O(                ) ≤ e−Ω(∥Errt ∥2 di dj /τw )                      (83)
                                                                    τw        2


                                                                Errt
                                                                                              √
                        Pr          A −A 2t         ∗
                                                         1
                                                           ≤ O(               ) ≤ e−Ω(∥Errt ∥2 di dj /τw τv )                       (84)
                                                                τw τv     2


                                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof: The difference between AtBij and A∗Bij is
                                                                                  nij
                                                                                  X
                                ∆Bij = AtBij − A∗Bij =                                  (atij − a∗ij )                                  (85)
                                                                                  i=1

where nij is the number of elements in A∗Bij and (atij − a∗ij ) are iid, with µij = E[∆Bij ] =
nij pij √ 1 . The Moment-generating function of (atij − a∗ij ) is
         di dj
                                              h    t    ∗
                                                             i
                        M(atij −a∗ij ) (s) = E es(aij −aij )
                                                            s √d1 d
                                                    =e       pij + es·0 (1 − pij )
                                                                  i j

                                                               √s                                                                       (86)
                                                    = 1 + pij e di dj − 1
                                                            √s
                                                    ≤ exp e di dj − 1

Thus, for any t > 0, using Markov’s inequality and the definition of MGF, we have
                                                 Qnij
                                                    i=1 M(atij −a∗ij )
                                                                       (s)
                            P(∆Bij ≥ k) ≤ min
                                             s>0          etk
                                                    √        √s                                                                         (87)
                                                                         !
                                                               di dj
                                                                      µ       di dj     e       −1
                                                                  e
                                                    = min
                                                        t>0                           etk
                                                                                                              p
If 0 ≤ δij ≤ 1, we plug in kij = (1 + δij )µij and the optimal value of sij =                                  di dj ln(1 + ϵij ) to
the above equation:

                                                                       µij √di dj                                        !
                                                                                                         −ϵ2ij µij di dj
                                                                                                                  p
                                               eϵij

      P(∆Bij ≥ (1 + δij )µij ) ≤                                                            ≤ exp                                       (88)
                                         (1 + ϵij )(1+ϵij )                                                      3

            (1 + δij )(1+δij ) = exp[(1 + δij )ln(1 + δij )]
                                          2
                                         δij       3
                                                  δij                             2
                                                                                δij     3
                                                                                       δij                                              (89)
                                                           4
                                 = exp(δij + −        + o(δij )) ≥ exp(δij +         −     )
                                          2        6                             2      6
                                                                     √
                                           1                           di dj Errt
Let δij = 1, µij = Θ(Errt ), and di ≥ Ω( Err t
                                               ), we  have p ij ≤ O(     nij      ).

C.7    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY
                                                                                                                                          1
Lemma C.8 Given a graph G with |V (G)| = N , if the maximum degree ∆(G) ≤ O((N ϵ2 ) 4 )
                                            2                 2
                                     ∆(G) (τw ∥A∥1 ) log N
and sample complexity Ω ≥ O(                  ϵ2           ), with probability 1 − N −τw ∥A∥1 , we have

       E           yn − outn X, A1t , A2t           2
                                                        −                 E                 yn − outn X, A1t , A2t         2
                                                                                                                                   ≤ ϵ.
n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                                n∈V,(X,yn )∼D

Proof: For the set of samples Z define
                                                                                      Ω
                                                                               1 X
                             yn − outn X, A1t , A2t                                  yn − outn X, A1t , A2t 2

               E                                                  2
                                                                    =                                                                   (90)
         n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                                         Ω n=1

Denote the generalization error as


                       yn − outn X, A1t , A2t                                                   yn − outn X, A1t , A2t

           E                                                 2
                                                                 −                E                                                 2
      n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                                   n∈V,(X,yn )∼D


                                    outn X, A1t , A2t                                                    outn X, A1t , A2t

               =         E                                                2
                                                                              −             E                                       2
                   n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                                  n∈V,(X,yn )∼D


                                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Hoeffding’s inequality and ∥outn (X, an )∥2 ≤ O(τw ∥A∥1 ) , we have
     "                                                                              #
        s       E       ∥outn (X,A1t ,A2t )∥2 −n∈V,(X,y
                                                     E        ∥outn (X,A1t ,A2t )∥2      (sτw ∥A∥1 )2
   E e    n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                 n )∼D
                                                                                      ≤e       8                               (91)


Define maximum degree of G is ∆(G). It is easy to know that outn X, A1t , A2t 2 is de-
pendent with at most
                    its second order neighbor, so the maximum number of nodes related with
 outn X, A1t , A2t 2 is ∆(G)2 . By Lemma 7 in Shuai, we have
                                         ∥outn (X,A1t ,A2t )∥2 ≤ e∆(G)2 (sτw ∥A∥1 )2 Ω/8
                                  PΩ
                            Ees    n=1
                                                                                                                               (92)



                            outn X, A1t , A2t                                    outn X, A1t , A2t

    P            E                                       2
                                                           −           E                                          2
                                                                                                                    ≥ϵ
            n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                        n∈V,(X,yn )∼D                                                 (93)
                                                                                      2              2

                                                                      ≤ exp ∆(G) (sτw ∥A∥1 ) Ω/8 − sϵΩ
                                                             q
                                                                 ∆(G)4 log N
Let s = ∆(G)2 (τ4ϵw ∥A∥ )2 and ϵ = (τw ∥A∥1 )2                       Ω
                       1

                                          1t    2t                                              1t       2t

    P            E          outn X, A , A                2
                                                             −         E         outn X, A , A                    2
                                                                                                                      ≥ϵ
            n∈V,(X,yn )∼Z                                        n∈V,(X,yn )∼D
                                                                                                                               (94)
                                                                                 ≤ exp −(τw ∥A∥1 )2 log N


                                                                                                     ≤ N −τw ∥A∥1

with
                                                 ∆(G)2 (τw ∥A∥1 )2 log N
                                       Ω ≥ O(                            )                                                     (95)
                                                           ϵ2

D       A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT
D.1         A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT ON SYNTHETIC DATA

Model and sample complexities with ∥A∗ ∥1 : In Figures 3 (a) (b), we generate a graph G with
N = 2000 nodes. G      has one-degree groups and the degree of each node follows a Gaussian
distribution N d, σ 2 . d = 200. The degrees are truncated to fall within the range of 0 to 500. We
vary A∗ by changing σ and the corresponding A. We directly train with A∗ to study the impact of A∗
on model and sample complexities.
In Figures 3 (a), |Ω| = 1200 and the number of neurons per layer m varies. Fig. 3 (a) shows the
testing error decreases as m increases. When m is the same, the testing error increases as ∥A∗ ∥1
increases. This verifies our model complexity in Theorem 3.2. In Figures 3 (b), m = 50 and |Ω|
varies. Fig. 3 (b) shows the testing error decreases as Ω increases. When Ω is the same, the testing
error increases as ∥A∗ ∥1 increases. This verifies our model complexity in Theorem 3.2.
Fig. 3 (c) is a 2D vertical projection of the 3D Fig. 1 (c).

D.2         A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT ON REAL DATA

A summary of Ogbn datasets’ statistics is presented in Table 2.

                                         Table 2: Ogbn datasets statistics.

                 Dataset            Nodes              Edges               Features       Classes     Metric
                Ogbn-Arxiv         169,343           1,166,243               128            40       Accuracy
               Ogbn-Products      2,449,029          61,859,140              100            47       Accuracy



                                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a)                               (b)                               (c)

Figure 3: Experiment on synthetic data. (a) Test error with model complexity and ∥A∗ ∥1 . (b) Test
error with sample complexity and ∥A∗ ∥1 . (c) 2D heatmap of 3D Fig. 1 (c)


                            (a)                                        (b)

Figure 4: Learning deep GCNs on Ogbn-Arxiv (a) 2D Heatmap of 3D Fig. 2 (a). (b) 2D Heatmap of
3D Fig. 2 (b).


For the Ogbn-Products dataset, we deploy a 4-layer Jumping Knowledge Network (Xu et al., 2018b)
GCN with concatenation layer aggregation. Each hidden layer consists of 128 neurons. We define the
first two layers as shallow layers and the last two layers as deep layers. with sampling rate p2 . The
task of Ogbn-Products is to classify the category of a product in a multi-class, where the 47 top-level
categories are used for target labels. We use 60% of the data for training, 20% for testing, and 20%
for verification.
We run the similar experiment as Figure 2 (a) for Obgn-Arxiv dataset. We fix q1 = 0.1 and vary
q2 from 0.1 to 1.0 at increments of 0.1, then fix q2 = 0.1 and vary q1 from 0.1 to 1.0 at increments
of 0.1. Figure 5 shows that with the increasing sampling rate in shallow layers, the test accuracy
is higher than the test accuracy with the increasing sampling rate in deep layers. It suggests that
the generalization is more sensitive to the sampling in the shallow layers rather than deep layers,
consistent with observations in other datasets.


                     Figure 5: Layer-wise Sampling Rate Effect on Ogbn-Products


                                                  26
