Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ISTRIBUTIONAL S TRUCTURED P RUNING BY L OWER
BOUNDING THE T OTAL VARIATION D ISTANCE USING
W ITNESS FUNCTIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

            Recent literature introduced the notion of distributional structured pruning (DSP)
            in Deep Neural Networks by retaining discriminative filters that can effectively
            differentiate between classes. Crucial to DSP is the ability to estimate the dis-
            criminative ability of a filter, which is defined by the minimum pairwise Total
            Variation (TV) distance between the class-conditional feature distributions. Since
            the computation of TV distance is generally intractable, existing literature assumes
            the class-conditional feature distributions are Gaussian, thereby enabling the use of
            the tractable Hellinger lower bound to estimate discriminative ability. However,
            the Gaussian assumption is not only restrictive but also does not typically hold. In
            this work, we address this gap by deriving a lower bound on TV Distance which
            depends only on the moments of witness functions. Using linear witness functions,
            the bound establishes new relationships between the TV Distance and well-known
            discriminant-based classifiers, such as Fisher Discriminants and Minimax Prob-
            ability machines. The lower bounds are used to produce a variety of pruning
            algorithms called WitnessPrune by varying the choice of witness function. We
            empirically show that we can achieve up to 7% greater accuracy for similar sparsity
            in hard-to-prune layers using a polynomial witness function as compared to the
            state-of-the-art.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

The size of modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), some of which possess billions of parameters,
makes deploying them in real-world scenarios a challenging problem (Hoefler et al., 2021; Prakash
et al., 2019; Molchanov et al., 2019). This has necessitated research into model compression
techniques, by which model sizes are reduced in order to satisfy real-world performance requirements,
such as inference time and power consumption. A variety of methods have been developed, including
quantization (Gholami et al., 2022), knowledge distillation (Gou et al., 2021), hashing (Deng et al.,
2020), and pruning (Hoefler et al., 2021; Blalock et al., 2020). Structured pruning - processes
by which entire filters or neurons are removed from DNNs - is a popular and effective tool for
improving real-world performance in terms of inference time and power consumption of DNNs,
without requiring any additional hardware and software (Hoefler et al., 2021).
However, most contemporary methods for structured pruning require access to the training data or
the loss function, which may be unavailable due to constraints such as privacy and security (Yin
et al., 2020; Narshana et al., 2022), making the development of algorithms to prune models in this
setting an active area of research. In this work, we relax this constraint, and address the problem of
structured pruning without training set or loss function access, but with access to the distribution of
the data, such as natural samples or moments.
A new approach for solving this problem was proposed in Murti et al. (2022), which identified
discriminative filters - filters that generate features capable of effectively discriminating between
classes - and pruning non-discriminative filters. This paradigm of pruning is called distributional
pruning, as it requires some access to the class-conditional distributions.
    1
        Our code is available at the anonymous repository at https://shorturl.at/kmrE9


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The key challenge in distributional pruning lies in quantifying discriminative ability. In Murti et al.
(2022), the class conditional features are assumed to be Gaussian distributed, and the discriminative
ability is quantified by computing the Hellinger-lower bound on the Total Variation (TV) distance
between Gaussians. This assumption may be unrealistic, as our experiments indicate that class-
conditional distributions are in general not Gaussian. However, estimating the TV distance is known
to be intractable (Bhattacharyya et al., 2022). Recent works have addressed finding lower bounds on
the TV distance between known distributions, such as (Hardt & Price, 2015; Davies et al., 2022). To
address this problem, we adopt a witness function based approach to lower bounding the TV distance.
In this work, we address the problem of identifying and pruning non-discriminative filters without
assuming prior knowledge about the class conditional feature distributions. To do so, we develop
witness function based lower bounds on the TV distance, with which we then derive a variety of
distributional pruning algorithms. We state our contributions formally below.

       • We produce the empirical observation that the class conditional distributions of feature maps
         are, in general, not Gaussian in section 7. This motivates us to propose a novel witness
         function-based lower bound on the TV distance between distributions; this result is stated
         in Theorem 1. The bounds require no prior knowledge of the distributions, apart from the
         boundedness of the distributions moments. Motivated by the use of the Hellinger distance in
         contemporary work on distributional pruning (Murti et al., 2022), we also apply our strategy
         to derive witness function-based lower bounds on the Hellinger distance as well. This result
         is presented in Theorem 2.
       • Using a careful choice of witness function, our bounds reveal new connections between
         discriminant-based classifiers like the Fisher linear discriminant and the Minimax Probability
         Machine, and the TV and Hellinger distances. In particular, in Corollary 1, we show that the
         TV distance is lower bounded by a monotonic function of the Fisher discriminant, and in
         Corollary 2, we show that the TV distance is lower bounded by monotonic functions of the
         Minimax Probability Machine.
       • Using these lower bounds, we derive a family of algorithms for distributional structured
         pruning, called W ITNESS P RUNE(stated in Algorithm 1). W ITNESS P RUNE uses the lower
         bound proposed in Theorem 1 to quantify the discriminative ability of filters, while only
         assuming the moments of the feature distributions are bounded. By varying the choice of
         witness function, we obtain a variety of distributional pruning algorithms.
       • We produce a slate of experiments to illustrate the efficacy of our method. First, we show
         that our witness function-based lower bounds can effectively compute a lower bound on
         the TV distance even when the means are not well separated; we illustrate this on the
         Two Spirals dataset, and a pair of zero mean Gaussians. Motivated by these results, we
         compare the efficacy of W ITNESS P RUNE on pruning hard-to-prune layers, and show that
         W ITNESS P RUNE consistently achieves up to 6% higher accuracies than TVSPrune when
         pruning hard-to-prune layers. We then compare the efficacy of W ITNESS P RUNE for pruning
         VGG nets and ResNets trained on CIFAR10, and show that we achieve up to 76% sparsity
         with a .12% reduction in accuracy on VGG19.


2    BACKGROUND AND N OTATION

In this section, we introduce our notation, and provide basic background definitions. For an in-
teger N > 0, let [N ] := {1, · · · , N }. Let 0N be a vector of zeros of dimension N . Let
sortB ({a1 , · · · , aM }) be the set of the B largest elements of {a1 , · · · , aM }. Suppose P, Q are two
distributions supported on X , with densities given by p(x) and q(x). For a function f : X → R, let
                                (2)
f¯p = Ex∼P [f (x)], and let f¯p = Ex∼P f (x)2 . Let D be a data distribution. Suppose the dataset

has C classes, then let Dc be the class-conditional distribution of the c-th class, and let Dc̄ be the
distribution of the complement of c (that is, samples are drawn from all classes other than c).
Suppose we have a neural network W = (W1 , · · · , WL ). Each layer yields (flattened) representations

                                   Y l (x) = Y1l (X), · · · , YNl l (X) ,

                                                                                                       (1)


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Nl is the number of filters in layer l. Since Y l is dependent on X, we assume that Y l (X) ∼ Dl ,
and Yjl (X) ∼ Djl . Furthermore, let Dj,cl          l
                                              and Dj,c̄ be the class-conditional distributions and class-
                                l
complement distributions of Yj (X) respectively.
Next, we define the Fisher Linear Discriminant and the Minimax Probability Machine Lanckriet et al.
(2001).
Definition 1. Let P and Q be distributions supported on X , with moments µp , Σp and µq , Σq . Then,
                                        2
                          u⊤ (µp − µq )                                |u⊤ (µp − µq )|
       Fish(P, Q; u) = ⊤                    and MPM(P, Q; u) = p                 p         .     (2)
                         u (Σp + Σ2 ) u                              u⊤ Σp u + u⊤ Σq u
If we choose the optimal u, denoted by u∗ , we write Fish(P, Q; u∗ ) = Fish(P, Q)∗ and
MPM(P, Q; u∗ ) = MPM(P, Q)∗ .
We define the TV and Hellinger distances as follows.
Definition 2. Let P and Q be two probability measures supported on X, and let p and q be the
corresponding densities. Then, we define the Total Variation Distance TV and the Squared Hellinger
distance H2 as
                                                            Z
                                                          1
                  TV (P, Q) = sup |P(A) − Q(A)| =              |p(x) − q(x)| dx
                                A⊂X                       2 X
                                  Z  p                     2
                                1                  p
                  H2 (P, Q) =              p(x) − q(x) dx
                                2 X

3    R EVIEW OF D ISTRIBUTIONAL S TRUCTURED P RUNING
In this section, we set up the problem of structured pruning, and formalize the notion of distributional
pruning in terms of the performance of a Bayes optimal classifier trained on the generated features.
Structured Pruning In this section, we review structured pruning. Structured pruning, as defined in
Hoefler et al. (2021); Blalock et al. (2020), is the removal of entire filters from a convolutional neural
network. We aim to find the most sparse model that satisfies a sparsity budget. A large body of work
exists that explores this problem, as noted in Hoefler et al. (2021) and the references therein In this
work, we solve this problem in a layer-wise fashion.
Distributional Pruning In this section, we describe how distributional information about the feature
maps can be used for structured pruning. In Murti et al. (2022), this was accomplished by identifying
                                                                                           l     l
discriminative filters, which are filters that generate features with minc,c′ ∈C TV(Dj,c     , Dj,c ′ ) that

are small, and pruning them. However, as mentioned previously, estimating lower bounds on the
TV distance between arbitrary distributions, given moments, remains a challenging task. In Murti
et al. (2022), this challenge is overcome by assuming the class conditional distributions are spherical
Gaussians; that is, Yjl (X) ∼ N (µlj,c , (σl,c
                                            l 2        l
                                               ) I) ≡ Dj,c . Using this assumption enables the use of the
Hellinger lower bound on the TV distance as follows.
                                                                            ! d2
                                                                l   l
                                                             2σj,c σj,c ′           ∆          ∆
                l     l        2   l      l
          TV(Dj,c , Dj,c′ ) ≥ H (Dj,c , Dj,c′ ) = 1 −       l )2 + (σ l )2
                                                                                 e− 4 ≥ 1 − e− 4
                                                       (σj,c  ′         j,c

where ∆ = Fish∗ (Dj,c
                   l     l
                      , Dj,c ′ ). Using this bound, the TVSPrune algorithm proposed in Murti et al.

(2022) checks whether 1 − e−∆/4 is small for each filter, and if so, removes them.
Discussion on TVSPrune: While TVSPrune is a powerful pruning algorithm, it has a notable
drawback. Our experiments show that the class conditional distributions are either non-Gaussian or
in hard-to-prune layers, have poorly separated means. This undercuts the fundamental assumptions
laid out in Murti et al. (2022). This motivates the following questions.

      1. Since the class conditional filter outputs are either non-Gaussian or poorly separated (as
         noted in Murti et al. (2022), can we derive tractable lower bounds on the TV distance
         between arbitrary distributions provided sufficient moment information?
      2. Can these lower bounds be applied to the problem of structured pruning, and reveal new
         insights into distributional pruning?


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     W ITNESS F UNCTION -BASED L OWER B OUNDS FOR THE T OTAL VARIATION
      D ISTANCE
In this section, we derive a lower bound on the Total Variation Distance that relies on the moments
of a witness function, a scalar-valued function whose moments can be used to derive bounds on
divergences between distributions. We then adapt this lower bound to a variety of scenarios, depending
on the extent of the information about the distributions available to us. When access to only the first
two moments is available, we derive lower bounds on the total variation distance based on the Fisher
linear discriminant and the minimax probability machine.

4.1   L OWER BOUNDS ON THE TV AND H ELLINGER D ISTANCES

We derive robust lower bounds on the TV and Hellinger distances that are functions of the moments
of a witness function f : X → R, where X is the support of the distribution(s) in question. We begin
by defining a metric between sets of distributions.
Estimating the Total Variation is known to be #P complete (Bhattacharyya et al., 2022). Estimating
lower bounds on the TV distance is an active area of research (see Davies et al. (2022) and the
references within), with a variety of applications from clustering (Bakshi & Kothari, 2020; Hardt
& Price, 2015) to analyzing neural networks (Yu et al., 2018). However, most bounds such as
those presented in Davies et al. (2022) require prior knowledge about the distributions, and tractable
estimation of lower bounds given access to collections of moments or samples, without assumptions
on the distributions themselves, remains an open problem.
                n            h             i                         o
Let Sk (P) := P : EX∼P X1d1 · · · Xndn = Pd1 ···dn ,
                                                          P
                                                            i di ≤ k   be the set of probability mea-
                                                      h            i
sures whose moments are given by P, where EX∼P X1d1 · · · Xndn = Pd1 ···dn ; similarly, let Sk (Q)
be the set of measures whose moments are given by Q. For any random variable X ∈ Rd supported
on X ,  suppose φ : R d → Rn for which there exist functions g and G such that EX [φ(X)] = g(P)
and E φ(X)φ(X)⊤ = G(P). Given two collections of moments of the same order, we want to
measure the worst-case TV separation between all distributions possessing the moments given in P
and Q.
Theorem 1. Suppose P and Q are sets of moments of two probability measures supported on X .
                                               (2)                 (2)
Let f = u⊤ φ(X), be a witness function, with f¯p = u⊤ g(P), and f¯p = u⊤ G(P)u. Then, for any
                                                    d
P ∈ Sk (P), Q ∈ Sk (Q), supported on a set X ⊆ R , we have
                                                                                        2
                                                                      u⊤ (g(P) − g(Q))
        DTV (Sk (P), Sk (Q)) =       min           TV(P, Q) ≥ sup      ⊤
                                                                                              (3)
                               P∈Sk (P),Q∈Sk (Q)              u∈Rn 2u (G(P) + G(Q))u


Proof Sketch. We provide a sketch of the proof. We express the quantity fp − fq in terms of the
densities p(X) and q(X). We then isolate the integral of |p(x) − q(x)|. After rearranging terms, we
obtain the result. For the full proof, we refer readers to Appendix A.

Theorem 1 is a worst-case lower bound on the TV distance between distributions with given moments.
Note that it is straightforward to extend this result to the case where the moments of witness functions
match instead. While we focus our results on the case where f (x) = u⊤ φ(x), where φ(x) is a vector
of monomials, this bound is valid for any choice of f with bounded first and second moments.
Next, we utilize the same methodology to produce a lower bound on the squared Hellinger distance.
Theorem 2. Suppose P and Q are sets of moments of two probability measures supported on X .
                                               (2)                (2)
Let f = u⊤ φ(X), be a witness function, with f¯p = u⊤ g(P), and f¯p = u⊤ G(P)u. Then, for any
                                                     d
P ∈ Sk (P), Q ∈ Sk (Q), supported on a set X ⊆ R , we have
                                                                                      2
                                                   2            2 u⊤ (g(P) − g(Q))
 DH (Sk (P), Sk (Q)) =         min         H(P, Q) ≥ sup  p                               2 (4)
                         P∈Sk (P),Q∈Sk (Q)             u∈Rn
                                                                            p
                                                               u⊤ G(P)u + u⊤ G(Q)u

The proof for this theorem is similar to that of Theorem 1, and is presented in full in Appendix A.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   C ONNECTIONS TO D ISCRIMINANT BASED C LASSIFIERS

In this section, we exploit the bound stated in Theorem 1 to reveal extensive connections between
the total variation distance and discriminant-based linear classifiers, specifically the Fisher Linear
Discriminant and the Minimax Probability Machine.

Connection to the Fisher Discriminant In this section, we leverage the results of Theorem 1 to
illustrate the connection between the Total Variation distance between two distributions, and their
Fisher Discriminant. Specifically, we show that the TV distance is lower-bounded by a monotonic
function of the Fisher Discriminant. We state this result formally in Corollary 2.
Corollary 1. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances of P and Q respectively.
Then,
                                                  Fish∗ (P, Q)
                                   TV(P, Q) ≥                    .                             (5)
                                                2 + Fish∗ (P, Q)

This lower bound can be improved upon by selecting a witness function of the form f (x; u) = u⊤ φ(x)
where φ(x) is a vector of basis functions (such as monomials, if f (x; u) is a polynomial).

Connection to Minimax Probability Machine In this section, we provide lower bounds on the
Total Variation and Hellinger distances between the two distributions in terms of the minimax
probability machine.
Corollary 2. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances of P and Q respectively.
Then,
                                   p                     MPM∗ (P, Q)
                                       TV(P, Q) ≥ √                                                 (6)
                                                        2 + MPM∗ (P, Q)

We present the proof for this Corollary in Appendix B. As with Corollary 1, the lower bound can be
improved by choosing f (x) = u⊤ φ(x), and is also amenable to kernelization.

5     W ITNESS P RUNE - A LGORITHMS FOR D ISTRIBUTIONAL P RUNING

In this section, we leverage the lower bounds proposed in Theorem 1 and Corollaries 1 and 2 to
develop W ITNESS P RUNE, a one-shot pruning algorithm that requires no access to the training data or
loss function, but only access to the data distributions. W ITNESS P RUNE aims to identify and prune
the least discriminative filters.

5.1   D ISTRIBUTIONAL P RUNING WITH W ITNESS P RUNE

A key drawback of the approach proposed in Murti et al. (2022) is that the class-conditional feature
distributions are assumed to be Gaussian, which is an impractical assumption. Furthermore,
                                                                                           by as-
suming the distributions are Gaussian and using the closed-form Hellinger lower bound, C2 pairwise
TV distances need to be computed for each filter. We now derive the W ITNESS P RUNEalgorithm.
Let Y l (X) be the features generated by layer l of a neural network as defined in equation 1. We choose
a test function f = u⊤ φ(Yjl (X)) = φlj (X), and let f¯l,j,c (u) = EX∼Dc [u⊤ φlj (X)], f¯l,j,c̄ (u) =
                        (2)                                      (2)
EX∼D [u⊤ φl (X)], f¯ (u) = EX∼D [(u⊤ φl (X))2 ] and f¯ (u) = EX∼D [(u⊤ φl (X))2 . Next,
       c̄     j        l,j,c              c       j                    l,j,c̄           c̄   j
define rjl to be the saliency score for the jth filter in the lth layer as
                                                                                  2
                                                      f¯l,j,c (u) − f¯l,j,c̄ (u)
                               rjl = min max             (2)           (2)
                                                                                    .               (7)
                                     c∈[C] u           f¯ (u) + f¯ (u)
                                                        l,j,c          l,j,c̄

We use the lower bound established in Theorem 1 on the TV distances be-
tween the class conditional distributions to measure the saliency or importance


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of a given filter.            With this, we formally state W ITNESS P RUNE in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: W ITNESS P RUNE
Input: Class conditional distributions Dc , c ∈ [C], Pretrained CNN with parameters
         W = (W1 , · · · , WL ), layerwise sparsity budgets B l , witness function f
for l ∈ [L] do
     Set S l = [sl1 , · · · , slNl ] = 0Nl
     Compute rjl using equation 7 for all j.
                              Nl
     if j ∈ sortBl ({rjl }j=1      ) then
               l
          Set sj = 1
Output: Binary masks S 1 , · · · , S L ,
return Ŵ

The W ITNESS P RUNE algorithm has several advantages. First, as compared to TVSPrune, it requires
that only C TV distances be computed at each step. Second, by varying the choice of witness function,
we obtain new algorithms for structured pruning; we can choose different witness functions for each
class as well.


5.2    VARIANTS OF W ITNESS P RUNE


In this section, detail specific variants of the W ITNESS P RUNE algorithm. We describe these variants
of W ITNESS P RUNE in greater detail in Appendix C.
Linear Witness Functions: By choosing fc (x) = u⊤ (x − µc −µ          2
                                                                        c̄
                                                                           ), we recover the W IT-
NESS P RUNE -F and W ITNESS P RUNE -M pruning algorithms. Thus, we would select rjl =
minc∈C Fish∗ (Dj,cl     l
                     , Dj,c̄ ) for W ITNESS P RUNE-F, and rjl = minc∈C MPM∗ (Dj,cl    l
                                                                                   , Dj,c̄ ) for W IT-
NESS P RUNE-M. We can make this choice as is since the lower bounds on the TV distance obtained in
Corollaries 1 and 2 are monotonic functions of the Fisher discriminant and the minimax probability
machine.
Nonlinear Witness Functions By choosing nonlinear witness functions of the form f (x) =
u⊤ (ϕ(x) − ϕ̄c +2
                  ϕ̄c̄
                       ), where ϕ̄c = Ex∼Dc [ϕ(x)], we can employ the same tools as with the case
of linear witness functions. However, the variants of W ITNESS P RUNE-F and W ITNESS P RUNE-M
are better able to measure discriminative ability, and achieve a higher lower bound on TV distance.
In practice, we choose ϕ(x) to be a quadratic function - yielding the algorithms W ITNESS P RUNE-FQ
and W ITNESS P RUNE-MQ - though any choice of function with bounded moments with respect to
the class-conditional distributions would be applicable.
Ensembles of Witness Functions To improve the effectiveness of W ITNESS P RUNE, we can choose
the largest possible measure of discriminative ability we can choose rjl to be the largest of several
computed lower bounds.
                     (     For instance, if we consider linear witness             functions, we can choose
                             ∗
                                                         ∗
                                                                             2 )
                        Fish   (D l
                                     ,D l
                                             )      MPM    (D l
                                                                 ,D   l
                                                                          )
rjl = minc∈C max                 j,c    j,c̄
                                               ,             j,c     j,c̄
                                                                          √      . We call this variant of the
                       Fish∗ (Dj,c
                                l ,D l )+2
                                      j,c̄         MPM∗ (Dj,c
                                                           l ,D l )+ 2
                                                                 j,c̄

algorithm W ITNESS P RUNE-E. Unlike with W ITNESS P RUNE-F or W ITNESS P RUNE-M, we cannot
directly use the discriminant functions as saliencies, as the scale of the discriminants can be different.
Thus, we use the lower bounds on TV distance directly.
Using the BatchNorm random variables We can also measure the discriminative ability of filters in
terms of the TV distance between the class conditional BatchNorm (BN) random variables. Given a
filter that generates a feature map Yjl (X), we measure the TV distance between the class conditional
distributions of the random variable BNlj (X) = 1⊤ Yjl (X). This choice is motivated by work such
as Yin et al. (2020), which establishes that significant distributional information is stored in the
BN moments. Measuring the TV distance between the class-conditional distributions of BNlj (X)
serves as an effective means of measuring the discriminative ability of filters, and provides significant
improvements in storage overhead.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6     A D ISCRIMINATION P ERSPECTIVE ON D ISTRIBUTIONAL P RUNING
In this section, we offer a new perspective on distributional pruning. Our algorithm W IT-
NESS P RUNE identifies filters that generate features whose class conditional distributions are poorly
separated in terms of the TV distance. Since the TV distance and the misclassification probability
of the Bayes optimal classifier are connected by the identity 2R∗ (P, Q) = 1 − TV(P, Q), we can
reformulate distributional pruning as identifying those filters that generate features for which the
Bayes optimal classifier has high error, and pruning them. In this spirit, a natural extension of our
results is to derive bounds on the generalization error of the Fisher and Minimax classifiers in terms
of the Bayes error of the data distributions, and vice versa. To the best of our knowledge, these are
the first such results. We state these results formally below.
Corollary 3. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the
corresponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances    q of P and Q re-
spectively. Let uF = arg maxu Fish(P, Q; u), bF = u⊤                          ⊤
                                                    F µp − MPM(P, Q; uF ) uF Σp uF , uM =
                                                           q
arg maxu MPM(P, Q; u); and bM = u⊤                             ⊤
                                      M µp − MPM(P, Q; uM ) uM Σp uM . Suppose we have the
linear classifiers fF (X) = sign u⊤                            ⊤

                                  F X + bF and fM (X) = sign uM X + bM with accuracies αF
and αM respectively. Then
                                                      2(1 − 2R∗ (P, Q))
        αF ≥ 1 − 2R∗ (P, Q) and αM ≤           p                                     ,  (8)
                                           (1 − 1 − 2R∗ (P, Q))2 + 2(1 − 2R∗ (P, Q))
where R∗ (P, Q) denotes the Bayes error rate for the distributions P and Q.
The proof for this result is provided in Appendix B.
This perspective also allows us to develop a sanity check on the validity of our bounds. Suppose the
Bayes classifier for a pair of distributions is sign(g(X)) for some g ∈ F, where F is a family of
witness functions. Then, optimizing the bound provided in Theorem 1 yields the Bayes classifier.
For instance, if we choose P ≡ N (µp , Σ) and Q ≡ N (µq , Σ), then, maximizing the lower bounds
obtained in Corollaries 1 and 2 yield the same solutions, which in turn maximizes the TV distance
between P and Q. We detail this in Appendix B.

7     E MPIRICAL E VALUATIONS
In this section, we demonstrate the utility of our lower bound, and the W ITNESS P RUNEfamily of
algorithms as a tool for structured pruning. Additional experimental details, including the experiment
setup, are provided in D

7.1   M EASURING THE TV D ISTANCE BETWEEN L INEARLY I NSEPARABLE DATA

In this section, we use the bounds proposed in corollaries 1 and 2 to bound the TV distance between
poorly separated datasets. We choose the ‘Two Spirals’ Dataset, and a dataset consisting of two
zero-mean Gaussians with different variances. We choose f (x) = u⊤ (φ(X) − (φ̄1 − φ̄0 )/2), where
ϕ(X), when chosen to be of degree d ≥ 1, is given by φ(X) = 1 + (1⊤ X) + · · · + (1⊤ X)d . We
compare two methods, the lower bounds given in equation 5 and equation 6. We present our results
in Figure 1. We observe that using the lower bound for Fisher (equation 5 outperforms the MPM
lower bound (equation 6 on both toy datasets. However, the choice of polynomial witness functions
clearly outperforms lower degree choices, such as using the Hellinger lower bound, particularly in
the ‘Two Gaussians’ case.

7.2   V ERIFYING CLASS - CONDITIONAL F EATURE M APS ARE NOT G AUSSIAN

In this section, we attempt to validate the assumptions made in Murti et al. (2022) about the normality
of the class-conditional feature distributions. To do so, we apply the Shapiro-Wilks test (Shapiro &
Wilk, 1965), a standard test for Normality.
Experiment Setup: We consider a VGG16 model trained on CIFAR10. Let BNlj (X) = 1⊤ Yjl (X).
For each l, j, we collect 100 samples from each class c ∈ [10]. We then apply the Shapiro-Wilk


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Two Spirals. H lower (b) TV Lower bounds for (c) Two Gaussians. H (d) TV Lower bounds for
bound: .172              Two Spirals             lower bound: 2.493 × Two Gaussians
                                                 10−5

Figure 1: Comparison of the performance of W ITNESS P RUNE F with W ITNESS P RUNE M with
polynomial features on the TwoSpirals and Zero-Means Gaussians datasets.


normality test (Shapiro & Wilk, 1965), and we compute plj,c values, which are the minimum p-values
from the Shapiro-Wilks test computed for the features of the jth filter in layer l conditioned on class
c. We consider that a filter’s features are unlikely to be Gaussian if plj,c < 0.1. We plot the heatmaps
of plj = minc∈[C] plj,c values for 15 randomly selected filters in Figure 2, to indicate the normality of
the least Gaussian class-conditional features.
Results: We observe that for most layers, particularly those close to the output, the class-conditional
feature distributions are highly unlikely to have been drawn from a Gaussian, with plj,c values for
layers 10-12 in VGG16 typically being below 1e − 5. For layers with filters that yield likely-Gaussian
features, we observe that for the majority of filters, at least one feature output is likely to be non-
Gaussian. Moreover, the layers that generate Gaussian features are the hard-to-prune layers identified
in (Murti et al., 2022; Liebenwein et al., 2019), which were shown in Murti et al. (2022) to be those
features with poorly separated means.


   (a) Layer 2 heatmap        (b) Layer 7 heatmap         (c) Layer 10 heatmap       (d) Layer 12 heatmap

Figure 2: p-Value heatmaps from Shapiro-Wilks tests as applied to class-conditional features from
different layers. x-axis is the class index, and y-axis is the filter index



7.3   E FFECTIVE P RUNING OF H ARD - TO -P RUNE L AYERS

In this section, we utilize the lower bounds provided in this paper to prune hard-to-prune layers in
neural networks. As noted in Murti et al. (2022); Liebenwein et al. (2019), some layers, in particular
the initial layers in the case of VGG-nets, are difficult to effectively sparsify. In this set of experiments,
we aim to show that using the lower bounds proposed in this work, we are able to better identify
discriminative filters in hard-to-prune layers, and therefore prune those layers more effectively.

Problem Setup: We select a VGG16 model trained on CIFAR10. We fix pruning budgets of
40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%. For each model, we then prune three hard-to-prune layers in isolation,
and measure the impact on accuracy. We compare the following methods:
TVSPrune: We modify TVSPrune to prune a fixed budget, and using the BatchNorm random
variables as described in Appendix C.
W ITNESS P RUNE-EQ: We apply Algorithm 4 as presented in Appendix C using the features
φ(1⊤ X) = [1⊤ X, (1⊤ X)2 ]. Thus, for each c, f(c) (X) = u⊤ (φ(X) − (φ̄c + φc̄ )/2)).
L1 -based Pruning: We use the L1 norms of the filter weights, as proposed in Li et al. (2017).


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) VGG-16 Layers 0-2                          (b) VGG16 Layer 1-3                              (c) VGG16 Layer 2-4

Figure 3: Comparison of the performance of W ITNESS P RUNE F with TVSPrune and L1 pruning on
hard-to-prune layers in VGG16 trained on CIFAR10

                           Table 1: W ITNESS P RUNE Performance with fine-tuning

         Model    Param. Sparsity   W ITNESS P RUNE(our work)   TVSP RUNE(Murti et al., 2022)   CHIP (Sui et al., 2021)   L1

         VGG16    61.2%             -0.37 %                      -0.98%                         -0.73%                    1.26%
                  75.05%            -1.32%                      -1.54%                          -1.62                     -2.31

         VGG19    72.4%             -.12%                       -.16%                           N/A                       -2.41%
                  76.1%             -.96%                       -1.13%                          N/A                       -3.30%

         ResNet   60.7%             -1.21%                      -1.92%                          -1.77%                    -6.21%


Results and Discussion We present our results in Figure 3 The experiments show that W IT-
NESS P RUNE variants using quadratic features (using algorithms outperforms both TVSPrune and the
L1 -norm based pruning strategy. In particular, we see that at 70% sparsity in Layers 1-3, the models
obtained by W ITNESS P RUNE-EQ are 6.6% more accurate than those obtained using TVSPrune.

7.4    E FFECTIVENESS OF THE W ITNESS P RUNE A LGORITHM

In this section, we investigate the ability for W ITNESS P RUNE to sparsify models effectively without
fine-tuning. Specifically, we prune VGG16, VGG19, and ResNet56 models trained on CIFAR10
with two sets of fixed sparsity budgets, and then fine-tune them for 50 epochs. We show that models
trained with W ITNESS P RUNE are able to almost fully recover the accuracy of the original models.
Table 1 shows the drop in accuracy for different sparsity levels after fine-tuning.

8     C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, in Theorem 1, we propose new witness function-based lower bounds on the Total
Variation distance between arbitrary distributions and apply them to the problem of distributional
structured pruning. Our lower bounds are robust to the choice of distribution, and yield a family of
pruning algorithms, W ITNESS P RUNE( based on Algorithm 1), that require no access to the training
set or loss function. Moreover, the bounds can be further generalized, as Corollaries 1 and 2 give
bounds in terms of discriminant functions that can be kernelized.


                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ainesh Bakshi and Pravesh Kothari. Outlier-robust clustering of non-spherical mixtures. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2005.02970, 2020.
Arnab Bhattacharyya, Sutanu Gayen, Kuldeep S Meel, Dimitrios Myrisiotis, Aduri Pavan, and
  NV Vinodchandran. On approximating total variation distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07209,
  2022.
Davis Blalock, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Jonathan Frankle, and John Guttag. What is the state of
  neural network pruning? Proceedings of machine learning and systems, 2:129–146, 2020.
Sami Davies, Arya Mazumdar, Soumyabrata Pal, and Cyrus Rashtchian. Lower bounds on the total
  variation distance between mixtures of two gaussians. In International Conference on Algorithmic
  Learning Theory, pp. 319–341. PMLR, 2022.
Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and Yuan Xie. Model compression and hardware
  acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings of the IEEE, 108(4):
  485–532, 2020.
Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. A
 survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. In Low-Power Computer
 Vision, pp. 291–326. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2022.
Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge distillation: A
   survey. International Journal of Computer Vision, 129(6):1789–1819, 2021.
Moritz Hardt and Eric Price. Tight bounds for learning a mixture of two gaussians. In Proceedings of
 the forty-seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 753–760, 2015.
Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in deep
  learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(241):1–124, 2021.
Gert Lanckriet, Laurent Ghaoui, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya, and Michael Jordan. Minimax probability
  machine. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Gert RG Lanckriet, Laurent El Ghaoui, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya, and Michael I Jordan. A robust
  minimax approach to classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Dec):555–582,
  2002.
Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan Samet, and Hans Peter Graf. Pruning filters for
  efficient convnets. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=rJqFGTslg.
Lucas Liebenwein, Cenk Baykal, Harry Lang, Dan Feldman, and Daniela Rus. Provable filter pruning
  for efficient neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
P Molchanov, S Tyree, T Karras, T Aila, and J Kautz. Pruning convolutional neural networks for
  resource efficient inference. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2017-Conference Track Proceedings, 2019.
Chaitanya Murti, Tanay Narshana, and Chiranjib Bhattacharyya.                 Tvsprune-pruning non-
  discriminative filters via total variation separability of intermediate representations without fine
  tuning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Tanay Narshana, Chaitanya Murti, and Chiranjib Bhattacharyya. Dfpc: Data flow driven prun-
  ing of coupled channels without data. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Leandro Pardo. Statistical inference based on divergence measures. CRC press, 2018.
Prafull Prakash, Chaitanya Murti, Saketha Nath, and Chiranjib Bhattacharyya. Optimizing dnn
  architectures for high speed autonomous navigation in gps denied environments on edge devices.
  In Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 468–481. Springer, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin B Wilk. An analysis of variance test for normality (complete
  samples). Biometrika, 52(3/4):591–611, 1965.
Yang Sui, Miao Yin, Yi Xie, Huy Phan, Saman Aliari Zonouz, and Bo Yuan. Chip: Channel
  independence-based pruning for compact neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Jose M Alvarez, Zhizhong Li, Arun Mallya, Derek Hoiem, Niraj K
  Jha, and Jan Kautz. Dreaming to distill: Data-free knowledge transfer via deepinversion. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8715–8724, 2020.
Ruichi Yu, Ang Li, Chun-Fu Chen, Jui-Hsin Lai, Vlad I Morariu, Xintong Han, Mingfei Gao,
  Ching-Yung Lin, and Larry S Davis. Nisp: Pruning networks using neuron importance score
  propagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 9194–9203, 2018.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this appendix, we provide the following material.

       • In Appendix A, we provide proofs for Theorem ?? and 2 omitted in the paper.
       • In Appendix B, we provide proofs for the lower bounds on the TV distance based on linear
         discriminants as well as the new connections between the generalization error of linear
         classifiers and the Bayes error. That is, we provide proofs for Corollaries 1, 2, and 3.
       • In Appendix C, we provide details for variants of the W ITNESS P RUNE algorithm.
       • In Appendix D, we provide additional experimental details.

A     L OWER B OUNDS FOR TV AND H ELLINGER DIVERGENCES
In this section, we derive lower bounds on other f -divergences using our witness function-based
approach.

A.1   L OWER B OUNDS ON THE TV D ISTANCE

In this section, we provide the proof for a variant of Theorem 1.
Theorem. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , and let p and q be the
corresponding densities. Let F be the set of functions with bounded first and second moments defined
on X. Then,                                                        2
                                                        f¯p − f¯q
                                 TV(P, Q) ≥ sup                                                   (9)
                                               f ∈F 2 f¯p(2) + f¯q(2)



Proof. Choose an arbitrary f ∈ F. Then, we have
              Z                          2
          2
 ¯     ¯
 fp − fq =        (p(x) − q(x)) f (x)dx
                  X
                 Z                                             2
                    p                   p
            =              |p(x) − q(x)| |p(x) − q(x)| f (x)dx
                  X
                 sZ                     !2   sZ                                 !2
            ≤             |p(x) − q(x)|dx             |p(x) − q(x)|f (x)2 dx         (by Cauchy-Schwarz)
                      X                          X
                             Z
            = 2TV(P, Q)       |p(x) − q(x)|f (x)2 dx    (by Definition 2)
                           X
                         Z
            ≤ 2TV(P, Q)       (p(x) + q(x)) f (x)2 dx
                          X
            = 2TV(P, Q) f¯p(2) + f¯q(2) .

Thus, for any arbitrary f ∈ F, we have
                                                                  2
                                                       f¯p − f¯q
                                     2TV(P, Q) ≥                       ,
                                                        (2)   (2)
                                                      f¯p + f¯q

from which it follows that                                           2
                                                          f¯p − f¯q
                                  2TV(P, Q) ≥ sup                           .                      (10)
                                                          (2)   (2)
                                               f ∈F     f¯p + f¯q



The proof of Theorem 1 follows from the fact that we can choose f (x) = u⊤ φ(x), and apply the
formula for the expectation. Then, maximizing over F is equivalent to maximizing over u. Thus, the
proof is completed.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   L OWER B OUNDS ON THE H ELLINGER DISTANCE

In this section, we derive lower bounds on the Squared Hellinger distance based on the moments of
witness functions.
First, we define the Hellinger distance as follows.
Definition 3. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on Rd , and let p and q be the
corresponding densities. We define the squared Hellinger distance as
                                          Z  p                   2
                                        1                p
                          H2 (P, Q) =            p(x) − q(x) dx.
                                        2 Rd

We state the lower bound formally below.
Theorem. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , and let p and q be the
corresponding densities. Let F be the set of functions with bounded first and second moments defined
on X. Then,
                                                                    2
                               2                         f¯p − f¯q
                             2H (P, Q) ≥ sup  q                q          2 .                   (11)
                                            f ∈F        (2)          (2)
                                                       ¯
                                                      fp + fq       ¯


Proof. Choose an arbitrary f ∈ F. Then, we have
              Z                          2
           2
 f¯p − f¯q =      (p(x) − q(x)) f (x)dx
                  X
               Z                            p                        2
                  p             p                    p
            =          p(x) − q(x)            p(x) + q(x) f (x)dx
               ZX                         2      Z                     2
                     p          p                     p          p            2
            ≤          p(x) − q(x) dx                    p(x) + q(x) f (x) dx          (by Cauchy-Schwarz)
                X                                  X
                          Z
                                                  p
            = 2H2 (P, Q)        p(x) + q(x) + 2 p(x)q(x) f (x)2 dx         (by Definition 3)
                           X                 Z p
            = 2H2 (P, Q) f¯p(2) + f¯q(2) + 2      p(x)q(x)f (x)2 dx
                                              X
                                             sZ                 sZ               !
            ≤ 2H (P, Q) f¯ + f¯ + 2
                2           (2)
                              p
                                     (2)
                                          q       p(x)f (x)2 dx     q(x)f (x)2 dx     (by Cauchy-Schwarz)
                                                    X                X
                                               q         q
                                                     (2)    (2)
            = 2H2 (P, Q) f¯p(2) + f¯q(2) + 2       f¯p    f¯q
                         q      q       2
                 2         ¯(2)   ¯(2)
            = 2H (P, Q)   fp + fq         .


Thus, for any arbitrary f ∈ F, we have
                                                               2
                                      2             f¯p − f¯q
                                  2H (P, Q) ≥  q          q         2 ,
                                                   (2)         (2)
                                                 f¯p + f¯q

from which it follows that
                                                              2
                                  2                f¯p − f¯q
                              2H (P, Q) ≥ sup  q         q          2 .                        (12)
                                          f ∈F    (2)          (2)
                                                 ¯
                                                 fp + fq      ¯


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     D ISCRIMINANT F UNCTION BASED L OWER B OUNDS ON THE TV DISTANCE
In this section, we provide proofs for the discriminant-based lower bounds on the TV distance.

B.1   F ISHER D ISCRIMINANT BASED L OWER B OUNDS

In this section, we provide proofs for Corollaries 1 and 3. We begin with the proof for Corollary 1.
Corollary. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances of P and Q respectively.
Then,
                                                     Fish(P, Q; u)
                                TV(P, Q) ≥ sup                      .                          (13)
                                             u∈Rd 2 + Fish(P, Q; u)


Proof. Begin by choosing
                                            ⊤          µp + µq
                                    f =u            x−                  ,
                                                          2
where u ∈ Rd is constant. Then,
                             1                        1
                       f¯p = u⊤ (µp − µ2 ) and f¯q = u⊤ (µq − µp ),
                             2                        2
and
                                "                              ⊤ #!
                ¯(2)     ⊤            µp + µq        µp + µq
               fp = u        EP    x−             x−                u
                                         2              2
                             h
                                               ⊤
                                                 i                 µp + µq
                     = u⊤ EP (x − ∆) (x − ∆)        u (setting ∆ =         )
                             h                                       i 2
                                                                   ⊤
                     = u⊤ EP (x − µp + µp − ∆) (x − µp + µp − ∆)         u

                                  1
                     = u⊤ Σp + (µp − µq )(µp − µq )⊤ u.
                                  4
Similarly, we have
                            ¯(2)    ⊤       1                     ⊤
                           fq = u       Σq + (µp − µq )(µp − µq )      u.
                                            4
Substituting this into equation 9, we get
                                                                   2
                                                    u⊤ (µp − µq )
                       2TV(P, Q) ≥ sup                     1                 2
                                     u∈Rd u⊤ (Σp + Σq )u + 2 (u⊤ (µp − µq ))
                                                                    2
                                                  2 u⊤ (µp − µq )

                                   ≥ sup                                    2
                                     u∈Rd 2u⊤ (Σp + Σq )u + (u⊤ (µp − µq ))
                                                              2
                                             (u⊤ (µp −µq ))
                                            2 u⊤ (Σp +Σq )u
                                 ≥ sup
                                                    (u⊤ (µ −µ ))2
                                    u∈Rd   2 + u⊤ (Σpp+Σqq )u
                                             Fish(P, Q; u)
                     ⇒ TV(P, Q) ≥ sup
                                    u∈Rd   2 + Fish(P, Q; u)



We next provide the proof for Corollary 3.
Corollary. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances of P and Q respectively.
Let Fish∗ (P, Q) = arg maxu Fish(P, Q; u). Then, the Bayes Error R∗ (P, Q) satisfies
                                                           1
                                  R∗ (P, Q) ≤             ∗         .
                                                    Fish (P, Q) + 2

                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, suppose we have a linear classifier f (x) = u⊤  † x + b† , where u†     =
                                                      q
arg minu Fish(P, Q; u) and b† = u⊤                      ⊤
                                 † µp − MPM(P, Q; u† ) u† Σp u† . Then, the accuracy of
this classifier α† satisfies
                                 α† ≥ 1 − 2R∗ (P, Q)

Proof. Recall that the Bayes risk is related to the TV distance as
                                                 1
                                  R∗ (P, Q) = (1 − TV(P, Q)) .
                                                 2
Substituting the expression from Corollary 1, we get
                                            Fish∗ (P, Q)

                                1                                        1
                   R∗ (P, Q) ≤       1−                       =
                                2         Fish∗ (P, Q) + 2       Fish∗ (P, Q) + 2
Next, from Lanckriet et al. (2002), we have
                                                 2
                             1 − α† ≤                     = 2R∗ (P, Q).
                                        2 + Fish∗ (P, Q)
Rearranging the terms, we prove the statement.

B.2   M INIMAX P ROBABILITY M ACHINE BASED L OWER B OUNDS

In this section, we provide proofs for Corollaries 2 and the second statement in 3. We begin with the
proof for Corollary 2.
Corollary. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances of P and Q respectively.
Then,
                              p                        MPM(P, Q; u)
                                TV(P, Q) ≥ sup √
                                             u∈R  d   2 + MPM(P, Q; u)

Proof. As with Corollary 1, choose

                                                µp + µq
                                     f = u⊤ x −           ,
                                                   2
where u ∈ Rd is constant. Then,
                               1                             1
                         f¯p = u⊤ (µp − µ2 ) and f¯q = u⊤ (µq − µp ).
                               2                             2
Then, we get
                             1 ⊤             2                          1 ⊤            2
        f¯p(2) = u⊤ Σp u +     u (µp − µq )      andf¯q(2) = u⊤ Σq u +    u (µp − µq ) .
                             4                                          4
Plugging these expressions into equation 9, we get
                                                             2
                                             u⊤ (µp − µq )
               2TV(P, Q) ≥ sup                       1                2
                             u∈Rd u⊤ (Σp + Σq )u + 2 (u⊤ (µp − µq ))
                                                             2
                                          2 u⊤ (µp − µq )
                          ≥ sup                                      2
                             u∈Rd 2u⊤ (Σp + Σq )u + (u⊤ (µp − µq ))
             p                                 |u⊤ (µp − µq |
        ⇒ TV(P, Q) ≥ sup q
                             u∈Rd                                       2
                                    2u⊤ (Σp + Σq )u + (u⊤ (µp − µq ))
                                             |u⊤ (µp − µq |
                         ≥ sup √  p            p
                           u∈Rd 2   u⊤ Σp u + u⊤ Σq u + |u⊤ (µp − µq )|
                                           ⊤
                                     √ ⊤|u (µp√
                                              −µq |
                                       u Σp u+  ⊤    u Σq u                  MPM(P, Q; u)
                         ≥ sup √               |u⊤ (µp −µq |
                                                                  = sup √
                           u∈Rd      2+ √ ⊤           √ ⊤          u∈Rd     2 + MPM(P, Q; u)
                                           u Σp u+       u Σq u


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We next present the proof for Corollary 3.
Corollary. Let P, Q be two probability measures supported on X ⊆ Rd , let p and q be the corre-
sponding densities, and let µp , µq and Σp , Σq be the means and variances ofpP and Q respectively.
Suppose u∗ = arg maxu MPM(P, Q; u) and b∗ = u⊤          µ
                                                       ∗ p − MPM(P,   Q; u∗ )  u⊤∗ Σp u∗ . Then, the
                                         ∗        ⊤
generalization error α∗ of a classifier f (x) = u∗ x + b∗ satisfies
                                               2(1 − 2R∗ (P, Q))
                      α∗ ≥          p                                               ,
                             (1 −       1 − 2R∗ (P, Q))2 + 2(1 − 2R∗ (P, Q) − 1)
and                                                  p
                                 ∗        2 − 2α∗ + 2 2α∗ − 2α∗2
                               R (P, Q) ≤            p           .                                    (14)
                                           2 − α∗ + 2 2α∗ − 2α∗2

                                                                                                 p
Proof. The proof follows by rearranging the terms of equation 6 to get an expression for             TV(·),
and recalling that
                                                    r
                                                         α∗
                                 MPM(P, Q; u∗ ) =             .
                                                       1 − α∗
Then, we obtain an expression for α∗ in terms of the TV distance, and reverse the inequality with the
expression R∗ (P, Q) = 12 (1 − TV(P, Q)). Rearrange the terms to complete the proof.

B.3     C OMPUTING TV(P, Q) FROM THE L OWER B OUND

The lower bound proposed in Theorem 1 is not tight, as the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality used in the
derivation of the bound is only not strict when the witness function f is a constant. However, there
are cases where the bound can be used to compute the true TV distance. We state one such case
below in Corollary 4.
Corollary 4. Suppose Suppose P ≡ N (µp , Σ) and Q ≡ N (µq , Σ) Let f (x; u) = u⊤ (x− 21 (µp −µq ))
be a witness function. Then,
                                          q
                          TV(P, Q) = 2Φ      (u∗ )⊤ (µp − µq )/2 − 1,

where
                                                                                2
                                            (Ex∼P [f (x; u)] − Ex∼Q [f (x; u)])
                         u∗ = arg max
                                     u      Ex∼P [f (x; u)2 ] + Ex∼Q [f (x; u)2 ]

                                                               ∗       −1
                                              p1, we have u =  Σ (µp − µq ). Substitut-
Proof. First, following the proof of Corollary
ing u∗ into the expression TV(P, Q) = 2Φ         (u∗ )⊤ (µp − µq )/2 − 1, we get TV(P, Q) =
    p
2Φ     (µp − µq )⊤ Σ−1 (µp − µq )/2 − 1. Note that with this choice of u∗, the square root term
remains well-defined. This matches the well-known result for the TV distance between Gaussian
measures with the same variance (Pardo, 2018). Thus, we prove the statement.

Remark: This result also illustrates the case where the Bayes’ classifier lies in the set of functions
F := {f (x) : f (x) = u⊤ φ(x)} for a given function φ(x). In this case, if φ(x) = x − 12 (µp − µq ),
and P and Q are Gaussian with the same variant, the Bayes classifier is equivalent to the Fisher
discriminant.
Remark: This result and the observations one may draw from it also motivate another perspective on
identifying discriminative filters without access to the training set or loss function. Specifically, we
say that the discriminative ability of a filter can be measured as the classification accuracy of the best
possible classifier - the Bayes classifier - of a model trained on the feature map generated by the filter.
Since we cannot measure the TV distance (and thus, the Bayes error) directly, we may use our lower
bound instead.


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     VARIANTS OF THE W ITNESS P RUNE A LGORITHM
C.1    F ISHER - BASED L OWER B OUNDS AND TVSP RUNE

We choose f (X) = u⊤ φ(X). Let
                                         µlj,c = EX∼Dc [φ(X)]
and let
                             Σlj,c = EX∼Dc (φ(X) − µlj,c )(φ(X) − µlj,c )⊤ .


Then, we get
If φ(X) is a vector of quadratic functions of X, we call the algorithm W ITNESS P RUNE-FQ.

Algorithm 2: W ITNESS P RUNE-FQ
Input: Class conditional distributions Dc , c ∈ [C], Pretrained CNN with parameters
        W = (W1 , · · · , WL ), layerwise sparsity budgets B l , witness function f
for l ∈ [L] do
     Set S l = [sl1 , · · · , slNl ] = 0Nl
     Compute µlj,c µlj,c̄ , Σlj,c , Σlj,c̄ for all j, c
     Compute
                                                           (u⊤ (µlj,c − µlj,c̄ )2 )
                                               rjl = max
                                                        u 2u⊤ (Σlj,c + Σlj,c̄ )2 )u
      equation 7 for all j.
                         Nl
    if j ∈ sortBl ({rjl }j=1 ) then
              l
         Set sj = 1
Output: Sparse masks S 1 , · · · , S L
return Ŵ



C.2    R ECOVERING TVSP RUNE

In TVSPrune, at any layer l, the jth filter is pruned if
                                               1 − e−∆l,j
where ∆l,j is the minimum Fisher discriminant between pairs of classes. Suppose that we identify
important and discriminative filters by measuring the TV distance in a pairwise sense. Recall that
Corollary 1 gives us a bound that is also monotonic in ∆l,j . If we apply the strategy that we prune all
filters with a score less than a threshold, we would prune filter j if
                                                ∆
                                                   ≤γ
                                               2+∆
                                                                                               −∆
for some γ ∈ (0, 1). We can now find a relation between γ and η. First, note that if 1 − e 4 ≤ η,
                                             ∆                    2γ
then ∆ ≤ 4(1 − η). Similarly, if we prune 2+∆   ≤ γ, then ∆ ≤ 1−γ    . Equating the two gives us the
expression
                                                3γ − 2
                                           η=          .
                                                2γ − 2
Thus, both TVSPrune and a variant of W ITNESS P RUNE-F where the TV distance is measured
pairwise, and which prunes at a threshold are equivalent, as they require pruning the jth filter if
                                                           3γ − 2
                                         ∆ ≤ 4 − 4η =             .
                                                           2γ − 2

C.3    U SING THE BATCH N ORM R ANDOM VARIABLES

The BatchNorm random variables for this layer are given by
                                                       h                           i
           BNl (X) = 1⊤ Y1l (X), · · · , 1⊤ YNl l (X) = BNl1 (X), · · · , BNlNl (X) .

                                                                                                    (15)


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As stated earlier, our goal is to minimize the TV distance between the distributions of the pruned and
unpruned features; we use the BatchNorm random variables as a proxy for the features Y l (X). Next,
the moments of BNl (X) are given by
                            h        i
                        EX∼D BNli (X) = BNli = µli and Var(BNli (X)) = (σil )2 .

                                                                                                              (16)



Suppose BNl (X) is drawn from the distribution DjBN,l , Dj,c
                                                           BN,l be the cth class conditional distribu-

tion, and let DBN,l be the distribution of features sampled from the complement of class c.
                 j,c̄



C.4     M INIMAX P ROBABILITY M ACHINE BASED A LGORITHMS

We define µlj,c µlj,c̄ , Σlj,c , Σlj,c̄ as previously. We then state the algorithm as follows.

Algorithm 3: W ITNESS P RUNE-M
Input: Class conditional distributions Dc , c ∈ [C], Pretrained CNN with parameters
        W = (W1 , · · · , WL ), layerwise sparsity budgets B l , witness function f
for l ∈ [L] do
     Set S l = [sl1 , · · · , slNl ] = 0Nl
     Compute µlj,c µlj,c̄ , Σlj,c , Σlj,c̄ for all j, c
     Compute
                                                          |u⊤ (µlj,c − µlj,c̄ )|
                                             rjl = max q             q
                                                      u
                                                         u⊤ Σlj,c u + u⊤ Σlj,c̄ u
      for all j.
                         Nl
    if j ∈ sortBl ({rjl }j=1 ) then
               l
         Set sj = 1
Output: Sparse Masks S1 , · · · , S L
return Ŵ

If φ(X) is a vector of quadratic functions of X, we call the algorithm W ITNESS P RUNE-MQ.


C.5     E NSEMBLE P RUNE - TAKING THE BEST OF F ISHER P RUNE AND MPMP RUNE

We choose the same witness functions as we did for W ITNESS P RUNE-M and
W ITNESS P RUNE-F, and define the moments in the same fashion.   We then
Algorithm 4: W ITNESS P RUNE-E
Input: Class conditional distributions Dc , c ∈ [C], Pretrained CNN with parameters
        W = (W1 , · · · , WL ), layerwise sparsity budgets B l , witness function f
for l ∈ [L] do
     Set S l = [sl1 , · · · , slNl ] = 0Nl
     Compute µlj,c µlj,c̄ , Σlj,c , Σlj,c̄ for all j, c
     Compute
                                                                                                         
                                                    ⊤    l       l                 ⊤    l       l     2
                                                |u   (µ j,c − µ j,c̄ )|        (u   (µ j,c − µ j,c̄ )  ) 
                  rjl = max max q                            q           , max   ⊤     l       l      2
                                      u
                                               u⊤ Σl u + u⊤ Σl u            u  2u (Σj,c + Σj,c̄ ) )u 
                                                j,c              j,c̄

      for all j.
                         Nl
    if j ∈ sortBl ({rjl }j=1 ) then
               l
         Set sj = 1
Output: Sparse Masks S1 , · · · , S L
return Ŵ


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In this section, we detail additional experiments not mentioned in the main paper, as well as a
comprehensive description of our experimental setup.

D.1     P RUNING S ETUP

In this section, we discuss our experimental setup.

D.1.1    P LATFORM D ETAILS
The hardware used for the experiments in this work are detailed below:

      1. Server computer with 2 NVIDIA RTX3090Ti GPUs with Intel i9-12700 processors, running
         Ubuntu 20.04, with Python 3.11 and CUDA Tools 10.2 with PyTorch 2.0.1.
      2. Desktop computer with 1 NVIDIA RTX3070Ti GPUs with Intel i7-10700 processor, running
         Ubuntu 22.04, with Python 3.11 and CUDA Tools 11.7 with PyTorch 2.0.1.

D.1.2    M ODELS UNDER CONSIDERATION
We consider the following models.

        • VGG16/19 trained on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100: We use the pre-trained VGG11/16/19
          models trained on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. The models achieve accuracies greater than
          90% on both datasets.
        • ResNet56 trained on CIFAR10: We consider a ResNet56 model trained on CIFAR10. We
          do not prune layers that are part of complex interconnections (such as the final layer in each
          BasicBlock).

All our models were obtained from:
https://github.com/chenyaofo/pytorch-cifar-models

D.1.3    DATASET S ELECTION
Since we assume that the training dataset is unavailable to us, we utilize the validation set as a proxy
for the data-distribution. We detail our dataset splits in Table 2.

                    Table 2: Breakdown of dataset splits used in our experiments.

            Dataset     Training Set       TV Distance Set                  Test Set
            CIFAR10       Not used      4000 images from test set   6000 images from Test set



D.1.4    H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS
We detail the hyperparameters used in our experiments below.

      1. Batch Size: 128
      2. Epochs: 50
      3. Learning Rate: .001
      4. Optimizer: ADAM
      5. Weight Decay: .0005
      6. Momentum paramters: .9 and .99.


                                                   19
