Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AVATAR S TUDIO : H IGH - FIDELITY AND A NIMATABLE
3D AVATAR C REATION FROM T EXT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


           Albert Einstein      Spanish flamenco dancer   Harry Potter       Kim Kardashian             Messi         Woman wearing ski clothes


                                                          Text-to-Avatar Generation
                               Terracotta Warriors                            Style image             Karate master              Chef


                                Professional boxer                                                    Karate master             Kratos


                             3D Avatar Animation                                            Style-guided Avatar Creation

Figure 1: With only text inputs, AvatarStudio generates high-fidelity, animatable 3D avatars fea-
turing realistic textures and detailed geometry, including high-resolution faces and varied clothing
styles. A unique feature of AvatarStudio is its easy-to-use animation capability, which allows users
to animate the generated avatars via multimodal signals, such as a dancing video or a motion de-
scribed by text (e.g., “A person is doing boxing”). Furthermore, AvatarStudio supports the creation
of avatars with distinct artistic styles (e.g., sketch style) given an additional reference style image.

                                                           A BSTRACT

         We study the problem of creating high-fidelity and animatable 3D avatars from
         only textual descriptions. Existing text-to-avatar methods are either limited to
         static avatars which cannot be animated or struggle to generate animatable avatars
         with promising quality and precise pose control. To address these limitations, we
         propose AvatarStudio, a coarse-to-fine generative model that generates explicit
         textured 3D meshes for animatable human avatars. Specifically, AvatarStudio
         begins with a low-resolution NeRF-based representation for coarse generation,
         followed by incorporating SMPL-guided articulation into the explicit mesh rep-
         resentation to support avatar animation and high-resolution rendering. To ensure
         view consistency and pose controllability of the resulting avatars, we introduce
         a 2D diffusion model conditioned on DensePose for Score Distillation Sampling
         supervision. By effectively leveraging the synergy between the articulated mesh
         representation and the DensePose-conditional diffusion model, AvatarStudio can
         create high-quality avatars from text that are ready for animation, significantly
         outperforming previous methods. Moreover, it is competent for many applica-
         tions, e.g., multimodal avatar animations and style-guided avatar creation. Our
         project page is https://avatarstudio3d.github.io/.


                                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1     I NTRODUCTION

The creation of high-fidelity and animatable 3D human avatars is essential in various fields, includ-
ing media industry, VR/AR, game design, etc. However, it is a labor-intensive task that typically
requires pre-captured templates and extensive work from experienced artists. Therefore, a user-
friendly system that can generate and animate 3D avatars is of great value, which is the primary
goal of this work. Existing 3D avatars creation methods can be classified into three categories:
(1) template-based generation pipeline (Met, 2023), (2) 3D generative models (Hong et al., 2022a;
Zhang et al., 2022) and (3) 2D-lifting methods (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023a). Avatars gen-
erated using template-based methods typically exhibit relatively simple topology and texture. On
the other hand, 3D generative models often struggle to generalize to arbitrary avatars with diverse
appearances due to the scarcity and limited diversity of accessible 3D models. Yet, in real-world
applications, users often desire high-quality 3D avatars with intricate structures and artistic styles.
Recently, 2D-lifting methods have shown that 2D generation models trained on large-scale image
datasets possess strong generalizability, making them suitable for 3D content creation. Represen-
tative works such as DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) and Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023a), employ
2D diffusion models as supervision to optimize 3D representations using Score Distillation Sam-
pling. More recent studies (Cao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Kolotouros et al., 2023) incorporate
parametric human priors (Loper et al., 2015; Alldieck et al., 2021) into the 2D-lifting optimization
process to facilitate 3D human avatar creation. Nevertheless, these methods either focus primarily
on creating static avatars, which makes them difficult to animate, or produce low-quality animatable
3D avatars (e.g., blurriness, coarseness, lack of details, and poor pose controllability ) (Cao et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2022b; Kolotouros et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023), which
fail to satisfy the requirements for practical applications. Consequently, there is a growing need for
more advanced solutions capable of generating high-fidelity, animatable 3D avatars.
In this work, we propose AvatarStudio, a novel framework designed for creating high-quality 3D
avatars from textual descriptions while offering flexible animation ability. To achieve this, we pro-
pose a new 3D human representation that incorporates articulated human modeling into explicit
mesh representation. The former enables to animate the generated avatars to desired poses, while
the latter allows to fully harness the power of 2D diffusion priors at high-resolution. Specifically, we
train a human NeRF from scratch with a pre-defined canonical pose. Taking this learned canonical
representation as initialization, we further optimize a SMPL-guided articulated textured avatar mesh
represented by DMTet (Shen et al., 2021). The mesh-based representation allows us to render high-
resolution images up to 5122 through an efficient rasterization-based renderer (Laine et al., 2020),
facilitating high-fidelity avatar creation. To improve the animation quality and the pose controllabil-
ity, we jointly optimize the textured avatar mesh in both deformed and canonical spaces.
To optimize the proposed articulated avatar representation from text, we utilize pre-trained 2D dif-
fusion models as priors. Previous methods typically use StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2021)
or skeleton-conditional ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023b) for SDS supervision, which suffer from
inaccurate pose control and the Janus problem (Cao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). In contrast, we
leverage ControlNet conditioned on DensePose (Güler et al., 2018) as guidance, which offers two
benefits: 1) 3D-aware DensePose ensures a more stable and view-consistent avatar creation process;
2) it enables more accurate pose control of the generated avatars.
As shown in Fig. 1, AvatarStudio can create high-fidelity, animatable avatars from text. We evaluate
it quantitatively and qualitatively, verifying its superiority over previous state-of-the-arts. Thanks to
the easy-to-use animation capability, it allows users to animate the generated avatars using multi-
modal signals (e.g., video and text). Moreover, by simply plugging an additional adapter (Ye et al.,
2023), it is able to create avatars with unique artistic styles given a reference style image, further
expanding the range of applications and customization options for 3D avatar creation.

2     R ELATED W ORK AND P RELIMINARIES

2.1   R ELATED W ORKS

Text-guided 3D Content Generation. The successful advancement in text-guided 2D image gen-
eration has paved the way for text-guided 3D content creation. Notable examples include CLIP-


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


forge (Sanghi et al., 2021), DreamFields (Jain et al., 2021), and CLIP-Mesh (Khalid et al., 2022),
which utilize the widely acclaimed CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to optimize underlying 3D represen-
tations, such as NeRF and textured meshes. DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) proposes to use the
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss, derived from a pre-trained diffusion model (Saharia et al.,
2022) as supervision during optimization. Subsequent improvements over DreamFusion include op-
timizing 3D representations in a latent space (Metzer et al., 2022) and coarse-to-fine manner (Lin
et al., 2023a). Furthering this line of research, TEXTure (Richardson et al., 2023) opts to generate
texture maps for a given 3D mesh, while ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023) introduces variational
score distillation to produce promising results. However, despite these advancements, when it comes
to avatar creation, these techniques often exhibit limitations including low quality generation, pres-
ence of the Janus problem, and incorrect rendering of body parts. In contrast, AvatarStudio enables
high-fidelity and animatable generation of 3D avatars from text prompts.
Text-guided 3D Avatar Generation. To enable 3D avatar generation from text, several approaches
have been proposed. Avatar-CLIP (Hong et al., 2022b) sets the foundation by initializing human
geometry with a shape VAE and utilizing CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to assist in geometry and
texture generation. DreamAvatar (Cao et al., 2023) and AvatarCraft (Jiang et al., 2023) integrate the
human parametric model with pre-trained 2D diffusion models for 3D avatar creation. DreamHu-
man (Kolotouros et al., 2023) further introduces a camera zoom-in technique to refine the local de-
tails of resulting avatars; while DreamWaltz (Huang et al., 2023) incorporates a skeleton-conditioned
ControlNet and develops an occlusion-aware SDS guidance for pose-aligned supervision. Although
these methods achieve animatable results, they suffer from low-quality generation issues, like blur-
riness, coarseness and insufficient details. Additionally, the weak SDS guidance and the inherent
sparsity of skeleton conditioning makes it difficult to generate multi-view consistent avatars with
accurate pose controllability. In contrast, we propose an articulated textured mesh representation for
3D human modeling, enabling effective avatar animation and high-resolution rendering. It allows
the model to fully utilize 2D diffusion priors at high-resolution, leading to higher-quality generation.
Moreover, we use a DensePose-conditioned ControlNet for SDS guidance to ensure more stable,
view-consistent avatar creation and improved pose control. A concurrent work, AvatarVerse (Zhang
et al., 2023a) also employs DensePose as conditioning for SDS guidance. However, it is limited to
static avatar generation, making it hard to animate the resulting avatars in a user-friendly way.

2.2   P RELIMINARIES

Score Distillation Sampling. The key technique of lifting a pre-trained 2D diffusion model ϵϕ
into a 3D representation θ is the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), which can be used to guide
the generation of 3D content given an input text prompt y. Specifically, given a rendered image
I = g(θ) from a differentiable 3D model g, we add random noise ϵ to obtain a noisy image. The
SDS loss then computes the gradient of θ by minimizing the difference between the predicted noise
ϵϕ (xt ; y, t) and the added noise ϵ, which can be formulated as:

                                                                           ∂x
                         ∇θ LSDS (ϕ, xθ ) = Et,ϵ w(t) (ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵ)      ,             (1)
                                                                           ∂θ
where zt is the noisy image at noise level t, w(t) denotes a weighting function depends on t and y.
SMPL. Skinned Multi-Person Linear model (Loper et al., 2015) is a parametric human model that
represents a wide range of human body poses and shapes. It defines a deformable mesh M(ξ, β) =
(V, S), where ξ and β denote the pose and shape parameters, V is the set of Nv = 6890 vertices,
and S is the set of linear blend skinning (LBS) weights assigned for each vertex. It provides an
articulated geometric proxy to the underlying dynamic human body. In this paper, we develop an
articulated 3D human representation for animatable avatar creation by generalizing LBS of SMPL.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
In this work, we aim to generate high-fidelity and animatable 3D human avatar from only text inputs.
In Sec. 3.1, we first present how to design an articulated explicit mesh representation for animatable
avatar modeling and high-resolution rendering. Then, in Sec. 3.2, we elaborate on how to optimize
the proposed representation from text inputs via a DensePose-conditional ControlNet and introduce
several simple-yet-effective strategies to facilitate the generation process.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Variational Pose Prior           DensePose SDS Optimization               Part-aware Super-resolution

                                          Loss         ControlNet
              VPoser

                                              Prompt: “Captain America”
                                                                                        Dual-Space Training


                                   𝑝 = (𝜉, 𝛽)
                                   SMPL-guided
                                    articulation                      render

      DMTet      Canonical space                   Deformed space
         Articulated Textured Mesh Representation                               Canonical space    Deformed space

Figure 2: The overview of AvatarStudio. It takes a text prompt as input to optimize an articulated tex-
tured mesh representation via a DensePose-conditioned ControlNet for high-quality and animatable
3D avatar creation. To facilitate the optimization process, it leverages several simple-yet-effective
strategies, like part-aware super-resolution and dual-space training. See main text for more details.


3.1     A RTICULATED 3D H UMAN M ODELING

SMPL-guided Avatar Articulation. To create animatable human avatars, we incorporate SMPL-
guided articulation into the 3D human modeling process to drive the generated avatar to the desired
poses. Specifically, given SMPL parameter p = (ξ, β), our model first generates a template avatar
with a pre-defined pose in the canonical space, followed by deforming it to the target pose defined
by the corresponding parameter p in the deformed space. We leverage the inverse transformation of
SMPL LBS to guide the deformation of our human representation. Specifically, given a point xd in
the deformed space, we first find its nearest vertex v ∗ in the corresponding SMPL mesh, and then
use the skinning weights of v ∗ to deform xd to the corresponding point xc in the canonical space:
                                                                Nj
                                                                X
                                   xc = G −1 · xd ,       G=          s∗i · Bi (ξ, β)                               (2)
                                                                i=1

where s∗i is the skinning weight of vertex v ∗ w.r.t the i-th joint, Bi (ξ, β) is the bone transformation
matrix of joint i, Nj = 24 is the number of joints.
Articulated Textured Mesh Representation. Most existing text-to-avatar methods (Jiang et al.,
2023; Cao et al., 2023) represent human avatars as NeRF and use volumetric rendering for avatar
image rendering. However, these methods typically require a considerable computation budget, lim-
iting the resolution of generated images. As a result, they often produce low-quality avatars with
coarseness and lack of detail. In contrast, we opt for an explicit mesh representation for animatable
human modeling, which enables high-resolution rendering via a highly efficient rasterizer (Laine
et al., 2020). Nevertheless, we empirically observe that directly optimizing the explicit mesh rep-
resentation for avatar generation produces degenerated results due to the high dimensionality of the
mesh space and the complexity of human bodies.
To address this, we propose a coarse-to-fine pipeline to optimize the 3D human representation in a
progressive manner. In the coarse stage, we adopt NeRF to learn a static human in the canonical
space by leveraging the low-resolution diffusion prior as guidance. We use hash grid decoding from
InstantNGP (Müller et al., 2022) with a two-layer MLP to predict the density and color. To ease
the learning difficulties, we adopt a residual prediction scheme on top of the SMPL-derived density
field, which serves as a strong geometric prior. For more details, please refer to the Appendix.
In the fine stage, we use a differentiable surface representation, i.e., Deep Marching Tetrahedra
(DMTet) (Shen et al., 2021), to model avatars as textured meshes. The explicit mesh representation
allows us to improve the generation quality by optimizing with high-resolution diffusion prior (e.g.,
512 × 512). Particularly, DMTet represents the surface of humans with a discrete signed distance
field defined on a deformable tetrahedral grid, where a mesh face will be extracted if two vertices of
an edge in a tetrahedron have different signs of SDF values. To inherit the learned geometry prior
from the previous stage, we initialize DMTet with the mesh extracted from the coarse NeRF using
the marching cube algorithm (Lorensen & Cline, 1998).


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For articulating avatar modeling, we establish the correspondence between the canonical and de-
formed spaces via the SMPL-guided deformation. In specific, for a point xd in the deformed space,
we first find the corresponding point xc in the canonical space (see Eq. 2). We then predict a signed
distance offset from the surface of the mesh extracted from the coarse model for geometry refine-
ment. The final signed distance of the fine stage df ine (xc ) at point xd can be computed as:

                                 df ine (xc ) = dcoarse (xc ) + ∆d(xc ),                             (3)

where dcoarse (xc ) is the signed distance value from the coarse stage, ∆d(xc ) is the residual SDF
value predicted by a two-layer MLP. This allows us to animate the generated avatars to arbitrary
poses by simply deforming the canonical one. We employ the neural color field initialized from the
coarse stage for mesh textures modeling under higher-resolution space.


3.2   T EXT- TO - AVATAR G ENERATION

DensePose SDS Optimization. We employ 2D diffusion models as priors for guiding the 3D hu-
man generation process. The core idea is to optimize the 3D model by distilling prior knowledge
from a pretrained diffusion model using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss. Although the im-
age diffusion model can guide content generation, it struggles to synthesize a human avatar with
the correct pose due to the absence of conditioning signals. To address this, some previous meth-
ods (Huang et al., 2023) utilize skeleton-conditioned ControlNet for SDS supervision. However,
they still suffer from inaccurate pose control and the Janus problem due to the sparsity of keypoints
signal. In this work, we adopt a DensePose-conditioned ControlNet that leverages more expressive
DensePose signal as condition for avatar generation. Given the SMPL parameter p, we render the
human image I = g(θ, p) from the 3D human model g parametrized by θ. We also render the
SMPL mesh defined by p as DensePose conditions Icond from the same camera viewpoint as I.
The DensePose-conditioned SDS loss can be defined as follows:

                                                                                   ∂I
                 ∇θ LSDS (ϕ, I = g(θ, p)) = Et,ϵ ω(t)(ϵ̂ϕ (It ; y, Icond , t) − ϵ)      ,         (4)
                                                                                   ∂η

where It denotes the noisy image at noise level t, ω(t) is a weighting function that depends on the
noise level t, ϵ is the added noise, and y is the input text prompt. Compared to skeleton-conditioned
ControlNet, DensePose-conditioned ControlNet offers two benefits: 1) 3D-aware DensePose en-
sures a more stable and view-consistent avatar creation process; 2) it enables more accurate pose
control of the generated avatars.
Part-aware Super-resolution. Directly generating the full-body avatars often produce results that
are blurry and lack of fine details. To improve the fidelity of the generated avatars, we develop a part-
level super-resolution strategy for both the coarse and fine stages. By leveraging the body prior from
SMPL, we can easily determine the positions of different body parts (i.e., head, hand, upper body,
lower body, and arm). We zoom in on each part and apply SDS as before to refine their texture and
geometric details. To guide this fine-grained optimization, we use the corresponding text prompts
for each body part (e.g., “The headshot of <name>”, “The right hand of <name>”,
etc), where <name> is the textual description of an avatar.
Dual Space Training. To improve the quality of animation while maintaining high-quality textures
and geometries, we adopt a dual-space training strategy that jointly optimizes the human avatar in
both the canonical space and deformed space. We utilize “A-pose” in the canonical space as it
is a common pose for natural humans. Within the deformed space, we sample different poses for
training to enhance pose control generalization and accuracy. In particular, we randomly sample
human poses from VPoser (Pavlakos et al., 2019), a variational autoencoder that learns a latent
representation of the human pose prior, during the training process.
CFG Rescale. To ensure better alignment with input text, existing works often use a large classifier-
free guidance (CFG) scale when optimizing avatar representation with SDS. However, it comes at
a cost of causing severe color saturation, making the generated avatars look unreal. To alleviate
the color saturation issue, we apply the CFG rescale trick from Lin et al. (2023b) for adjusting the
denoised x̂0 . We encourage the readers to refer to Lin et al. (2023b) for more details.


                                                   5
                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       4     E XPERIMENTS
                       In this section, we first verify AvatarStudio’s ability for 3D avatar creation from text inputs. Then,
                       we conduct ablation studies to analyze the effectiveness of each component. Finally, we showcase
                       the applications of AvatarStudio, including multimodal avatar animation and style-guided creation.
                       Implementation Details. To train DensePose-conditioned ControlNet, we sample human images
                       from the LAION dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022) and annotate them using a pre-trained DensePose
                       model (Güler et al., 2018), resulting in around 1.2M image pairs. The ControlNet training is based
                       on the Stable Diffusion v2.1 base model (5122 ) and takes about 2 days using 16 NVIDIA V100
                       GPUs. Our AvatarStudio is implemented in the threestudio (Guo et al., 2023) codebase. For
                       each text prompt, AvatarStudio trains the 3D model with a batch size of 1 for 10k and 3k iterations
                       in the coarse and fine stages, respectively, using the AdamW optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) at a
                       learning rate of 0.01. The entire training process takes around 2.5 hours on a single NVIDIA V100
                       GPU. For the SDS guidance, the maximum and minimum timestep decrease from 0.98 to 0.5 and
                       0.02, over the first 8,000 steps in the coarse stage. In the fine stage, these are fixed to 0.5 and 0.02,
                       respectively. We set rescale factor to 0.5 for the CFG rescale trick. The rendering resolution begins
                       at 642 and increases to 2562 after the first 5,000 steps in the coarse stage and is set to 5122 in the
                       fine stage. For more implementation details, please refer to Appendix.
(a)
 (a)

(a)
 (a)
       (a)


(b)
 (b)

(b)
 (b)   (b)


(c)
 (c)
(c)
 (c)   (c)

                            DreamAvatar      DreamWaltz          Ours           DreamHuman        AvatarVerse        Ours
       DreamFusion
       DreamFusion         DreamAvatar
                           DreamAvatar      DreamWaltz
                                            DreamWaltz             Ours
                                                                   Ours            DreamHuman
                                                                                   DreamHuman              Ours
                                                                                                           Ours
       DreamFusion
       DreamFusion       DreamAvatar
                          DreamAvatar
            DreamFusion Figure
                             DreamAvatar    DreamWaltz
                                             DreamWaltz         Ours
                                                                 Ours
                                              DreamWaltz with four
                                                               Ours         DreamHuman
                                                                             DreamHuman Ours Ours
                                                                         DreamHuman                Ours
                               3: Qualitative comparisons          SOTA methods. AvatarStudio generates more realistic
                       and higher-resolution avatars with fine-grained geometries, like cloth wrinkles, compared with other
                       methods. The prompts we used for comparisons: 1st row: “A standing Captain Jack Sparrow from
                       Pirates of the Caribbean”; “A man wearing a white tanktop and shorts”, 2nd row: “Joker”; “A karate
                       master wearing a Black belt”, 3rd row: “Stormtrooper”; “A man wearing a jean jacket and jean
                       trousers”. Best viewed in 2× zoom. For more results, please refer to our appendix and project page.


                       4.1    Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON

                       We present a qualitative comparison against DreamAvatar (Cao et al., 2023), DreamWaltz (Huang
                       et al., 2023), DreamHuman (Kolotouros et al., 2023) and AvatarVerse (Zhang et al., 2023a) in Fig.
                       3. These methods, like ours, also employ human priors and 2D diffusion models for the creation of
                       3D avatars. Benefiting from the explicit mesh representation, AvatarStudio outperforms the Dream∗
                       methods significantly in terms of both geometry and texture, resulting in richer details across all
                       cases. In comparison with AvatarVerse, our AvatarStudio generates avatars with clearer appear-
                       ances (1st and 3rd rows) and align more closely with the input texts (2nd row). Moreover, thanks to
                       its articulation modeling, a standout feature of AvatarStudio is its ability to support avatar animation
                       (see later in Fig. 7), which is not available in AvatarVerse. These clearly demonstrate the superi-
                       ority of AvatarStudio for text-guided 3D avatar creation. We also visualize the normal maps of the
                       generated avatars in Fig. 4 and show that our method produces high-quality and detailed geometry.


                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         A young man with curly hair
                                       A man wearing a Christmas sweater       Assassin Creed
               wearing glasses


          Goku in Dragon Ball series       Lara Craft in Tomb Raider           Naruto Uzumaki
              Figure 4: Our AvatarStudio produces high-quality and detailed geometry.

4.2   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

User Study. To quantitatively evaluate AvatarStudio, we conduct user studies comparing the
performance of our results with four SOTA methods under the same text prompts. We ran-
domly pick 30 samples to conduct user studies. Each text prompt is evaluated by 20 volunteers.
In Fig. 5, we first compare AvatarStudio with DreamA-
                                                            DreamHuman
vatar (Cao et al., 2023) and DreamWaltz (Huang et al.,          15%
                                                                                     DreamWaltz
                                                                                        20%
2023) for specific characters generation, and then com-               AvatarStudio DreamAvatar  AvatarStudio
pare with AvatarVerse and DreamHuman (Kolotouros et al., AvatarVerse
                                                             25%
                                                                          60%          8%           72%

2023) in terms of realistic humans generation. The results
demonstrate that our method achieves significantly superior
preference over all other methods.
                                                                   Figure 5: User preference.
CLIP Score. We use CLIP score, implemented by TorchMetrics (tor, 2023), as an evaluation
metric to measure the consistency between the generated avatars and input texts for the above meth-
ods. For each method, we render its generated avatars from four evenly distributed horizontal views,
and calculate the averaged CLIP score for these rendered images and the input text. Similar to the
user study, we compare with DreamAvatar and DreamWaltz in term of specific characters genera-
tion, and compare with AvatarVerse and DreamHuman for realistic human generation. The CLIP
scores for DreamAvatar, DreamWaltz and ours are 30.45, 31.52 and 32.80, respectively, while the
CLIP score for DreamHuman, AvatarVerse and ours are 29.54, 28.88 and 32.17, respectively. Our
AvatarStudio consistently outperforms all these methods, verifying its effectiveness in creating more
accurate avatars in alignment with the input texts.


4.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

Avatar Representation. Our approach, AvatarStudio, utilizes an articulated mesh representation in
a coarse-to-fine manner, with the coarse stage being represented by NeRF. To explore the impact
of different 3D representations, we optimize 3D avatars from text using either mesh-only (DMTet)
or NeRF-only representations. As shown in Fig. 6 (a), directly optimizing meshes for avatar cre-
ation results in collapsed results, while using NeRF-only representation often yields avatars of lower
quality. In contrast, our proposed articulated representation, which combines NeRF and mesh, suc-
cessfully generates high-resolution images with fine details, demonstrating its effectiveness.
DensePose-conditioned ControlNet. AvatarStudio uses ControlNet conditioned on DensePose for
SDS guidance. To assess its efficacy, we compare the performance of our method when trained
with StableDiffusion (SD) or Skeleton-conditioned ControlNet (see Fig. 6 (b)). We observe the
model guided by StableDiffusion generates avatars that exhibit incorrect poses and lower quality
due to the lack of pose-aware guidance, which results in inaccurate animations. While the Skeleton-
conditioned ControlNet model improves pose control, it still suffers from inaccuracies in foot posi-
tioning and head orientation. In contrast, our proposed DensePose-conditioned diffusion guidance


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                DMTet-only                          NeRF-only                       Ours          w/o CFG rescale   Ours
                                           (a) Avatar representation                                    (c) CFG rescale


           SD                   Skeleton           DensePose    w/o part-aware SR          Ours   w/o dual-space    Ours
                             (b) Control signals                        (d) Part-aware SR           (e) Dual-space training

                              Figure 6: Ablation studies on different components.

achieves precise and stable pose control, accompanied by high-quality textures, which validates the
importance of leveraging DensePose-conditioned guidance in the avatar creation process.
To quantitatively assess the pose controllability of avatars generated with different diffusion guid-
ances, we predict the SMPL parameters for posed avatar images using a pre-trained 3D human
reconstruction model HybrIK (Li et al., 2021). There images are generated via given SMPL param-
eters. We calculate the Mean Squared Error (MSE) in 10−2 between the input and the estimated
SMPL parameters. Specifically, for each avatar, we generate 120 posed images using 120 fixed
SMPL parameters in a frontal view. We compute the average MSE across those images as the final
MSE score. The MSE for StableDiffussion, Skeleton-conditioned ControlNet and our method are
9.0, 7.7, 5.9, respectively. AvatarStudio achieves the best pose control with the lowest MSE, further
verifying the effectiveness of DensePose guidance.
Part-aware Super-resolution and CFG Rescale Strategy. Furthermore, we explore the individual
impacts of part-aware super-resolution (SR) and CFG rescale strategy. As shown in Fig. 6 (c),
we observe CFG rescale method can mitigate the color saturation issue, generating more natural
appearance for the generated avatar. Upon the addition of part-aware super-resolution, the model can
produce sharper appearances and more local fine details, such as on faces and belts (see Fig. 6 (d)).
These studies validate the effectiveness of each proposed component in our approach, demonstrating
their substantial contribution to the final result.
Dual-space Training. To validate the effectiveness of the dual-space training, we compare with
a baseline that trains on canonical space only. For quantitative evaluations, we report the pose
controllability score by computing the MSE in 10−2 between the input and the estimated parameters:
6.5 and 5.9 for canonical space only and dual-space training, respectively. We further visualize
the generated RGB images for qualitative comparison (see Fig. 6 (e)). We can see that, without
dual-space training, the generated avatar exhibits poor details when deformed to a different pose,
suggesting that dual-space training is essential to improve the robustness against different poses.

4.4   A PPLICATIONS

Multimodal Animation. A crucial feature of our method lies in its capability to provide high-
quality, natural and easy-to-use animation, which allows users to drive avatars using multimodal
signals (e.g., video, text, audio, etc). Fig. 7 shows the animation of avatars created by AvatarStudio
using either video (a) or text (b). For video-driven animation, we first use VIBE (Kocabas et al.,
2021) to estimate SMPL sequences from the driving video, which are then leveraged to animate
the generated avatar. For text-driven animation, we adopt MDM (Tevet et al., 2023) to convert text
into SMPL sequences. Benefiting from the articulation modeling integrated into our explicit mesh
representation, the generated avatars can be easily animated, exhibiting natural movements. The
consistency of these results w.r.t. SMPL motions ensures that avatars generated by AvatarStudio
can leverage any multimodal-to-motion methods that output SMPL sequences for animation. These


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    (a) Video-driven animation                                                     (b) Test-driven animation

Figure 7: AvatarStudio facilitates the animation of avatars using multimodal signals. We demon-
strate examples of animated avatars, i.e., “Mark Zuckerberg” and “Michael Jackson”, using video-
driven motion and text-driven motion (“A person is doing Moonwalk”), respectively.
    Style image   Karate master   Girl wearing dress   Style image   Police Woman   Girl wearing skirt   Style image   Chef    Ninja


Figure 8: Our AvatarStudio also supports style-guided avatar creation by simply providing an addi-
tional style image. Note that the provided style image can be combined with text prompt to enable
flexible avatar creation (e.g., a police woman in Pixar Disney style in the middle).

examples showcase the versatility and potential of our method in creating realistically animated
avatars from diverse text prompts. For more results, please refer to our project page.
Style-guided Avatar Creation. Moreover, we show that AvatarStudio supports stylized avatar cre-
ation by simply providing an additional style image. To achieve this, we employ IP-Adapter (Ye
et al., 2023), an adapter that enables image prompt capability for pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
model via a decoupled cross-attention design. We plug IP-Adapter into our DensePose-conditioned
ControlNet and optimize with SDS as before. Without bells and whistles, AvatarStudio can generate
high-quality avatars of various styles of interests as shown in Fig. 8. Note that the provided style
image can be combined with text prompt to enable flexible avatar creation (e.g., a police woman in
Pixar Disney style in the middle of Fig. 8). This capability expands its application, allowing users
to create stylized avatars catering to specific aesthetic desires.

5        D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce AvatarStudio for creating high-fidelity and animatable 3D avatars from
only textual inputs. In short, AvatarStudio introduces articulated modeling into explicit 3D mesh
representation to support avatars animation while offering high rendering quality. To further improve
pose contrallability and view consistency, we leverage DensePose-conditioned ControlNet for Score
Distillation Sampling supervision. We also discover several simple yet effective strategies, such
as part-aware super-resolution for improving the fidelity of each body part, dual-space training for
improving the robustness against different poses and CFG rescale to alleviate the color saturation
issue. As a result, AvatarStudio supports various downstream applications, including multimodal
avatar animations (e.g., video or text driven) and style-guided avatar creation.
Limitations. While AvatarStudio can generate high quality, animatable 3D avatars, there are still
rooms for improvement: 1) Although AvatarStudio supports animation of the generated avatars,
it currently does not support fine-grained motions, such as changes in facial expressions. 2) The
efficiency of AvatarStudio could be improved as it currently takes about 2.5 hours to generate a 3D
avatar from a text input. 3) Artifacts, particularly in the avatars’ hands, can occasionally be observed.
Social Impact. The capabilities of 3D avatar creation, animation, and image-guided avatar styliza-
tion could be misused for generating fake videos or manipulating authentic videos for illicit pur-
poses. Such potentially harmful applications could pose sizable societal threats. We strictly forbid
these kinds of abuses of our technology. Moreover, AvatarStudio might exhibit bias in avatar gener-
ation due to an unbalanced distribution within the training data used for the 2D diffusion model.


                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Metahuman. https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/metahuman, 2023.
Torchmetrics.        https://torchmetrics.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
  multimodal/clip_score.html, 2023.
Thiemo Alldieck, Hongyi Xu, and Cristian Sminchisescu. imghum: Implicit generative models of
  3d human shape and articulated pose. In ICCV, 2021.
Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-Yee Kenneth Wong. Dreamavatar:
  Text-and-shape guided 3d human avatar generation via diffusion models. ArXiv, 2023.
Mathieu Desbrun, Mark Meyer, Peter Schroder, and Alan H Barr. Implicit fairing of irregular meshes
 using diffusion and curvature flow. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries. 2023.
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Jiri Borovec, Justus Schock, Ananya Harsh Jha, Teddy Koker, Luca
  Di Liello, Daniel Stancl, Changsheng Quan, Maxim Grechkin, and William Falcon. Torchmetrics-
  measuring reproducibility in pytorch. Journal of Open Source Software, 2022.
Rıza Alp Güler, Natalia Neverova, and Iasonas Kokkinos. Densepose: Dense human pose estimation
  in the wild. In CVPR, 2018.
Yuan-Chen Guo, Ying-Tian Liu, Ruizhi Shao, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Guan Luo, Chia-
  Hao Chen, Zi-Xin Zou, Chen Wang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Song-Hai Zhang. threestudio: A unified
  framework for 3d content generation. https://github.com/threestudio-project/
  threestudio, 2023.
Fangzhou Hong, Zhaoxi Chen, Yushi Lan, Liang Pan, and Ziwei Liu. Eva3d: Compositional 3d
  human generation from 2d image collections. arXiv, 2022a.
Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Avatarclip:
  Zero-shot text-driven generation and animation of 3d avatars. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2022b.
Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Ailing Zeng, Heng Cao, Xianbiao Qi, Yukai Shi, Zhengjun Zha, and
  Lei Zhang. Dreamwaltz: Make a scene with complex 3d animatable avatars. ArXiv, 2023.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T. Barron, P. Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. CVPR, 2021.
Ruixiang Jiang, Can Wang, Jingbo Zhang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing
  Liao. Avatarcraft: Transforming text into neural human avatars with parameterized shape and
  pose control. arXiv, 2023.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splat-
  ting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2023.
Nasir Mohammad Khalid, Tianhao Xie, Eugene Belilovsky, and Tiberiu Popa. Clip-mesh: Gen-
  erating textured meshes from text using pretrained image-text models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Muhammed Kocabas, Chun-Hao P Huang, Otmar Hilliges, and Michael J Black. Pare: Part attention
 regressor for 3d human body estimation. In ICCV, 2021.
Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Andrei Zanfir, Eduard Gabriel Bazavan, Mihai Fieraru, and
  Cristian Sminchisescu. Dreamhuman: Animatable 3d avatars from text. ArXiv, 2023.
Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Modular
  primitives for high-performance differentiable rendering. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2020.
Jiefeng Li, Chao Xu, Zhicun Chen, Siyuan Bian, Lixin Yang, and Cewu Lu. Hybrik: A hybrid
   analytical-neural inverse kinematics solution for 3d human pose and shape estimation. In CVPR,
   2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tingting Liao, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Jiaxiang Tang, Yangyi Huang, Justus Thies, and Michael J
  Black. Tada! text to animatable digital avatars. ArXiv, 2023.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In CVPR, 2023a.
Shanchuan Lin, Bingchen Liu, Jiashi Li, and Xiao Yang. Common diffusion noise schedules and
  sample steps are flawed. arXiv, 2023b.
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl:
 A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2015.
William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d surface construction
 algorithm. 1998.
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. arXiv, 2022.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2022.
Andrew Nealen, Takeo Igarashi, Olga Sorkine, and Marc Alexa. Laplacian mesh optimization. In
  CGIT, 2006.
Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dim-
  itrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a
  single image. In CVPR, 2019.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In ICCV, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML,
  2021.
Elad Richardson, Gal Metzer, Yuval Alaluf, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Texture: Text-
  guided texturing of 3d shapes. ArXiv, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Seyedeh Sara Mahdavi, Raphael Gontijo
  Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. ArXiv, 2022.
Aditya Sanghi, Hang Chu, J. Lambourne, Ye Wang, Chin-Yi Cheng, and Marco Fumero. Clip-forge:
  Towards zero-shot text-to-shape generation. CVPR, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. NeurIPS, 2022.
Katja Schwarz, Axel Sauer, Michael Niemeyer, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. Voxgraf: Fast 3d-
  aware image synthesis with sparse voxel grids. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. arXiv, 2023.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. ArXiv,
  2023.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv, 2023.
Wang Yifan, Lukas Rahmann, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Geometry-consistent neural shape rep-
 resentation with implicit displacement fields. arXiv, 2021.
Huichao Zhang, Bowen Chen, Hao Yang, Liao Qu, Xu Wang, Li Chen, Chao Long, Feida Zhu,
  Kang Du, and Min Zheng. Avatarverse: High-quality & stable 3d avatar creation from text and
  pose. arXiv, 2023a.
Jianfeng Zhang, Zihang Jiang, Dingdong Yang, Hongyi Xu, Yichun Shi, Guoxian Song, Zhongcong
   Xu, Xinchao Wang, and Jiashi Feng. Avatargen: a 3d generative model for animatable human
   avatars. arXiv, 2022.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. ICCV, 2023b.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
In this Appendix, we provide additional implementation details in Section A.1, additional baseline
comparisons and more visual results in Section A.2. We discuss limitations and future work in
Section A.3. Please refer to our project page: https://avatarstudio3d.github.io/ for
results in video format.

A.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Training Details. We represent the camera position in the world coordinate system by radius, el-
evation angle, azimuth angle, and field of view (FOV). Here we set the camera distance within
the range of [1.0, 2.0], the elevation angle within the range of [−10◦ , 60◦ ], the azimuth angle
within the range of [0◦ , 360◦ ], and the FOV within the range of [55, 65], respectively. Dur-
ing training, we perform part-aware super-resolution every 3 step. In practice, we empirically
find the following prompt postfixes can improve the quality and realism of generated images:
“high quality, 8k uhd, realistic”. We also use “lowres, bad anatomy, bad
hands, missing fingers, worst quality, nsfw” as negative prompts to improve
the generation. Another challenge is the infamous multi-face Janus issue that is due to the lack of
3D awareness of 2D diffusion models. The text prompts often describe the identity and the appear-
ance of the desired human avatar while ignoring the view information. Consequently, the model
may generate redundant contents of the character, i.e., face, in other views. To address this, we
append view-dependent text to the provided input text prompt according to the randomly sampled
camera poses. Specifically, we divide the horizontal angles to “front view”, “back view”,
and “side view”, and append “overhead view” for camera poses with high elevation angles,
following DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022).
Coarse Stage NeRF. In the coarse stage, we adopt NeRF to learn a static human in the canonical
space by leveraging the low-resolution diffusion prior as guidance. We use hash grid decoding
from InstantNGP (Müller et al., 2022) with a two-layer MLP to predict the density and color. The
hash grid encoding from Instant NGP allows us to encode high-frequency details at a relative low
computational cost. The normal is calculated as the spatial gradient of the density fields. We find
that directly learning the geometry of the human from scratch is non-trivial because the human
body has complex pose and shape variations. Therefore, we adopt a residual prediction scheme by
leveraging the SMPL model as a strong geometry prior. In other words, instead of directly predicting
the density value from scratch, we predict a residual density based on the signed distance value from
the surface of the SMPL template (Yifan et al., 2021). Specifically, for a point xc in the canonical
space, we query the body SDF value d(xc ) to the surface of SMPL, and then convert SDF to the
density by:
                                                                  1             d(xc )
                  σ(xc ) = softmax−1 (τ ) + ∆σ(xc ),         τ = sigmoid(−             )               (5)
                                                                  α               α
where ∆σ(xc ) is the residual density term predicted by the MLP network, α is set to 0.001 in
experiments. The residual densities prediction scheme based on the coarse SMPL body mesh can
largely alleviate the geometry learning difficulties, yielding better generation results. In practice, we
also use grid pruning to reduce the memory cost and speed up the training process. During training,
we maintain an occupancy grid and gradually prune sample points in the empty space.
Background Modeling. We model the foreground avatars and backgrounds separately. We adopt a
neural environment map network similar to DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) to model the learnable
background. Specifically, we use a two-layer MLP which takes the ray direction position encoding as
input and predicts the color. We generate the final image by performing alpha composition (Schwarz
et al., 2022):
                                     If inal = If g + (1 − M) · Ibg ,                                 (6)
where If g is the rendered foreground human image, and Ibg is the rendered background image, and
M is the foreground object mask. For the coarse stage, the foreground mask of the NeRF model
can be generated by accumulating to density along the ray:
                              N
                              X                                         i−1
                                                                        X
                        M=           Ti (1 − exp(−σi δi ), Ti = exp(−         σj δj ),                (7)
                               i=1                                      j=1


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where N is the number of samples in each camera ray, δi is the distance between adjacent sample
points i-th and (i + 1)-th, σi is the volume density of sample i. For more details, please refer to
NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020). In the fine stage, we can directly generate the foreground mask of
the textured mesh with the differentiable rasterizer Nvdiffrast (Laine et al., 2020).
Evaluation Metrics. We use CLIP score, implemented by TorchMetrics (Detlefsen et al.,
2022), as an evaluation metric to measure the consistency between the generated avatars and in-
put texts. For each method, we render its generated avatars from four evenly distributed horizontal
views, i.e., [0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ ] and calculate the averaged CLIP score for these rendered images
and the input text. Specifically, we use CLIP model “clip-vit-base-patch16” for clip score evaluation.
In order to evaluate the pose controllability of the generated avatars, we predict the SMPL parameters
for posed avatar images using a pre-trained 3D human reconstruction model HybrIK (Li et al., 2021).
There images are generated via given SMPL parameters. We then calculate the Mean Squared Error
(MSE) in 10−2 units between the input and the estimated SMPL parameters. This MSE provides a
quantitative measure of how closely the pose of the generated avatars align with the expected poses,
as determined by the input SMPL parameters. Specifically, for each avatar, we generate 120 posed
images using 120 fixed SMPL parameters in a frontal view. We compute the average MSE across
those images as the final MSE score.
Loss Functions. We use the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss (Poole et al., 2022) LSDS to
guide the optimization of 3D human generation. To encourage smooth geometry, we also intro-
duce several regularization terms, including normal smooth loss (Nealen et al., 2006) Lc and mesh
Laplacian smoothing loss (Desbrun et al., 2023) Ls . The overall loss function is formulated as:
                               Ltotal = λSDS LSDS + λc Lc + λs Ls                                  (8)
where λSDS = 1, λc = 10, 000 and λs = 10, 000 are weights for the SDS loss LSDS , normal
smooth loss Lc and mesh Laplacian smoothing loss Ls , respectively.

A.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

More Comparisons. In fig. S9, fig. S10 and fig. S11, we provide more comparison results with
SOTA methods DreamHuman (Kolotouros et al., 2023), AvatarVerse Zhang et al. (2023a) and
TADA (Liao et al., 2023), respectively.
Additional Results of AvatarStudio. In fig. S12 and fig. S13, we visualize more results from
AvatarStudio.

A.3   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

While AvatarStudio displays potential in generating high-quality, there are
still rooms for improvement: Firstly, although AvatarStudio supports ani-
mation of the generated avatars, it currently does not support fine-grained
motions, such as changes in facial expressions. Future improvements can
delve into utilizing more expressive parametric human models such as the
SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019) model for avatar creation guidance, which
can yield greater expressiveness in avatar animation. Second, the efficiency
                                                                                   Figure S14: Failure
of AvatarStudio can be further improved. It currently requires approximately
                                                                                   cases.
2.5 hours to generate a single 3D avatar from a text input. Toward increasing
optimization efficiency, we can consider two promising solutions: 1) adopt-
ing more efficient 3D representations like Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) for human avatar
representation. 2) incorporating more powerful guidance such as Multiview Diffusion (Shi et al.,
2023) to expedite the optimization process. Finally, artifacts, particularly in the avatars’ hands, can
occasionally be observed (see Fig. S14). A potential improvement could lie in the use of a hybrid
guidance solution. For example, using DensePose-conditioned ControlNet for body guidance and
Skeleton-conditioned ControlNet for hand guidance can mitigate these artifacts.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   DreamHuman                                     Ours

Figure S9: Visual comparison between AvatarStudio and DreamHuman (Kolotouros et al., 2023).


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   AvatarVerse                                       Ours

   Figure S10: Visual comparison between AvatarStudio and AvatarVerse (Zhang et al., 2023a).


                     TADA                                           Ours

Figure S11: Visual comparison between AvatarStudio and the latest work TADA (Liao et al., 2023).



                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                A ballerina                        A construction worker                     A professional boxer


        A Bedouin dressed in white                       A cowboy                      A man wearing a bomber jacket


          A black female surgeon                          A farmer                   A man wearing a camel coat and a hat


          A chef dressed in white           A Roman soldier wearing his armor        A man wearing a Christmas sweater


                 Firefighter                      A thin Marathon runner                     A high-school janitor


    An Asian woman wearing a life jacket   A person dressed at the Venice carnival               Santa Claus


   A man wearing motorcycle clothes and      A Mediterranean man with a beard        A young man with curly hair wearing
                a helmet                        wearing a white linen shirt                       glasses


       A highly detailed stone bust of      Retro astronaut with a helmet and a        A man wearing a Hawaiian shirt,
          Theodoros Kolokotronis                        bulky suit                         sunglasses and shorts


                               Figure S12: More qualitative results of AvatarStudio.


                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Abraham Lincoln                Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart                   Jack Ma


                 Ironman                            Joe Biden                       Green Arrow


                Hua Mulan                         Hilary Clinton                       Groot


        Goku in Dragon Ball series                  Elon Musk                    Donald Trump


                 Ant man                            Bruce Lee                  Cristiano Ronaldo


      Black Panther, Marvel character             Doctor Strange                Michael Jackson


            Luffy in One Piece                    Assassin Creed                 Barack Obama


                Deadpool                         Luke Skywalker                      Jeff Bezos


                Superman                     Lara Croft in Tomb Raider          Steve Paul Jobs


             Mark Zuckerberg                       Taylor Swift                 Sherlock Holmes


             Naruto Uzumaki                           Kratos                Thanos, Marvel character


                            Figure S13: More qualitative results of AvatarStudio.

                                                       18
