Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O PTIMAL CRITERION FOR FEATURE LEARNING OF
TWO - LAYER LINEAR NEURAL NETWORK IN HIGH DI -
MENSIONAL INTERPOLATION REGIME

 Keita Suzuki                                              Taiji Suzuki
 University of Tokyo and Preferred Netowrks, Inc.          University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
 keitasuzuki@preferred.jp                                  taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp



                                             A BSTRACT
         Deep neural networks with feature learning have shown surprising generalization
         performance in high dimensional settings, but it has not been fully understood how
         and when they enjoy the benefit of feature learning. In this paper, we theoretically
         analyze the statistical properties of the benefit from feature learning in a two-layer
         linear neural network with multiple outputs in a high-dimensional setting. For that
         purpose, we propose a new criterion that allows feature lerning of a two-layer lin-
         ear neural network in a high-dimensional setting. Interestingly, we can show that
         models with smaller values of the criterion generalize even in situations where
         normal ridge regression fails to generalize. This is because the proposed crite-
         rion contains a proper regularization for the feature mapping and acts as an upper
         bound on the predictive risk. As an important characterization of the criterion, the
         two-layer linear neural network that minimizes this criterion can achieve the opti-
         mal Bayes risk that is determined by the distribution of the true signals across the
         multiple outputs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to specifically
         identify the conditions under which a model obtained by proper feature learning
         can outperform normal ridge regression in a high-dimensional multiple-output lin-
         ear regression problem.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Thanks to the benefit of feature learning, neural networks have demonstrated superior generaliza-
tion performance across numerous high-dimensional problems, including image classification and
natural language processing. This empirical observation is surprising as it conflicts with conven-
tional statistical theory, which claims a model shouldn’t be too complex to predict unseen randomly
labeled data well. Therefore it has drawn great attention from the community of learning theory
(Belkin et al., 2018). To understand the generalization of high-dimensional statistical models, many
researchers have studied the generalization mechanism of simpler models such as linear models,
which are amenable to theoretical analysis in over-parametrized settings. Thanks to intensive re-
search, we’ve gained an understanding of benign overfitting phenomenon in many simple models.
In this phenomenon, models generalize well to unseen test data even when they interpolate train-
ing data with significant label noise, and we can see this in linear regression (Bartlett et al., 2020;
Hastie et al., 2022; Muthukumar et al., 2020; Negrea et al., 2020; Xu and Hsu, 2019), ridge regres-
sion (Tsigler and Bartlett, 2020; Dobriban and Wager, 2018; Mei and Montanari, 2022), logistic
regression (Montanari et al., 2019; Chatterji and Long, 2021), and kernel-based estimators (Liang
and Rakhlin, 2020; Belkin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022). However, in practical use, neural networks
frequently surpass these simpler models in high-dimensional problem settings. Hence, understand-
ing the benefits of feature learning and its dominance over simple models without feature learning
remains crucial in order to elucidate the generalization of deep learning. For this reason, many re-
searchers have studied feature learning of two-layer neural networks, which is the simplest case of
neural networks. However, much of this research is confined to the setting of classification prob-
lems (Frei et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2022), with few studies dedicated to regression problems. This
is because there is a difficulty in feature learning for over-parameterized regression problems that
increasing the number of parameters excessively for feature mapping can lead to overfitting. Accord-
ingly, it’s crucial to apply regularization for parameters including feature mapping for appropriate


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


feature learning. As a regularization for such parameters, a considerable number of researchers are
focusing on implicit regularization. This form of regularization is automatically induced by opti-
mization methods and deep learning architectures. Several studies have examined the influence of
implicit regularization on the generalization of two-layer neural networks in high-dimensional re-
gression problems (Chatterji et al., 2022; Azulay et al., 2021). However, these analyses on implicit
regularization aren’t enough to fully understand the benefit of feature learning. This is because such
implicit regularization does not always leverage the entire potential of feature learning, that is, it
isn’t necessarily an optimal regularization in terms of feature learning. In particular, the existing
work on implicit regularization as listed above missed important properties of feature learning such
as the Bayes risk optimality that will be shown in our study. Therefore, the goal of this work is to
answer the following question:
  Can we design an optimal regularization of feature mapping to fully exploit the benefit of feature
       learning and demonstrate its improvement over simpler models like ridge regression?

1.1 C ONTRIBUTIONS
For the goal above, we consider a two-layer linear neural network which is the simplest setting of
feature learning in a multi-output linear regression problem setting. We use the ridge estimator as
the second-layer parameter and design a proper regularization on the first-layer parameter which
enables feature learning. Our contribution can be summarized as follows:
   • We propose a criterion that gives an upper bound of the predictive risk and show that the
     predictive risk for an estimator with smaller values of the criterion converges to zero. This
     criterion has a proper regularization term on the first-layer parameter.
   • An important characterization of the proposed criterion is that the minimizer of the criterion
     achieves near-optimal Bayes risk under some conditions, which represents the adequacy of the
     criterion. This is a merit of considering a multi-output setting.
   • We characterize when the normal ridge estimator does not generalize and show the two-layer
     neural network selected by the proposed criterion generalizes even in such situations using
     examples. Indeed, the predictive risk of such an estimator can converge to zero even when that
     of the naive ridge regression does not. This result demonstrates the benefit of feature learning
     and its dominance over simpler models in high-dimensional regression problems.

1.2 R ELATED WORK
Benign overfitting of linear models. One line of research sought a theoretical understanding of
the benign overfitting phenomenon in linear models. Hastie et al. (2022) gave an asymptotic eval-
uation of the bias and variance of linear models and random feature regression. Additionally, they
demonstrated that the predictive risks associated with certain models exhibit a double descent curve
as the ratio of parameter size to sample size becomes large. Bartlett et al. (2020) derived a tight up-
per bound for the predictive risk of the minimum-norm interpolator in an over-parametrized setting.
They further elucidated the role of the input covariance matrix’s spectrum in enabling the model to
generalize well. Furthermore, Tsigler and Bartlett (2020) extended this result to ridge regression.
Belkin et al. (2019) showed that the Nadaraya-Watson estimator with a singular kernel that perfectly
fits training data enjoys the benign overfitting phenomenon, because thanks to singular kernels, this
model fits the training data with spike-like shape. Xu and Hsu (2019) gave an evaluation of the
predictive risk depending on the number of features in principal component regression and showed
that the number of features shouldn’t be reduced too much in high dimensional settings. Li et al.
(2022) showed that in the framework of (Bartlett et al., 2020), noises added to features play a role
of regularization and demonstrated that the double descent phenomenon occurs in this model. How-
ever, these methods are not optimal and can sometimes fail to generalize in our settings as this study
demonstrates.

Benign overfitting of two-layer neural network. Many recent works have characterized the gen-
eralization performance of two-layer neural networks. Chatterji et al. (2022) studied the two-layer
linear neural network setting we consider here and analyzed the generalization performance of a
two-layer linear neural network trained by gradient flow. Frei et al. (2022) studied benign overfitting
of a two-layer neural network with nonlinear activation function in classification problems. They
showed that if the ground truth is linear, a two-layer neural network trained by gradient descent can
achieve min-max optimal test error even if its training error is vanishingly small. Cao et al. (2022)


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


also studied benign overfitting in classification problem settings. They characterized the benign
overfitting phenomenon in terms of signal-to-noise ratio in a convolutional neural network whose
activation function is the power of ReLU. Additionally, they demonstrated that if the signal-to-noise
ratio satisfies a certain condition, a two-layer CNN trained by gradient descent achieves arbitrary
small training and test loss, and otherwise, the CNN can only achieve constant level test loss. Other
works (Ba et al., 2022; Damian et al., 2022) showed that the two-layer neural networks with one
gradient step on the first-layer parameter can outperform fixed kernel regression. Especially, Ba
et al. (2022) highlighted the importance of a large learning rate in the early phase of training and
demonstrated that if the learning rate is small, the two-layer neural network can’t defeat the best lin-
ear model. However, these analyses handled only one-step gradient learning, as they were motivated
by optimizability, and it’s unknown what kind of statistical optimality the actual optimal solution
satisfies in situations where n ≪ d. Indeed, both were considering settings where n ≥ d.

2    P ROBLEM S ETTINGS AND NOTATIONS
Multivariate linear regression. In this paper, we focus on the multi-output lin-
ear regression problem.                   Suppose that we observe n training examples Dn                     =
        (1)           (m)                    (1)           (m)                         (1)          (m)
  x1 , y1 , . . . , y 1      , . . . , xn , yn , . . . , y n      , where xi ∈ Rd and yi , . . . , yi     ∈ Rm ,
generated by
                                       (j)    ⊤           (j)
                                      yi = β∗j   xi + ϵi , j = 1, . . . , m,
with the unknown signals β∗j (j = 1, . . . , m) that we want to learn, where (xi )ni=1 are i.i.d. sample
                                                                              (j)  n
from some distribution Pχ with mean 0 and covariance matrix Σx , and ϵi i=1 are noise inde-
pendent of xi . This setting is called multivariate linear regression, which has been studied for a
long time (Breiman and Friedman, 1997; Bai et al., 1992). Indeed, we encounter a multivariate
output setting in several situations. Especially, in standard deep learning applications, we typically
deal with multivariate output like multi-label classification problems. Our problem setting could be
considered as the simplest problem setting to consider such a problem.

Assumption. Throughout the paper, we put the following sub-gaussian assumption on the
input random variable. We define ∥Z∥ψ2 to be sub-gaussian norm defined by ∥Z∥ψ2 :=

inf t > 0 : E exp Z 2 /t2 ≤ 2 for any random variable Z taking its value in R, and ∥Z∥ψ2 :=
sups̸=0 ∥⟨s, Z⟩/∥s∥∥ψ2 for any random variable vector Z taking its value in Rd . Let design matrix
                     ⊤
X := (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rn×d , and then we assume the following condition on the distribution of X.
                                                                                                  −1
Assumption 1. For some positive constants σx = O(1) and σ = O(1), the rows of XΣx 2 are sub-
gaussian vectors with the sub-gaussian norm at most σx and components of ϵ(i) are independent
and have sub-gaussian norms bounded by σ.

Two-layer linear neural network. In this paper, we consider estimating the target linear functions
  ⊤
β∗i x by a two-layer linear neural network which is given by a form of fi (x; W, β) = βi⊤ W x where
W ∈ Rd×d and βi ∈ Rd (i = 1, . . . , m). When the first-layer’s parameter W is given, we estimate
the second layer’s parameter βi as the ridge regression estimator:
                                                         −1 (i)
               β̂i (W ) = W X ⊤ XW ⊤ W X ⊤ + nλIn           y , i = 1, . . . , m.              (2.1)
Note that the first layer’s parameter W works as a linear coordinate transform. Accordingly, we
estimate the target function by fi (x; W, β̂i (W )) = β̂i (W )⊤ W x. Then, our question becomes what
kind of W yields better performance.

Notations. We write a ≲ b if there exists an absolute constant c such that a ≤ cb, and a ≲σx b if
there exists an absolute constant cx that only depends
                                                 √     on constant σx such that a ≤ cx b. For positive
semidefinite matrix M , we define ∥ · ∥M := x⊤ M x. For any matrix M ∈ Rn×d , we define
Mk ∈ Rn×k to be the matrix which is composed of the first k columns of M , M−k ∈ Rn×d−k to
be the matrix which is composed of the rest of d − k columns of M . Accordingly, for any matrix
M ∈ Rd×d , we define the eigenvalues of M in decreasing order by µ1 (M ) ≥ · · · ≥ µd (M ),
Mk,k ∈ Rk×k to be the submatrix of M which is composed of the upper left k × k components


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of M , and M−k,−k ∈ Rd−k×d−k to be the submatrix of M which is composed of the lower right
d − k × d − k components of M . For matrix A, B, if B − A is positive semidefinite, we write
A ⩽ B.

3     M AIN RESULTS
3.1   S ELECTING FIRST- LAYER PARAMETER W
Given the ridge estimator for the second layer’s parameter, our interest is what kind of W yields
generalization. A natural strategy is choosing W corresponding to vanishingly small predictive risk
which is unknown a priori. For this purpose, we aim to construct an estimator of the predictive risk
as a function of W . More specifically, we introduce a criterion R(W ) as an upper bound of the
predictive risk defined as
                m
                                                           σ ′2
                                                                                       −1
            1 X           1 (i)               2
                                         ⊤             2
 R(W ) =            min      y − XW βi + λ∥βi ∥ +               Tr Σ̂wx Σ̂wx + λId           ,
            m i=1 βi ∈Rd n                                  n

where Σ̂wx := n1 W X ⊤ XW ⊤ and σ ′2 is a hyper-parameter. Note that the last term plays a role
of regularization on feature mapping W as stated in the introduction. For Σwx := W Σx W ⊤ , we
obtain an upper bound of the predictive risk by bias-variance decomposition as follows:
                          m                                  2
                       1 X          ⊤         ⊤    ⊤
                             Ex x β∗i − x W β̂i (W )              ≲ B + V,
                      m i=1

where,
                     m                                                 2
                  1 X                                 −1
         B   :=         Id − W X ⊤ XW ⊤ W X ⊤ + nλIn     XW ⊤ W −⊤ β∗i     ,
                  m i=1                                                Σwx
                      m
                  1 X                            −1 (i) 2
         V   :=         W X ⊤ XW ⊤ W X ⊤ + nλIn    ϵ        .
                  m i=1                                 Σwx


B and V correspond to bias and variance terms respectively. R(W ) is essentially important because
it indeed yields an upper bound of the bias and variance as stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 1. There exist  (large) constants  c1 , c2 and c3 which only depend on σx such that if t
satisfies t ∈ 1, min n/c1 , n/4c21 , and σ ′2 satisfies tσ 2 ≲ σ ′2 , then it holds that with probability

                                               2
                                    (log 2)(1+σx )σ 2 max∥β∗i ∥2Σx
at least 1 − 24e−t/c1 − 8e−c3 n −                nδ 2              , for all W which satisfies R(W ) − σ 2 ≤
     σ ′2
max{8c2 ,c2 }
              ,
         1

                               B + V ≲σx max{R(W ) − σ 2 , δ}.
Theorem 1 asserts that if we take σ ′2 moderately large, R(W ) plays a role of a criterion to select
first-layer representation W because R(W ) − σ 2 can be regarded as an estimator for the predictive
risk. Therefore, a small function value of R(W ) directly leads to small predictive risk, and if we
obtain W which makes R(W ) − σ 2 close to zero, the two-layer neural network
                                                                                 with such W gen-
                                                                                               −1
                                                                    ′2
eralizes in the sense of predictive risk. The regularization term σ Tr Σ̂wx Σ̂wx + λId
is called “degrees of freedom”, which we can see in Widely Applicable Information Criterion
(WAIC) (Watanabe, 2010) or Mallows’ Cp (Mallows,
                                             1973) of    ridge regression defined as L̂(λ) :=
                                                        −1
           ⊤            −1 ⊤    2     2
  y − X(X X + nλId ) X y + 2σ̂ Tr Σ̂x Σ̂x + λId              . This criterion is used to select
optimal λ in d ≪ n settings. Our proposed function can be regarded as a kind of extension in the
sense that we can select optimal basis W in d ≥ n settings. Note that, the theoretical properties of
Mallows’ Cp and WAIC are valid only in d ≪ n settings, and so a theoretical guarantee of the de-
grees of freedom as a penalty term in high-dimensional settings is a novelty of our work. Typically,
in a high dimensional setting where the eigenvalues of Σx have slow decay, the ridge regression
with positive λ is not necessarily optimal (Wu and Xu) and this kind of classic degrees of freedom
may not work because the sum of eigenvalues diverges (Bartlett et al., 2020; Tsigler and Bartlett,


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2020). Indeed, diverging eigenvalue-sum is essentially important for obtaining benign overfitting.
However, in a two-layer neural network setting, the coordinate transformation by W can change the
problem into like a kernel regime. The W chosen by R(W ) yields an optimal kernel basis in terms
of predictive risk, enabling the model to generalize even in situations where it could not generalize
without the transformation as we will see later. This can happen if the β∗j are well correlated to
each other. Such a condition will be distilled to Assumption 3, under which we can show the ridge
regression with the optimal W minimizing R(W ) gives the Bayes optimal risk.

3.2    E VALUATION OF THE MINIMUM RISK ESTIMATE R(W ) − σ 2
Based on Theorem 1, we may have an upper bound of the predictive risk by evaluating how small
R(W ) − σ 2 can be. Here, we give an explicit form of the upperPm bound⊤by using the eigenvalues            of
                                                             1
Σx and the covariance matrix of (β∗j )m   j=1 . We let Σβ := m    i=1 β ∗i β ∗i ,  and define σ 2
                                                                                                1 ≥ · · · ≥ σ 2
                                                                                                              d
                         d
and v1 , . . . , vd ∈ R as eigenvalues of Σβ and corresponding eigenvectors respectively. Let V :=
(v1 , . . . , vd ). Then, we can obtain an upper bound of the infimum of the objective R(W ) − σ 2 as
stated in the theorem below.
                                                              1       1
                                                                                  ′2
                                                                                             1        1

Theorem 2. Suppose there exists k ≤ n such that µk+1 Σβ2 Σx Σβ2 ≤ σn ≤ µk Σβ2 Σx Σβ2 . For
W = diag (w1 , . . . , wd ) V ⊤ such that wi2 = σnλ    2
                                                  ′2 σi , there exists a constant c which only depends on

σx such that, with probability at least 1 − 4e−cn ,
                                       d         ′2
                                      X          σ           1        1
                 R(W ) − σ 2 ≲σx          min         , µi Σβ2 Σx Σβ2      := UNN .                 (3.1)
                                      i=1
                                                  n

Therefore, as long as the right-hand side of (3.1) is close to 0, W in Theorem 2 can make the
predictive risk itself close to 0. This means that the two-layer neural network selected by R(W )
can generalize. Qualitatively, this result is due to “good” regularization via feature learning using
R(W ) on the second-layer parameter. Normal l2 regularization is often not enough because this
regularization can be too strong even in a direction where signals have large contribution, which
leads to large bias. In an ideal regularization, directions in which the signals have a large contribution
should be weakly regularized, thereby resulting in small bias. Conversely, directions where signals
have a small contribution ought to be strongly regularized to facilitate small variance. For this
ideal regularization, information about the distribution of signals is essential which is usually not
accessible. Thanks to degrees of freedom as a regularization on W , R(W ) enables us to make use
of the information on the distribution of signals, and this is one of the biggest merits of selecting W
by R(W ).

3.3    BAYES R ISK O PTIMALITY
So far, we have derived an upper bound of the predictive risk. In this section, we show that the
derived upper bound can achieve a lower bound under some conditions using the optimal Bayes
risk. As stated in the introduction, this is the first attempt to show that an optimized two-layer neural
network can achieve Bayes risk optimality. We suppose Σβ is positive definite. To construct a lower
bound of the predictive risk of the two-layer linear neural network
                                                                 h     we considerhhere, we introduce
                                                                                                ii    the
                                                                                             2
optimal Bayes risk Ropt (X, σ) :=         inf Eβ∗ ∼N (0,Σβ ) EY ∼N (Xβ∗ ,σ2 I) ∥β∗ − β̂∥Σx where
                                          β̂:estimator
X = (x1 , . . . , xn ) is a given training input data, Y = Xβ∗ + ϵ with ϵi ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), and the infimum
is taken over all estimators depending on (X, Y ). The Bayes risk coincides with the predictive risk
of the multi-output linear regression averaged over the multiple-output since the Bayes risk is an
average of risks over the choice of β∗ . Therefore, it is natural to expect that attaining the Bayes
optimal risk directly leads to minimizing the predictive risk of the multiple-output regression. The
Bayes estimator β̂Bayes is defined as the minimizer that attains the infimum.
Proposition 1. For positive definite matrices Σx , Σβ , we suppose x ∼ N (0, Σx ), β∗ ∼
N (0, Σβ ), ϵi ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and training data (xi , yi )ni=1 ∈ Rd × R is generated by yi = β ⊤ xi + ϵi .
                                                  ⊤
For X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), ϵ = (ϵ1 , . . . , ϵd ) and y(β∗ , ϵ) = (y1 , . . . , yn )⊤ , the Bayes estimator β̂Bayes
can be explicitly given by
                                                                  −1
                        β̂Bayes (β∗ , ϵ) = X ⊤ X + σ 2 Σ−1     β      X ⊤ y(β∗ , ϵ).


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This regularization term Σ−1
                          β  enables ideal regularization discussed above.                        Further-
                         √
               nλ 1/2
more, for WB = σ̃ Σβ , we can write this optimal Bayes estimator as β̂Bayes      =
  ⊤       ⊤  ⊤
                   −1     ⊤
WB WB X XWB + nId     WB X y. Therefore, we can represent this Bayes estimator with
a two-layer linear neural network and this WB coincides with W in Theorem 2 except for constant
factor. As we will see later, minimum norm interpolator or more generally, normal ridge regression,
does not achieve Bayes risk optimality. Asymptotically, this result coincides with the result of (Wu
and Xu) when Σx and Σβh have   i the same eigenvectors. To construct a lower bound of this optimal
                             (j)
Bayes risk, for σ̃ 2 = Var ϵi      we make the following assumptions:
Assumption 2. We assume that the variance of label noise is not too large, i.e., it holds 2σ̃ 2 ≤ 1.
Assumption 3. We assume that the contribution to the output of the components correspond-
ing to small
Pd            1     1
                        of Σx is not too large, that is, there exists k ≤ n, such that
             eigenvalues
   i=k+1 µi Σβ Σx Σβ
              2     2
                       ≤ σ̃ 2 .
                                   1       1
This assumption ensures that Σβ2 Σx Σβ2 has a rapidly decreasing eigenvalues, which indicates that
alignment between Σβ and Σx has anisotropic property and then we may have better performance
by finding the informative direction in the first layer. Under these assumptions, we can construct a
lower bound of the predictive risk in the regime of (Tsigler and Bartlett, 2020) as follows:
                                               1       1
Theorem 3. Write eigenvectors of Σβ2 Σx Σβ2 as uB,1 , . . . , uB,d ∈ Rd and UB :=
(uB,1 , . . . , uB,d ) ∈ Rd×d . Suppose that components of the rows of XWB⊤ UB are independent.
Then under Assumption 2, 3, for k in Assumption o 3 there exists some absolute constant c such that
                                         n                         √
for any t which satisfies c < t < min n, 2σn2 and k + 2σ 2 + ktσ 2 < n/2, it holds that with
                                                   x

probability at least 1 − 24e−t/c ,
         m                                       2                     d         2
      1 X              ⊤          ⊤   ⊤
                                                                     X           σ̃       1        1
min         Ex,ϵ(i) x β∗i − x W β̂i (W )             ≥Ropt (X, σ̃) ≳      min       , µi Σβ Σx Σβ
                                                                                            2      2
                                                                                                        .
 W m                                                                              n
        i=1                                                           i=1
                                            Pd          n ′2       1        1
                                                                               o
Recalling that the upper bound is UNN = i=1 min σn , µi Σβ2 Σx Σβ2 , Theorem 3 claims that
the upper bound of the bias and variance of the optimized two-layer  neural network (3.1) achieves
the lower bound of the optimal Bayes risk as long as σ ′2 = Ω σ̃ 2 . This result characterizes the
effectiveness of feature learning using the proposed criterion R(W ). In other words, minimizing
R(W ) can properly find the informative direction, which can be realized thanks to the multiple-
output setting. This result indicates that the degrees of freedom is the optimal regularization of
feature mapping W in terms of feature learning in the multivariate linear regression problem. Even
though R(W ) isn’t employed in real-world applications, we can establish that in practical terms,
neural networks utilize the full potential of feature learning by identifying the implicit regularization
that lowers the value of this criterion.

4    C OMPARISON WITH NORMAL RIDGE REGRESSION
In this section, we discuss the generalization performance of the two-layer linear neural network
whose first-layer representation W is chosen based on R(W ), and compare this to a normal ridge
estimator without feature learning. Here, we compare the predictive risk of the selected two-layer
linear neural network with that of the normal ridge regression (i.e., W = I). For that purpose,
we derive an upper bound of the predictive risk of the normal ridge regression. This is the first
attempt to clarify when a two-layer linear neural network surpasses normal ridge regression in the
setting of high-dimensional, multivariate linear regression problems. To construct an upper bound,
first, we define eigenvalues of Σx and their corresponding eigenvectors as λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λd and
u1 , . . . , ud ∈ Rd . Accordingly, we define U := (u1 , . . . , ud ) ∈ Rd×d and σ̃i2 := u⊤
                                                                                          i Σβ P
                                                                                               ui . In the
same way as (Tsigler and Bartlett, 2020), for any k < n, we define ρk := nλ1k+1 nλ + i>k λi
                                       ⊤
and Ak (XU, λ) := (XU )−k (XU )−k + nλIn . Then, we can evaluate the predictive risk of normal
ridge regression as stated below.
                                                                   2
Corollary 1. Suppose it is known that for some δ < 1 − 4−n/cx , with probability at least 1 − δ, the
condition number of Ak (XU, λ) is at most L. Then there exists a constant cx , which only depends


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on σx , such that for any λ ∈ R, k ≤ n/cx , and t ∈ (1, n/cx ), if Ak (XU, λ) is positive definite and
ρk = O L1 , then it holds that with probability at least 1 − δ − 20e−t/cx ,
                          m                            2
                       1 X          ⊤        ⊤
                             Ex x β∗i − x β̂i (Id )        ≲ BNorm + VNorm ,
                      m i=1
                                                 k           2 2        d
                             B
                            n Norm                        2 ρk λk+1
                                                X                      X
                                  P          o=     λi σ̃ i     2   +       λi σ̃i2 ,                (4.1)
                                   i>k λi                      λ
                      L3 max L, nλ+P      λi    i=1             i     i=k+1
                                           i>k

                                     2   d
                      VNorm   ktσ   tσ 2 X    λ2i
                            =     +                 ,                                                (4.2)
                       L 2     n     n     ρk λ2k+1
                                            2
                                                 i=k+1

where BNorm corresponds to the bias term and VNorm corresponds to the variance term.
This result is an extension of the result of Tsigler and Bartlett (2020) for multi-output linear regres-
sion. k is called effective dimensionality (Bartlett et al., 2020; Tsigler and Bartlett, 2020), which
stands for the effective complexity of the ridge regression estimator in high-dimensional settings.
Notice that λ in Corollary 1 can be negative. In fact, some negative λ can show higher general-
ization performance than any λ > 0 under some conditions (Kobak et al., 2020; Wu and Xu). In
particular, when λ = 0 this ridge estimator coincides with minimum norm interpolator (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Liang and Rakhlin, 2020). In a similar way as Tsigler and Bartlett (2020), we can
construct lower bounds of the bias BNorm and the variance VNorm (See Lemma 6 and Lemma 7 in
Appendix C), and we can also show that the upper bounds and the lower bounds match under some
conditions (See Appendix 3). Furthermore, we can demonstrate that the upper bound UNN of the
selected model and that of normal ridge regression coincide when Σβ is isotropic (See Appendix G).
This result is natural because when Σβ is isotropic, the ideal regularization is equivalent to normal
l2 regularization, that is, W selected by the criterion R(W ) also becomes close to being isotropic,
which indicates that the selected two-layer neural network comes close to normal ridge estimator. In
the following part of this section, we discuss the condition that the selected two-layer linear neural
network outperforms normal ridge regression comparing UNN and BNorm + VNorm . Note that since
BNorm and VNorm achieve their lower bounds, this comparison is reasonable. For simplicity, we
assume that Σx and Σβ have the same eigenvectors.
4.1 W HEN λi DECREASE SLOWLY
In this section, we show that there appears separation between feature learning by R(W ) and the
naive ridge regression when the eigenvalues λi decrease slowly. The situation where the decay of
λi is slow appears in the benign overfitting regime (Bartlett et al., 2020; Xu and Hsu, 2019). The
following argument shows selecting W by R(W ) is effective in such a setting. Indeed, for the case
                                                                                                   ρ2k λ2k+1
of normal ridge regression, observing Corollary 1, if λi is large in comparison with ρk λk+1 ,         λ2i
in the first term of the bias BNorm can be seen as a weight that controls the impact of λi σi2 to the bias.
                                                         ρ2 λ2
However, if the decay of λi is gradual, the weight k λk+12   can be close to 1, thereby enhancing the
                                                         i
effect of the bias. On the other hand, in the context of the two-layer linear neural network
                                                                                         n ′2 whichois
                                                                              Pd
chosen based on R(W ), the upper bound of Theorem 2 is written as UNN = i=1 min σn , λi σi2 .
                                                                       ′2
This bound implies that the effect of bias λi σi2 is no larger than σn and this prevents the bias term
from deteriorating the predictive risk of the model. The example below reflects the difference in the
generalization performance of both models discussed above.
                           √
Example 1. We suppose n ∈ N and eigenvalues of Σx decay slowly, that is, we consider the
situation as follows:

                      1        i≤n               n −i
             λi =       1             , σi =         e , σ 2 = 1, σ ′2 = 1, d ≥ 2n.
                      i+1−n    i ≥  n         log n
Then for any k < n in Corollary 1, it holds that
                                                      log n
                                   BNorm ≳ 1, UNN ≲         .
                                                        n
Example 1 claims that the two-layer linear neural network selected by R(W ) can generalize even
when the decay of Σx is slow and normal ridge regression can’t generalize. This result reflects the


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


effect of the good regularization discussed above, using W obtained by feature learning via R(W ).
This allows for weak regularization in directions where signals make significant contributions, and
strong regularization where the signals’ contributions are minor.
4.2 W HEN x AND β∗i ARE MISALIGNED
In this section, we compare the predictive performance of the selected two-layer neural network and
normal ridge regression when x and β∗i are misaligned. First, we introduce the notion of alignment
and misalignment. We say that x and β∗i are aligned when the directions of large variance for x
and that of β∗i closely match. In other words, an aligned situation is that the eigenvectors of Σx
corresponding to large eigenvalues and those of Σβ are in close directions. On the other hand, if
the direction in which x has large variance and that of β∗i are different, that is, if eigenvectors
of Σx corresponding to large eigenvalues and those of Σβ are orthogonal, we refer to x and β∗i
as being misaligned. We may define the alignment in a more rigorous way by considering the
situation where Σx and Σβ have the same eigenvectors. In this setting, for λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λd if
σ1 ≥ · · · ≥ σd then we say x and β∗i are aligned, and on the contrary, if σ12 ≤ · · · ≤ σd , then we
say x and β∗i are misaligned. Here, we consider a misaligned situation, that is, σ12 ≤ · · · ≤ σd2 .
For the case of normal ridge regression, for any k < n, we can write the bias term as BNorm =
              2 2
           2 ρk λk+1
Pk                     Pd
   i=1 λi σi    λ2i
                     + i=k+1 λi σi2 . Since σ12 ≤ · · · ≤ σd2 , σk+1
                                                                  2
                                                                      , . . . , σd2 can be large and this
leads to large bias. On the other hand, the two-layer neural network selected by R(W ) can decrease
both bias and variance thanks to good regularization via learning with R(W ) as the example below
demonstrates.
Example 2. We suppose x and β∗i are misaligned, that is, we consider the situation as follows:
                             λi = i−1 , σi2 = iei−d , σ 2 = 1, σ ′2 = 1.
Then for any k < n in Corollary 1, it holds that
                                                        log n
                                    BNorm ≳ 1, UNN ≲          .
                                                           n
This result indicates that the estimator selected by R(W ) outperforms the normal ridge estimator in
misaligned situations.
4.3 W HEN TAIL EIGENVALUES OF Σx ARE LARGE
In this section, we show that the selected two-layer linear neural network outperforms normal ridge
regression when tail eigenvalues of Σx are large. In normal ridge regression, for any k = o(n), the
                                                      Pd
variance term is written as VLNorm     k        1
                              2 tσ 2 = n + nρ2 λ2
                                                                2
                                                        i=k+1 λi . We can see that if tail eigenvalues of
                                               k k+1
Σx are large, that is, if i>k λ2i is large, then the second term of VNorm can also be large. This indi-
                         P
cates that normal ridge regression doesn’t generalize. On the other hand, because of feature learning
via R(W ), the selected two-layer linear neural network can generalize even when the normal ridge
regression can’t generalize as the following example shows.
Example 3. Suppose that tail eigenvalues of Σx are large, that is, we consider the situation as
follows:
                           −1
                           i      i≤n
                  λi =     1             , σi2 = i−2 , σ 2 = 1, σ ′2 = 1, d = n3 .
                           n      i >n
Then for any k < n in Corollary 1, it holds that
                                                       2
                           BNorm + VNorm ≳ 1, UNN ≲ n− 3 .
Qualitatively, this result also reflects the good regularization obtained by R(W ). W selected by
R(W ) enables strong regularization in directions where signals don’t contribute significantly, lead-
ing to a decrease in variance without a drastic increase in bias.

4.4 W HEN y (i) IS LARGE
In this section, we demonstrate that the selected two-layer linear neural network surpasses normal
ridge regression when the norm of y (i) is notably large. In normal ridge regression, the bias can
                       Pk          ρ2 λ2      Pd                             ρ2 λ2
be written as BNorm = i=1 λi σi2 k λk+12   + i=k+1 λi σi2 and the weights k λk+1 2  in the first term
                                          i                                             i
contribute to reducing the impact on the bias term. However, if y (i) is large, that is, λi σi2 is large, then


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the bias term doesn’t vanish even if the weight is small. This means that an isotropic regularization is
not enough to effectively decrease the effect of bias in such situations. On the contrary, the selected
model with good regularization via feature learning by R(W ) is capable of bringing both the bias
and variance close to zero. The following example demonstrates the difference between the selected
two-layer neural network and normal ridge regression.
                              2
Example 4. We suppose n 3 ∈ N and norm of y (i) is large, that is, we consider the situation as
follows:                         3            2
                      −1          n2 i ≤ n3
                           2
                λi = i , σi =       −1        2   , σ 2 = 1, σ ′2 = 1.
                                  i    i > n3
Then for any k < n in Corollary 1, it holds that
                                                                   1
                              BNorm + VN orm ≳ 1, UNN ≲ n− 3 .

5     N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to justify our theoretical results.     We consider the
setting that (d, n, m) = (1, 000, 500, 1, 000), Σx = diag 1, 2−1 , . . . , 1, 000−1 , x ∼ N (0, Σx ),
                                                                                                (j)
Σβ = diag (1, 2−a , . . . , 1, 000−a ) (a = 0, 0.5, 1, . . . , 10), (σ 2 , σ ′2 ) = (1, 2) and ϵi ∼i.i.d.
        2
N (0, σ ). Since the criterion R(W ) is non-convex, we optimized this function with gradient
Langevin dynamics, which is a noisy gradient descent method aiming to escape from sharp local
minima. For a random variable matrix ξt which satisfies (ξt )i,j ∼i.i.d. N (0, 1), learning rate η and
inverse temperature parameter β, the    update of the gradient Langevin dynamics can be written as
   (t+1)       (t)              (t)
                                      q 2η
W         = W − η∇R W                +   β ξt . In this experiment, we set (η, β) = (0.1, 100, 000) and
iterated the update 500 times and selected W corresponding to the smallest R(W ). Figure 1 shows
the comparison of the predictive risks with a base-10 logarithm between the obtained two-layer
linear neural network, normal ridge regression, and Bayes-optimal estimator. The regularization
parameters for ridge regression were chosen from 1.0, 0.5, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001 to minimize the
predictive risk calculated using additional data. When a is small and the eigenvalues of Σβ de-
cay slowly, the proposed method has equivalent performance to or falls below the ridge regression.
However, as a becomes larger and the eigenvalues of Σβ decay more quickly, it can be seen that the
proposed method begins to outperform ridge regression. This reflects the fact that the more isotropic
Σβ is, the more isotropic the optimal parameter of the first layer becomes, hence the benefit of find-
ing informative directions by feature learning is diminished in such cases. 2 shows the minimum
values of the proposed criterion R(W )−σ 2 with a base-10 logarithm obtained by gradient Langevin
dynamics and predictive risks with a base-10 logarithm of the two-layer linear neural network with
corresponding W . We can see that the behavior of the function values of R(W ) − σ 2 captures that
of predictive risk. This result shows that the proposed criterion R(W ) − σ 2 can play a role of an
estimator for an upper bound of the predictive risk.


    Figure 1: Comparison of predictive risks.          Figure 2: R(W ) − σ 2 and predictive risk.

6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we have considered the feature learning of a multi-output linear regression problem
using a two-layer linear neural network. We have proposed a criterion with penalty term on feature
mapping W like Mallows’ Cp and have shown that an estimator selected by the criterion leads to
making its predictive risk close to zero. Then, we have shown the optimized model by the proposed
criterion can achieve nearly optimal Bayes risk. Furthermore, we have characterized when normal


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ridge regression doesn’t generalize and shown that the selected two-layer linear neural network gen-
eralizes even in such situations. We state the future directions of this research. On the optimization
aspect, we have to guarantee that we can minimize the proposed criterion well. It is not obvious
whether we can obtain the optimal solution by standard optimization techniques such as stochastic
gradient descent because the objective is non-convex. Another future direction is replacing the acti-
vation function. Although we considered identity in this paper, we usually use nonlinear activation
functions such as ReLU in real applications.

7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
KS was partially supported by JST CREST (JPMJCR2015). TS was partially supported by JSPS
KAKENHI (20H00576) and JST CREST (JPMJCR2115).

R EFERENCES
S. Azulay, E. Moroshko, M. S. Nacson, B. E. Woodworth, N. Srebro, A. Globerson, and D. Soudry.
   On the implicit bias of initialization shape: Beyond infinitesimal mirror descent. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pages 468–477. PMLR, 2021.
J. Ba, M. A. Erdogdu, T. Suzuki, Z. Wang, D. Wu, and G. Yang. High-dimensional asymptotics
   of feature learning: How one gradient step improves the representation. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Z. Bai, C. R. Rao, and Y. Wu. M-estimation of multivariate linear regression parameters under a
  convex discrepancy function. Statistica Sinica, 2(1):237–254, 1992.
P. L. Bartlett, P. M. Long, G. Lugosi, and A. Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear regression. Pro-
   ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30063–30070, 2020.
M. Belkin, S. Ma, and S. Mandal. To understand deep learning we need to understand kernel
 learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 541–549. PMLR, 2018.
M. Belkin, A. Rakhlin, and A. B. Tsybakov. Does data interpolation contradict statistical optimality?
 In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1611–1619. PMLR,
 2019.
L. Breiman and J. H. Friedman. Predicting multivariate responses in multiple linear regression.
  Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 59(1):3–54, 1997.
Y. Cao, Z. Chen, M. Belkin, and Q. Gu. Benign overfitting in two-layer convolutional neural net-
   works. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06526, 2022.
N. S. Chatterji and P. M. Long. Finite-sample analysis of interpolating linear classifiers in the
  overparameterized regime. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:129–1, 2021.
N. S. Chatterji, P. M. Long, and P. L. Bartlett. The interplay between implicit bias and benign
  overfitting in two-layer linear networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(263):1–48,
  2022.
A. Damian, J. Lee, and M. Soltanolkotabi. Neural networks can learn representations with gradient
  descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 5413–5452. PMLR, 2022.
E. Dobriban and S. Wager. High-dimensional asymptotics of prediction: Ridge regression and
  classification. The Annals of Statistics, 46(1):247–279, 2018.
S. Frei, N. S. Chatterji, and P. Bartlett. Benign overfitting without linearity: Neural network classi-
   fiers trained by gradient descent for noisy linear data. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages
   2668–2703. PMLR, 2022.
T. Hastie, A. Montanari, S. Rosset, and R. J. Tibshirani. Surprises in high-dimensional ridgeless
   least squares interpolation. The Annals of Statistics, 50(2):949–986, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D. Kobak, J. Lomond, and B. Sanchez. The optimal ridge penalty for real-world high-dimensional
  data can be zero or negative due to the implicit ridge regularization. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 21(1):6863–6878, 2020.
Z. Li, W. J. Su, and D. Sejdinovic. Benign overfitting and noisy features. Journal of the American
   Statistical Association, pages 1–13, 2022.
T. Liang and A. Rakhlin. Just interpolate: Kernel “ridgeless” regression can generalize. The Annals
   of Statistics, 48(3):1329–1347, 2020.
C. L. Mallows. Some Comments on Cp . Technometrics, 15(4):661–675, 1973.
S. Mei and A. Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise asymp-
   totics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75(4):
   667–766, 2022.
A. Montanari, F. Ruan, Y. Sohn, and J. Yan. The generalization error of max-margin lin-
  ear classifiers: High-dimensional asymptotics in the overparametrized regime. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.01544, 2019.
V. Muthukumar, K. Vodrahalli, V. Subramanian, and A. Sahai. Harmless interpolation of noisy data
   in regression. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 1(1):67–83, 2020.
J. Negrea, G. K. Dziugaite, and D. Roy. In defense of uniform convergence: Generalization via
   derandomization with an application to interpolating predictors. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pages 7263–7272. PMLR, 2020.
A. Tsigler and P. L. Bartlett.       Benign overfitting in ridge regression.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.14286, 2020.
S. Watanabe. Asymptotic equivalence of Bayes cross validation and widely applicable information
   criterion in singular learning theory. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:3571–3594,
   2010.
D. Wu and J. Xu. On the optimal weighted l2 regularization in overparameterized linear regression.
  In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pages 10112–10123. Curran Associates, Inc.
J. Xu and D. J. Hsu. On the number of variables to use in principal component regression. Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
