Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M U SR: T ESTING THE L IMITS OF C HAIN - OF - THOUGHT
WITH M ULTISTEP S OFT R EASONING

 Zayne Sprague, Xi Ye, Kaj Bostrom, Swarat Chaudhuri, Greg Durrett
 Department of Computer Science
 The University of Texas in Austin
 zayne@utexas.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

            While large language models (LLMs) equipped with techniques like chain-of-
            thought prompting have demonstrated impressive capabilities, they still fall short
            in their ability to reason robustly in complex settings. However, evaluating
            LLM reasoning is challenging because system capabilities continue to grow while
            benchmark datasets for tasks like logical deduction have remained static. We in-
            troduce MuSR, a dataset for evaluating language models on multistep soft reason-
            ing tasks specified in a natural language narrative. This dataset has two crucial fea-
            tures. First, it is created through a novel neurosymbolic synthetic-to-natural gen-
            eration algorithm, enabling the construction of complex reasoning instances that
            challenge GPT-4 (e.g., murder mysteries roughly 1000 words in length) and which
            can be scaled further as more capable LLMs are released. Second, our dataset
            instances are free text narratives corresponding to real-world domains of reason-
            ing; this makes it simultaneously much more challenging than other synthetically-
            crafted benchmarks while remaining realistic and tractable for human annotators
            to solve with high accuracy. We evaluate a range of LLMs and prompting tech-
            niques on this dataset and characterize the gaps that remain for techniques like
            chain-of-thought to perform robust reasoning.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

A great remaining challenge for large language models (LLMs) is the ability to do reasoning and
planning (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Dziri et al., 2023) Numerous methods have
been proposed to augment models’ capabilities on this front, including prompting strategies like
chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), integration with tools (Schick et al., 2023; Lyu et al., 2023; Ye
et al., 2023), and embedding models in search loops (Bostrom et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2023).
Do these approaches suitably address the shortcomings of LLMs? This is difficult to measure.
Math reasoning tasks can be approached in a two-stage fashion (Gao et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023):
the LLM translates the problem into a formal specification which is then solved with conventional
tools. Other datasets like RuleTakers (Clark et al., 2020) and CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019) are
solvable with rule-based systems (Kazemi et al., 2023a; Ye et al., 2023; Poesia et al., 2023). Finally,
datasets like SocialIQA (Sap et al., 2019) or StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021) that involve more
nuanced commonsense are often structurally simple (i.e., only involve 1-2 steps of reasoning). What
is lacking is a benchmark involving both sophisticated natural language and sophisticated reasoning.
In this work, we present MuSR: Multistep Soft Reasoning, a dataset focused on tasks involving
reasoning based on text narratives. The narratives in our dataset are hundreds of words long and
present evidence in ways that require commonsense knowledge to unpack. Then, when all of the
evidence is assessed, coming to a final answer requires “System 2”-style deliberation, which takes a
different form for each domain of interest. The domains we address here, murder mysteries, object
placement, and team assignment, involve commonsense reasoning about physical (Bisk et al., 2020)
and social situations (Sap et al., 2019), theory-of-mind, and more. Crucially, these types of reasoning
arise naturally from text descriptions of each problem.
    1
        Project website can be found at https://github.com/Zayne-Sprague/MuSR


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      Sample a problem…                                        Build a reasoning tree…                                     Generate a narra ve…
                                                                Recursively sample from an LLM to
                                                                                                                           Only use a small set of observed facts
                                                              establish reasoning behind conclusions
       Fact Sampling Model
                                                                            Sophia is the murderer.                        for each section:
       Create a murder mystery outline. Generate
       the name of the victim, two suspects, …                                      Sophia has a motive.                         Write part of a murder mystery describing
                                                                                                                                 Detective Winston interacting with the
                                                                                                                                 following people and learning the following
                                                                                              Tree construc on
                                                                                                                                 facts:
                                                                                              Fact: She has a grudge
       - The victim is Emily         Gold facts                                               due to her lost fortune            Sophia has a grudge due to her lost fortune
       - Emily was murdered in the park                                                                                          Emily stole Sophia’s inheritance…
                                                                                                Fact: Emily stole
       - Sophia murdered Emily                                                                 Sophia’s inheritance
       - Sophia never forgot the fortune Emily stole                                                                       iterate until
             from her                                                                     Commonsense: A grudge
                                                                                             can be a motive.                  valid Valida on (e.g., that
       - Richie felt angry when John fired him…
                                                                                        Sophia has an                                              facts are included)
                                                                                         opportunity


    Emily took her nal stroll in the park last night, forever, when her life was snu ed out under the mask
      of night. The cause of death was a single fatal shot from a pistol. Detec ve Winston was on the                   Can LLMs solve the mystery?
                              case and began to look at his rst suspect, Sophia.
     Sophia had a string of bad luck recently when someone who she thought was a friend, Emily, stole                        LLM to be tested
    her en re inheritance. Her evening strolls in the park became fran c pacing while she reconciled the
       fortune she lost. Detec ve Winston took a long sip of his co ee and began to ques on Sophia.                          Please identify the killer in this murder
                                                                                                                             mystery. Killers have a motive, means, and
              ‘Quite the marksmen I see’ - poin ng to a picture of her holding a recently shot buck up.                      opportunity […]
                         ‘Yeah, my dad loved taking me shoo ng’ - Sophia replied sheepishly.
       ti
        ti     ti   fi      ti    fi   ti   ti
                                            ti                  ff     ti    ti    ff    ti


Figure 1: Dataset construction process for MuSR. First, we generate gold facts that are used to
deduce the correct answer (the murderer in this case). Then, using an LLM, we create a reasoning
tree leading to those deductions from facts in a story combined with commonsense. Finally, we
iteratively generate a narrative one chunk at a time using the facts generated in step 2, validating the
generations for fact consistency and recall.


The congruence between the reasoning and the text itself allows us to generate these datasets auto-
matically with the aid of LLMs, using supporting logic to elicit examples that the LLMs themselves
cannot reliably solve. Our novel neurosymbolic dataset generation procedure is shown in Figure 1.
Recovering the reasoning from the final narrative itself is a hard problem, solvable by humans but
not by GPT-4 using any of a number of prompting strategies and neurosymbolic approaches we
tried. Notably, these properties do not hold when creating narratives with more basic prompting
strategies: asking GPT-4 to define and write a murder mystery in a single shot leads to unnatural,
homogeneous stories that may include inconsistencies, as we show later.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce a new reasoning benchmark, MuSR, consisting of
756 total examples across three domains that challenge state-of-the-art models such as GPT-4, Llama
2, and Vicuna. (2) We propose an algorithm for generating natural language narratives grounded in
reasoning trees. (3) We analyze the performance of LLMs on our dataset, focusing on variants of
chain-of-thought prompting and existing neurosymbolic approaches for these problems.

2        BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
We survey past dataset efforts in Table 1, using our analysis to establish the need for a new textual
reasoning benchmark. First, a number of prior benchmarks do not have natural text. Others do not
blend commonsense and multistep reasoning. Finally, we want a dataset that contains ground-truth
intermediate structure and which is not solvable with rules.
Many past datasets are simply too artificial, including bAbI (Weston et al., 2016), BigTOM (Gandhi
et al., 2023), ToMi (Le et al., 2019), RuleTakers (Clark et al., 2020), ProntoQA (Saparov & He, 2023;
Saparov et al., 2023), and CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019). These datasets are generally designed
to test some aspect of language model reasoning, but they are only challenging for “pure” LLM
approaches; many are solvable with rule-based methods. Furthermore, many of these do not involve
any commonsense reasoning, a key feature of reasoning from text.
EntailmentBank (Dalvi et al., 2021), Everyday Norms: Why Not (Sprague et al., 2022), and
BoardgameQA (Kazemi et al., 2023b) present somewhat more challenging multistep settings, but
consist of isolated collections of facts, not grounded in complex narratives. LLMs can solve the
former two datasets quite easily even without consulting ground truth facts. As these datasets are


                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Recent reasoning datasets used for benchmarking LLMs and neurosymbolic systems com-
pared across various dataset qualities. To the best of our knowledge, no previous dataset encom-
passes all of these qualities. The ∼ symbol denotes datasets that partially qualify for the property.
More details about how we define and classify these features can be found in Appendix B.
                                                        Properties
     Dataset      Natural Text Commonsense Multistep Intermediate structure Not solvable w/rules
      bAbI             ✗              ✗             ✓                ✓                     ✗
    BigTOM             ∼              ∼             ∼                ✗                     ✓
      ToMi             ✗              ✗             ∼                ✓                     ∼
   RuleTakers          ✗              ✗             ✓                ✓                     ✗
   ProntoQA            ✗              ✗             ✓                ✓                     ∼
    CLUTRR             ✗              ∼             ∼                ✓                     ∼
 BoardgameQA           ∼              ✓             ✓                ✓                     ✓
 EntailmentBank        ∼              ✗             ✓                ✓                     ✓
     ENWN              ∼              ✗             ✓                ✓                     ✓
   SocialIQA           ∼              ✓             ✗                ✗                     ✓
 True Detective        ✓              ✓             ✓                ✗                     ✓
     MuSR              ✓              ✓             ✓                ✓                     ✓


designed to be solved using explicit step-by-step deduction, they tend to avoid softer kinds of infer-
ences prevalent in commonsense reasoning. Past commonsense datasets (Sap et al., 2019; Talmor
et al., 2019; 2021), conversely, often do not involve multistep reasoning.

Techniques Many reasoning systems have been built to handle specific axes of reasoning that we
list in Table 1, but cannot handle a dataset which exhibits them all. Several past systems employ
an LLM in a search loop that enumerates a list of facts, generating conclusions deductively or ab-
ductively until a goal is reached (Bostrom et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2023; Kazemi et al., 2023a;
Sprague et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022). However, these systems do not handle natural contexts
where facts can be distributed among sentences across a long narrative. Other systems involve tools
or neurosymbolic algorithms to help solve reasoning problems (Sclar et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2022;
Ye et al., 2023); however, these are often run on artificial datasets that can be easily translated into
formal specifications, and have limited ability to handle soft reasoning types like commonsense.
One versatile technique is prompting, including various chain-of-thought strategies (Wei et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2023) and techniques to measure consistency (Wang et al., 2023; Jung et al., 2022). Using
these approaches to solve reasoning problems end-to-end has shown to be challenging (Ye & Durrett,
2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023). Our dataset is ideally suited to
test the limits of these approaches: a system must extract facts from our stories, apply appropriate
commonsense to interpret those facts, and finally use multistep reasoning to arrive at an answer.

Why a synthetic benchmark One alternative to the approach we describe could be to use human
authoring. Our murder mystery domain is represented in the recent True Detective (Del & Fishel,
2022) dataset, which collects human-authored murder mysteries from 5minutemystery.com.
We argue that a synthetic benchmark is preferable for two reasons. First, it is scalable and can be
renewed as more capable LLMs are produced. For example, if the mysteries on the aforementioned
website are solved by future LLMs, it will be costly and challenging to collect a new dataset, whereas
a synthetic benchmark can be refreshed with more complex reasoning and longer narratives. The
disentangling of logical reasoning and text generation gives us a reusable lever for producing in-
stances more complex than what systems themselves can solve. Second, because our dataset can be
regenerated, issues with dataset leakage and exposure to test data become less of a concern. Finally,
note that while our benchmark involves GPT-4 generated narratives, the scaffolding of the construc-
tion process and the hidden facts involved mean that the final generated outputs are not trivially
solvable with GPT-4. As long as the underlying information is faithfully preserved in the narrative,
we believe our data instances are valid test cases for any well-behaved reasoning system, which we
verify by measuring human performance.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Murder Mystery                                          Object Placements                                       Team Alloca on
      Who has a means, mo ve                             Where does Emma think the notebook is?                      How should we assign people
         and opportunity?                                     Items: notebook,     Locations: piano, producer’s        to maximize e ciency?
                                                                 earphones            desk, recording booth
                                                                                                                              Tasks: singing, baking

          F: John is the murderer.                                  F: Ricky moves the notebook to                      F: Lewis is good at singing.
                                                                       the piano. jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj

                                                                           F: Emma saw the notebook move                        Tree construc on
                 F: John has a motive.
                                                                              to the piano. Jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj
                                                                                                                                S(T): Lewis participates in an
                      Tree construc on                                                 Tree construc on                                acapella group.

                      S(T): John is strapped for cash.                           S(T): Emma oversees the artists               S(T): Lewis has always loved to
                                                                                 creative processes as a producer.                   perform. Jjjjjjjjjjjjjj
                               Tree construc on                                                                                C(T): Many good singers enjoy
                                                                                   S(T): Emma was monitoring
                                                                                         Ricky’s progress.                       performing and acapella.
                                  S(T): John has a huge
                                   gambling problem.                             C(T): Producers typically observe       F: Lewis is bad at baking.
                                                                                       the creative process.
                           S(T): Emily stole John’s
                                 inheritance.                              F: Danny saw the notebook move
                                                                              to the piano. Jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj
                      C(T): Being fired when you need                                                                  F: Lewis and Clyde work badly
                          money can be a motive.                                                                           together. Jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj

                                                                   F: Emma moves the earphones to
                  F: John has a means.                                  the producer’s desk.
                                                                                                                         F: Clyde is okay at baking.
                F: John has an opportunity.

 ti       ffi    ti   ti



Figure 2: Partial reasoning trees showing gold facts F , story facts S(T ), and commonsense facts
C(T ) for each of our three domains. Dotted lines indicate incomplete trees. Each deduction sampled
from an LLM will yield two scenario facts and one commonsense fact in our setup.


3       C REATING M U SR

MuSR is composed of multi-step reasoning problems, each rooted in a specific domain with a unique
logical structure to its solutions. To generate these problems, we have a construction method with
three stages: Tree Template Construction, responsible for the reasoning strategy and initial gold
fact set F ; Reasoning Tree Completion, which generates a tree T of intermediate reasoning steps
expanding upon F ; and Story Generation, which embeds the facts generated from the trees into a
natural narrative x. This process is described here and is represented in Figure 1.
The construction algorithm finally yields tuples (F, T, x, {q1 , . . . , qn }, {a1 , . . . , an }). Formally,
the reasoning task is to predict answers ai given the narrative x and the question to answer qi . The
gold fact set F and reasoning tree T are used as part of the generation process but are generally
not provided to an LLM at test time. Throughout the process, we use Prompt to denote using a
prompted LLM to sample an output conditioned on another variable.


3.1      T REE T EMPLATE C ONSTRUCTION

Each of our domains starts with a high-level fact set F , and a set of question-answer pairs
((q1 , a1 ), . . . , (qn , an )). For example, in our murder mysteries, the only question is “who is the
murderer?” and F contains ground-truth information about each suspect (John is the murderer,
John has an opportunity). Information for each domain is in Section 4, with facts shown in Figure 2.
More formally, F is a structured object with the requirement that there exists some program Φ
such that Φ(F, qi ) = ai for all i. F can also be represented in natural language through templated
expansion. Our questions q and answers a are templated. At this stage, we also generate additional
facts G to increase diversity and help expand the story later. This is done by sampling from curated
lists or by sampling from LLMs (e.g., when a coherent set of objects needs to be generated for object
placement). These facts differ from those in F in that they are not templated but instead actual facts
that must be included in the narrative. The output of this stage is a tuple (F, G) which contains the
core facts used to answer the question and a set of diversity facts used to give each question unique
storylines.


                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   R EASONING T REE C OMPLETION

Once the collection of facts F has been constructed, we produce reasoning trees for each individual
fact, fi , in the set F . A reasoning tree T = (s, T1 , . . . , Tm ) is a recursive data structure representing
a statement s supported by a collection of other statements: it must be the case that s is logically
entailed by sT1 , . . . , sTm . The root of each tree is a fact sT1 = fi where fi ∈ F . We include the facts
from G while prompting the language model so that the generated facts include diverse information
and ultimately help create interesting stories in the later stages.
These trees are automatically produced from root facts fi via recursively sampling from an LLM, in
our case GPT-4. This process is shown in Algorithm 1 in Appendix G.1. We repeat this process to
a specified depth, ultimately producing a set of leaf facts that deductively yield the original fact fi
but require multi-step reasoning to do so. These facts are divided into two types: scenario-specific
facts, which must be included in the ultimate narrative, and commonsense facts, which will not be
stated but should be facts that most people would agree are true. We denote these sets of scenario
facts and commonsense facts by S(T ) and C(T ), respectively, as shown in Figure 2.
Our generation process involves controlling the depth and shape of trees generated. We also want
to ensure that there are no vacuous transitions in our trees (e.g., the fact fi being explicitly stated
in a leaf node) or reasoning “shortcuts.” To ensure this, we use a collection of tree validators,
V = (v1 , . . . , vk ), per domain. These are often simple keyword lookups that prevent the keywords
from appearing in the deduction, for example, preventing “motive” from appearing in a lower-level
deduction in the murder mystery domain so that the reader is forced to deduce a motive. For more
details on validators for each domain, see Appendix G.
At each step in the tree, for a node with text s we sample T1 , . . . , Tm ∼ PromptLM(T1 , . . . , Tm |
s). We then filter this output against the validators V . We retry this prompt up to three times, and if
we are not able to draw a valid sample, prune the branch of the reasoning tree, making the current
deduction a leaf node. We repeat this process until the tree is at the target depth. Figure 2 shows an
example of the resulting trees.

3.3   S TORY G ENERATION

In the last stage, we use the scenario-specific leaf facts S(T ) from the reasoning tree. Our goal is to
generate a narrative by sampling x̂ ∼ Prompt(x | S(T )) from an LLM with an appropriate prompt.
However, for a long and complex narrative, S(T ) is not always reflected accurately in x; some facts
may be dropped as the model produces more of a summary of the situation, for example.
To address this, we instead divide S(T ) into chunks relating to a specific answer choice (e.g., the
information related to a specific possible murderer). We can then use this subset to prompt GPT4
for a “chapter” with a smaller list of facts. Once every chapter has been created, we concatenate all
the chapters together into one narrative. Some domains use additional prompts to “smooth” the final
narrative when necessary. Because our narratives do not need to be produced by one LLM call, they
can scale to be over 1000 words (in this dataset) and theoretically to be even longer. We refer this
process as chaptering; the overall process is broadly inspired by Yang et al. (2022).

4     M U SR D OMAINS
4.1   M URDER M YSTERIES : S OCIAL AND P HYSICAL D EDUCTIVE R EASONING

Murder mysteries are a classic domain requiring a variety of reasoning types. They have been ex-
plored in the context of LLM reasoning before (Frermann et al., 2018; Del & Fishel, 2022); however,
ours is the first work to approach the scale of human-written murder mysteries with synthetic chal-
lenge data. Murder mysteries elicit physical and social reasoning in the fact sets S(T ) and C(T ).
Specifically, unique and complex social scenarios arise naturally in murder mysteries that lead to
motives for murder and can require understanding social norms. Solving a murder mystery also
requires temporal reasoning about a person having an opportunity to commit the crime.
In this domain, Φ(F, qi ) is defined as an algorithm that can find the suspect with three facts in F .
Specifically, the murderer and answer ai is the suspect with the facts “x has a means”, “x has a
motive”, and “x has an opportunity”. To construct F such that Φ(F, qi ) will produce the correct


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


answer ai , we create two suspects and randomly assign one as the murderer. We then populate the
set F with the three facts proving a means, motive, and opportunity. For the innocent suspect, we
randomly chose two of the facts used to prove guilt, then add these and one additional “suspicious
fact” to the set F , creating a set that does not establish guilt. A suspicious fact has no impact on
Φ(F, qi ) and should not add any additional information relevant to the murder; for example, “x is
affiliated with a gang, and this is suspicious”.
In total, F is composed of three facts per suspect that are passed to the reasoning tree creation stage.
The reasoning tree will expand upon the descriptions for these facts, G, such as the fact that someone
could have had an opportunity to murder a victim in their study by having a key to the study, which
can be recursively expanded to describe why they had a key to the study. More details about the
construction can be found in Appendix G.2.

4.2   O BJECT P LACEMENTS : O BSERVATIONAL AND T HEORY O F M IND R EASONING

Inspired by theory-of-mind datasets (Le et al., 2019; Gandhi et al., 2023) we chose a domain that
focuses on a group of people moving items around to different locations. Other people in the story
either see each item move or not for various reasons. The reader is then asked where a person would
look for an item if asked to search for it, where the last move they saw is the most likely place
they’d begin to search. Because of this, Object Placements requires spatial and physical reasoning
as well as reasoning about people’s awareness in S(T ) and C(T ). The reader is tested further by
having to determine the observations of a specific person, modeling their belief state of where an
item is. Notably, our dataset features longer narratives and more sophisticated scenarios than past
theory-of-mind datasets.
In this domain, qi asks where a person believes an item to be in the story. The answer, ai , is then
the last location the person saw the item move in the story, or where the item was originally if they
never saw the item move. Φ(F, qi ) is backed by a set of sequential moves F , where each move
is a collection of observations denoting whether each person in the story saw the move or not. A
move is denoted as a fact “P moves I to L” where P is a person, I is an item, and L is a location,
respectively. For every move, each person other than the one moving the item is given a chance c
(set to 0.33 for our experiments) to see the move, which will add either “P ′ saw I move to L.” or
“P ′ did not see I move to L.” to F .
The reasoning trees then focus on explaining why someone may or may not have observed a move.
This integrates commonsense reasoning: for example, a barista was busy doing latte art for a cus-
tomer and didn’t observe the manager moving an item from the fridge to the storage room. More
details can be found in Appendix G.3.

4.3   T EAM A LLOCATION : S OCIAL AND C ONSTRAINT R EASONING

Team Allocation takes inspiration from assignment and MAX-SAT problems (Pan et al., 2023). In
this domain, the reader must determine the most optimal assignment of people to tasks where each
person can be assigned to one task. Because there are three people and two tasks, two people must
work together, adding a social dynamic to the assignment. S(T ) and C(T ) often involve inferring
about past experiences and personal preferences of an individual as to why they do or do not perform
a skill well. They also include reasoning over the strength of a relationship between two people in a
workplace setting, which requires social reasoning.
F represents these relations through numeric scores corresponding to each person’s skill for a
task and numerical teamwork score. Specifically, three people are each assigned score values
for task capabilities (0, 1, or 2) and for their pairwise relationships. To solve a Team Alloca-
tion question, Φ(F, qi ) can enumerate the assignments adding the skill level and teamwork scores
as a score for the overall assignment and then take the assignment that maximizes this score,
ai = Φ(F, qi ) = maxai ∈A skill(ai ) + teamwork(ai ). We found that using a small number of
values for skills translated well into soft natural language statements where the decision of human
annotators respects the hard underlying reasoning process. We further enforce that the optimal as-
signment outperforms all other assignments by a score of at least 2.
The reasoning tree then describes factors that contribute to these skills and relationships. More
details can be found in Appendix G.4.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   DATASET VALIDATION

We generate our three datasets comprising MuSR using GPT-4 following the procedure outlined
in the previous sections. See Appendix C for a discussion of using models other than GPT-4. Ta-
ble 2 describes the statistics of our generated datasets. We provide examples from each dataset in
Appendix F.
We do not aim to formally evaluate Table 2: Dataset statistics for MuSR, including the num-
fluency or coherence of our gener- ber of instances, number of steps, number of commonsense
ated stories. GPT-4 generates sto- facts, and performance of a rule-based system on the do-
ries that are, based on our inspec- main.
tion, very strong according to these
                                                           Size # Steps # CS Rule-based
attributes. We also do not evaluate in-
trinsic “sensibility” of commonsense,    Murder Mystery    250     10        9       50.0
which we also found to be very high;    Object Placements 256      11        6       35.9
we opt instead to evaluate this in an   Team  Allocations  250     10        9          -
end-to-end fashion based on whether humans can correctly reason about the right answer.

Rule-based Performance Table 2 also shows the performance of two rule-based systems we de-
veloped to sanity-check our datasets. The Murder Mystery rule baseline looks for which suspect has
the longest chapter in the context. Object Placements looks for the location that is mentioned the
most. We find that each of these is near random chance (reported in Table 5).

Human performance To validate that the answers derived from F actually match what can be
derived from our narratives, we conducted a human evaluation of dataset quality. A total of 7
annotators were used, 4 of whom were authors of the paper and 3 of whom were hired undergraduate
students not familiar with the datasets. Annotators were given the exact “chain-of-thought+” prompt
that we evaluated the LLMs with, described in the next section.
We triply-annotated between 34 in- Table 3: A granular view of the human annotation scores
stances for Murder Mystery and for each domain including the lowest score, highest score,
Team Allocation and 40 instances for average score, and the majority vote score. No model or
Object Placements. Table 3 displays prompt variant scores higher than any of our annotators.
the annotators’ scores broken down
                                                                Lowest Highest Average Majority
by the lowest, highest, and average
scores for each annotator; the average       Murder Mystery      88.2     94.1      92.1        94.1
is based on all (instance, annotator) Object Placements          85.0     95.0      90.0        95.0
pairs, over 100 for each domain. Our        Team  Allocations    91.1    100.0      95.1       100.0
best annotator across all domains was
one of the undergraduate students not familiar with the dataset construction procedure. We also dis-
play the majority annotation. Crucially, the majority is higher than the average annotator, showing
that many annotator errors are simply due to inattentiveness and our panel of three annotators is able
to collectively arrive at the right answer via voting. Overall, we believe this majority is reflective of
the ceiling for human performance on these datasets, demonstrating that it is very high.

Ablating our creation process Finally, we aim to establish that the procedure we have presented
so far in this paper is in fact necessary to produce high-quality data. Table 4 shows a set of ablations
on our construction procedure on 25 examples per domain, measured with several metrics. First,
we track the length (Len) and diversity (Div) of the context, measured by self-BLEU of a sentence
from one narrative compared with all other narratives. We also compute Fact Recall (R), which is a
percentage of the number of facts entailed in the context from the gold reasoning trees leaf nodes,
using GPT-4 to check for entailment of each fact. Finally, we evaluate GPT-4’s performance. Al-
though our goal is to make a challenging dataset, in the context of this table, low GPT-4 performance
usually means that the examples are ambiguous or unsolvable.
Basic prompting for any domain yields extremely short stories (often ten sentences in length). They
are also usually very similar. The GPT-4 performance is quite low; anecdotally, we found these
stories to have spurious solutions. Using diversity sampling to improve the reasoning gives a better


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 4: Variations of our dataset creation process. We compare against a simple one-shot prompting
approach and an approach using seed facts G to add diversity, which produce simple and poor-
quality narratives. We then ablate chaptering and tree validators, showing that these lower length,
fact recall in the narrative, and accuracy; the latter usually indicates inconsistent narratives.
                                Murder Mysteries          Object Placements       Team Allocation
          Ablation            Len   Div    R   Acc Len        Div   R    Acc Len     Div   R      Acc
         Prompt Only          280 0.30     -    76       200 0.26    -   64   172 0.34      -     80
      Diversity Sampling      422 0.25     -    60       404 0.24    -   39   448 0.26      -     84
 MuSR − chapt − validators    428 0.24 67       60       380 0.27 83     78    -    -   -          -
    MuSR − validators         924 0.24 93       60       793 0.25 82     65    -    -   -          -
         MuSR                 900 0.25 95       84       777 0.25 87     58   503 0.25 81         68



set of reasoning examples including a minor boost in length, but again, the problems are not always
solvable, nor are the solutions always consistent with the underlying ground truth.
When we introduce reasoning trees (the three MuSR variants), we can see GPT-4’s performance still
remains low. This is because prompting GPT-4 to generate a story from all the facts often leads to
shorter stories and can elide facts: only 62% of the facts from the original reasoning trees are entailed
in the resulting story for murder mysteries. By introducing “chaptering,” we can see that fact recall
increases and the story length nearly doubles in size while maintaining high diversity. Finally, the
added tree validators to ensure the reasoning tree is constructed according to a set of rules (like not
mentioning key items in deductions) fact recall increases slightly and GPT-4’s performance increases
substantially for Murder Mystery. Team Allocation did not require chaptering or validators to create
good examples and thus has no ablations for these components.

5.2    B ENCHMARKING WITH M U SR

We now evaluate a series of LLMs (Brown et al.,               Table 5: Scores for LLMs on each domain
2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al.; Chiang et al.,            in MuSR as well as the human evaluation
2023) with multiple prompting strategies. Specifically,       using the C OT+ strategy.
we compare single-shot prompting, chain-of-thought
(Wei et al., 2022, CoT), and a variant of chain-of-                                MM      OP          TA
thought we call “CoT+”. CoT+ uses an engineered                     random         50.0    24.6     33.3
textual description of the domain’s reasoning strategy               GPT-4         80.4    60.9     68.4
described in Section 3. Prompts for CoT+ can be seen                GPT-3.5        61.6    46.9     40.4
in Appendix I.1 Finally, we test multiple neurosym-             Llama2 70b Chat    48.8    42.2     44.8
bolic algorithms on domains that best match the set-            Llama2 7b Chat     50.8    29.3     36.8
tings those algorithms were designed for.                        Vicuna 7b v1.5    48.4    29.7     26.4
                                                                Vicuna 13b v1.5    50.8    34.4     32.0
Zero-shot results on LLMs We first focus on the                 Vicuna 33b v1.3    49.6    31.2     30.0
ability of large language models to solve this dataset        Human Eval       94.1        95.0     100.0
zero-shot, given only the prompt. We constructed the
dataset with this scenario in mind, but also evaluate a 1-shot prompt in Table 7.
Table 5 shows results over our LLMs with the CoT+ prompt as well as human performance. Llama
2 and Vicuna-based language models are able to get above chance for each domain but only slightly.
Although these models are often compared to GPT variants, they are unable to surpass GPT-3.5 on
two out of the three domains, with Team Allocation being the only one where the Vicuna models
outperform slightly. GPT-4 performs the best out of all the models we tested, but still underperforms
compared to humans. Although GPT-4 was instrumental in creating this dataset, it does not have
the reasoning capabilities to solve it end-to-end. A small qualitative analysis of some of the error
classes exhibited by the GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4 are discussed in Appendix D.

Results on Prompt Variants Table 7 shows GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, the two models that did best on
MuSR, evaluated with different prompting strategies. Overall, the best performance is seen when the
model is given a single-shot example with the “1-shot CoT+” or “Few-shot CoT+” prompt variants.
However, adding more examples is not always better. Despite significant jumps in performance on
some domains, the models still underperform compared to the human majority.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 7: Evaluations of different popular prompting strategies for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, our strongest
models. “Regular” supplies only the context and question. “CoT” asks the model to think step-by-
step. “CoT+” includes a textual description of the reasoning strategy, and “1-Shot CoT+” includes
a solved example. “Few-Shot CoT+” extends “1-Shot CoT+” with 3 examples (3 examples hits the
token limit for GPT-4)
                                 Murder Mystery      Object Placements    Team Allocation
                                GPT-3.5    GPT-4     GPT-3.5    GPT-4    GPT-3.5    GPT-4
                Regular           59.2      64.8        44.5     43.0      41.2      64.0
                  CoT             56.0      65.6        48.4     41.8      46.4      64.4
                 CoT+             61.6      80.4        46.9     60.9      40.4      68.4
              1-Shot CoT+         70.0      86.0        56.2     72.3      50.4      88.4
             Few-Shot CoT+        68.4      84.8        58.2     71.5      78.8      89.6



Results on Neurosymbolic Approaches We believe                  Table 6: Scores for a selection of rea-
that this dataset is an ideal testbed for different neurosym-   soning systems on the domain that best
bolic approaches. Besides basic chain-of-thought, we are        fit their capabilities.
not aware of a single approach that naturally handles all                  Murder mysteries
the reasoning types in our dataset and scales to exam-
                                                                 GPT-4 CoT+                     80.4
ples of the difficulty we present. As a result, we present
                                                                 Decomposed Prompting           77.6
three different methods in Table 6 each tailored to one          Decomposed Prompting 1-Shot    86.0
domain and evaluated in that domain. We describe these
approaches here and in Appendix E                                         Object Placements

In the Murder Mystery domain, we implement a variation           GPT-4 CoT+                     60.9
                                                                 SymbolicTOM                    23.8
of Decomposed Prompting (Khot et al., 2023) by manu-
ally imposing the breakdown of motive, means, and op-                Team Allocation
portunity and prompt GPT-4 to decide on each suspect        GPT-4 CoT+                          68.4
for each fact. We then decide the murderer based on who     PAL                                 77.2
has the most facts proving guilt, with random selection     PAL 1-Shot                          87.2
in case of ties. Despite aligning well with the reasoning
strategy, the accuracy is lower than prompting GPT-4 end-to-end.
Next we used SymbolicTOM (Sclar et al., 2023) on the Object Placements domain with minor
adjustments. Specifically, we use GPT-3.5 to produce the resulting state of a sentence that is then
used in the graph creation algorithm. The low accuracy of SymbolicTOM is mostly attributed to
selecting key entities from sentences that are not as templated as the original dataset (Le et al.,
2019). Because the contexts are more natural, entities’ actions and observations can span multiple
paragraphs rather than be isolated in one sentence. This introduces a new level of complexity for
these neurosymbolic methods, and past approaches on ToM cannot generalize here.
Finally, we run a variant of Program-Aided Language Models (Gao et al., 2022) on the Team Allo-
cation domain. From the story, PAL must deduce numerical values for the skill and teamwork levels
of each person and pair. Once this is done, we give it a description of the reasoning strategy for Team
Allocation, which it implements in a program and solves returning the assignment with the highest
score. We find that this solution pairs quite well with the domain, outperforming the end-to-end
models on both zero and single-shot settings, but falling short of aggregate human performance.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced Multistep Soft Reasoning (MuSR) a reasoning dataset written with
natural narratives presenting complex reasoning scenarios involving various reasoning strategies.
We presented a neurosymbolic dataset generation method for constructing instances of our dataset,
which can be scaled in complexity as more powerful models emerge. Human evaluation and other
intrinsic validations shows that the construction method is sound for sufficiently large models. Our
results show that LLMs are currently unable to match human performance on specific types of rea-
soning like multi-step and commonsense in our three domains. This dataset presents a challenge for
both the largest and smaller language models: we believe it can serve as (1) a benchmark for LLMs;
(2) a benchmark for general neurosymbolic approaches over language; (3) a general construction
procedure for generating challenging datasets as models improve.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY OF M U SR

To aid in reproducing the datasets for each domain in MuSR, we’ve included high-level details of
the construction procedure in Sections 3 and 4. We further detail each domain’s reasoning strategy
and algorithms as well as give the prompts verbatim for all parts of the construction procedure in
Appendix G. Implementation details, including hyperparameters and model design choices, can be
found in Appendix H. For our neurosymoblic evaluations, we provide relevant details on their im-
plementations in Section 5.2 and with further detail in Appendix E. Finally, all data will be publicly
available, including the code used to generate and evaluate the dataset in future versions of this
paper.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by NSF CAREER Award IIS-2145280, a grant from Open Philanthropy,
and by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML). This material is also
based on research that is in part supported by the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), DARPA,
for the KAIROS program under agreement number FA8750-19-2-1003. Thanks to Kathryn Kazanas
and Keziah Reina for providing human judgments on MuSR. Thanks to Juan Diego Rodriguez and
members of the UT TAUR lab for helpful discussion and feedback.

R EFERENCES
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. PIQA: Reasoning
  about Physical Commonsense in Natural Language. In Proceedings of the Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (AAAI), 2020.
Kaj Bostrom, Zayne Sprague, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Greg Durrett. Natural language deduction
  through search over statement compositions. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 4871–4883, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.358. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.358.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An Open-Source Chatbot Impressing GPT-4 with 90%* ChatGPT Quality, March 2023. URL
 https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson. Transformers as soft reasoners over lan-
  guage. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211126663.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large
  language models for interpretable logical reasoning. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  3Pf3Wg6o-A4.
Bhavana Dalvi, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Zhengnan Xie, Hannah Smith, Leighanna Pi-
  patanangkura, and Peter Clark. Explaining answers with entailment trees. EMNLP, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maksym Del and Mark Fishel. True Detective: A Deep Abductive Reasoning Benchmark Un-
 doable for GPT-3 and Challenging for GPT-4. In STARSEM, 2022. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259064331.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Sam Shleifer, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 8-bit optimizers via block-wise
  quantization. 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2022.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter
  West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D. Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Sean Welleck,
  Xiang Ren, Allyson Ettinger, Zaid Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. Faith and Fate: Limits of Trans-
  formers on Compositionality. arXiv eprint 2305.18654, 2023.
Lea Frermann, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Whodunnit? crime drama as a case for natural
  language understanding. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:1–15,
  2018. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00001. URL https://aclanthology.org/Q18-1001.
Kanishk Gandhi, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Gerstenberg, and Noah D Goodman. Understanding
  social reasoning in language models with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15448,
  2023.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. PAL: Program-aided Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10435, 2022.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did Aristotle
 use a laptop? A question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–361, February 2021. ISSN 2307-387X.
 doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00370.
Ruixin Hong, Hongming Zhang, Xintong Yu, and Changshui Zhang. METGEN: A module-based
  entailment tree generation framework for answer explanation. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pp. 1887–1905, Seattle, United States, July 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.145. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-naacl.145.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
  Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bres-
  sand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, L’elio Renard Lavaud, Lucile
  Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon An-
  toniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
  and William El Sayed. Mixtral of experts. ArXiv, abs/2401.04088, 2024. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266844877.
Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
  and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations.
  In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pp. 1266–1279, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.82. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.emnlp-main.82.
Mehran Kazemi, Najoung Kim, Deepti Bhatia, Xin Xu, and Deepak Ramachandran. LAM-
 BADA: Backward chaining for automated reasoning in natural language. In Proceedings of
 the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
 Papers), pp. 6547–6568, Toronto, Canada, July 2023a. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.361. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
 acl-long.361.
Mehran Kazemi, Quan Yuan, Deepti Bhatia, Najoung Kim, Xin Xu, Vaiva Imbrasaite, and Deepak
 Ramachandran. BoardgameQA: A Dataset for Natural Language Reasoning with Contradictory
 Information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07934, 2023b.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and
  Ashish Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=_nGgzQjzaRy.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind
 through question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
 ural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
 cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 5872–5877, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for
 Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1598. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/D19-1598.
Qing Lyu, Shreya Havaldar, Adam Stein, Li Zhang, Delip Rao, Eric Wong, Marianna Apidianaki,
  and Chris Callison-Burch. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13379,
  2023.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.             URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.
Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang.     Logic-LM: Em-
  powering Large Language Models with Symbolic Solvers for Faithful Logical Reason-
  ing. ArXiv, abs/2305.12295, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:258833332.
Gabriel Poesia, Kanishk Gandhi, E. Zelikman, and Noah D. Goodman. Certified Reasoning with
  Language Models. ArXiv, abs/2306.04031, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:259095869.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social IQa: Com-
 monsense reasoning about social interactions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-
 pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
 Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4463–4473, Hong Kong, China, Novem-
 ber 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1454. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/D19-1454.
Abulhair Saparov and He He. Language models are greedy reasoners: A systematic formal analysis
  of chain-of-thought. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qFVVBzXxR2V.
Abulhair Saparov, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Vishakh Padmakumar, Nitish Joshi, Seyed Mehran
  Kazemi, Najoung Kim, and He He. Testing the general deductive reasoning capacity of large
  language models using OOD examples. CoRR, abs/2305.15269, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
  2305.15269. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.15269.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. 2023.
Melanie Sclar, Sachin Kumar, Peter West, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Minding
 language models’ (lack of) theory of mind: A plug-and-play multi-character belief tracker. In
 Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
 1: Long Papers), pp. 13960–13980, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
 Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.780. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 2023.acl-long.780.
Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle Pineau, and William L. Hamilton. CLUTRR:
  A Diagnostic Benchmark for Inductive Reasoning from Text. Empirical Methods of Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), 2019.
Zayne Sprague, Kaj Bostrom, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Greg Durrett. Natural language deduction
  with incomplete information. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 8230–8258, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.564. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.564.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
  tion answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1421. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1421.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yoav Goldberg, Yejin Choi, and
  Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA 2.0: Exposing the limits of AI through gamification. In
  Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qF7FlUT5dxa.
Xiaojuan Tang, Zilong Zheng, Jiaqi Li, Fanxu Meng, Song-Chun Zhu, Yitao Liang, and Muhan
  Zhang. Large Language Models are In-Context Semantic Reasoners rather than Symbolic Rea-
  soners. arXiv eprint 2305.14825, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMA: open and
  efficient foundation language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2302.13971.
Karthik Valmeekam, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Large Lan-
  guage Models Still Can’t Plan (A Benchmark for LLMs on Planning and Reasoning about
  Change). In Proceedings of the NeurIPS workshop on Foundation Models for Decision Mak-
  ing, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Tomás Mikolov. Towards AI-Complete Question
  Answering: A Set of Prerequisite Toy Tasks. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May
  2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.
  05698.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
  ral Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Tianci Xue, Ziqi Wang, Zhenhailong Wang, Chi Han, Pengfei Yu, and Heng Ji. RCOT: Detect-
  ing and Rectifying Factual Inconsistency in Reasoning by Reversing Chain-of-Thought. ArXiv,
  abs/2305.11499, 2023.
Kevin Yang, Yuandong Tian, Nanyun Peng, and Dan Klein. Re3: Generating longer stories with
  recursive reprompting and revision. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  4393–4479, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.296. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.emnlp-main.296.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023.
Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The Unreliability of Explanations in Few-shot Prompting for Textual
  Reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xi Ye, Qiaochu Chen, Isil Dillig, and Greg Durrett. Satisfiability-aided language models using
  declarative prompting. In Proceedings of NeurIPS, 2023.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13534, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M U SR L IMITATIONS

A.1   T REE C ONSTRUCTION

Although our method can create reasoning trees of varying depths, we found that shallower trees
(of depth one or two) provide the best level of detail for creating a narrative. GPT-4 often failed to
create complex enough facts that could be broken down recursively to a larger depth. We believe
that prompting and better LLMs may increase the depth of acceptable deductions and is an important
area of future work for our method.


A.2   H UMAN E VALUATION

We experimented with validation on Amazon Mechanical Turk, but found that many workers per-
formed very badly in qualification rounds. When we collected justifications to try to improve the
quality of their judgments, we found many justifications which we suspected were written by Chat-
GPT.


B     DATASET F EATURES E XPLAINED

In this section, we elaborate on the features employed to evaluate the datasets as illustrated in Ta-
ble 1.

Natural Text: This denotes datasets containing organically constructed text, not created by tem-
plates. For instance, bAbI generates text by filling in predefined templates. True Detective is human-
authored. Datasets like EntailmentBank and ENWN, while incorporating natural text, present them
in specialized “premises” rather than contexts, hence the notation ∼. SocialIQA uses ATOMIC to
create templates for the questions, and while it aims to test commonsense reasoning in social situa-
tions, the questions and answers might not always reflect natural English. MuSR produces natural
contexts with language prompted from an LLM without any templating.

Commonsense: Refers to datasets that require commonsense knowledge to answer questions. En-
tailmentBank and RuleTakers supply all the necessary facts to answer a question in the input, re-
quiring no commonsense. BigTOM is harder to classify as nearly all the facts required to answer the
question are given, but understanding what it means for someone to have a “belief” could require
non-trivial commonsense from the reader. MuSR intentionally omits certain commonsense facts
during its construction, compelling users to draw on their inherent knowledge for problem-solving.

Multistep: Denotes datasets requiring a layered reasoning approach to deduce answers. Each
reasoning layer involves merging multiple premises to generate interim conclusions, which then
contribute to the final inference. SocialIQA is not designed to require such intermediate conclusions.
In contrast, MuSR, through its design, compels users to recreate the reasoning tree used in the
questions creation (or something similar to it) for comprehensive understanding.

Intermediate Structures: This captures datasets with underlying structure (chains of facts, etc.)
that can potentially assist in deducing answers. True Detective was written by humans and thus
lacks an intermediate structure. MuSR has the reasoning trees used to create each example given for
every question.

Not solvable with rules: This category represents datasets resilient to systematic, rule-based so-
lutions without the need for a language model. Datasets like Babi and ToMi, given their textual tem-
plates, may reveal patterns that can be reverse-engineered to facilitate solutions. Contrarily, datasets
such as MuSR, True Detective, and SocialIQA lack easily identifiable patterns, safeguarding them
against oversimplified, template-based resolutions.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Results of prompting LLMs to solve the 50 murder mysteries created by GPT-3.5-turbo.
The 1-shot example was taken from a murder mystery example created by GPT-4 and solved by a
human annotator.
                                                        Murder Mystery
                                                       GPT-3.5     GPT-4
                                          CoT+             62.0     80.0
                                       1-Shot CoT+         64.0     76.0


C      C REATING M U SR WITH OTHER M ODELS
Quality MuSR examples require a language model that can follow prompt instructions. A model
with more limited reasoning ability may not be able to perform the subtasks needed to construct
MuSR examples adequately. We highlight this by exploring GPT-3.5-turbo, Llama2-70B-Chat (Tou-
vron et al.), and Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024) to create MuSR examples.
For weaker models to create examples approaching the quality of GPT-4, we had to minorly edit the
prompts, introduce more detailed self-refine prompts, increase the temperature iteratively per retry,
and increase the total number of retries.
We created 50 murder mysteries using GPT-3.5-turbo. The results of the CoT+ and 1-Shot CoT+
systems running on these are shown in Table 8. The overall performance of LLMs on them is similar
to our main MuSR dataset.
Despite being able to use the same workflow as GPT-4 and producing some examples of high quality,
many still include major flaws in the reasoning tree that do not stand up to our inspection. For
example, some exhibit common reasoning errors seen in smaller language models like hallucination.
Examples of invalid deductions from GPT-3.5-turbo that were erroneously considered “valid” in the
workflow are shown in Listing 1.
                        Listing 1: Murder Mystery Logic Tree from GPT-3.5-turbo
Penelope is a chemist. | Deduced Fact

      Penelope has studied toxicology. | Fact From Story

      Penelope has a background in chemistry. | Fact From Story

      If someone has a background in chemistry and has studied toxicology, they have knowledge of toxic gases
       and their effects, providing them with the means to create and use poisonous gas as a murder weapon. |
      Commonsense Knowledge

...

Tessa and Melody were alone in the kitchen at the time of the murder. | Deduced Fact

      Tessa had a life insurance policy worth a significant amount of money. | Fact From Story

      Melody is a police officer. | Fact From Story

      When someone is alone with a victim and the victim has a life insurance policy, it provides an
      opportunity for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge

Llama2-70B-Chat and Mixtral were incapable of following the prompt instructions and could not
complete the deductions required to create MuSR examples at all, despite significant edits to the
format of the construction prompts to match their expected formats. Two examples of Llama2-70B-
Chat failing to understand the prompt and produce a deduction are shown in Listing 2
           Listing 2: Llama2-70b-Chat failure outputs for creating reasoning tree deductions
Please provide the next two explicit facts to continue the deduction.



                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


...

has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > Penelope wants to protect a secret. | Fact From Story
> > Protecting a secret can be a strong motive for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Penelope has an opportunity. | Deduced Fact
> > Penelope was in the victim’s home. | Fact From Story
> > Being in the victim’s home provides an opportunity to release the poisonous gas, which could lead to the
victim’s death. | Commonsense Knowledge

Deduction to complete:
Penelope has a means.
>?
>?
> Commonsense Knowledge

While further prompt engineering or using stronger models for validation (as opposed to generation)
could lead to more effective generation for these smaller models, we believe that using the strongest
LLMs is the best practice for creating a dataset like this.

D     Q UALITATIVE E RROR A NALYSIS
Five examples from each domain were selected and used to generate chains-of-thought from GPT-4
and GPT-3.5-turbo. Each of those chains-of-thought were then examined by hand and annotated for
errors. Below are the major categories of errors we saw in the GPT models when solving MuSR
problems.

Pre-committing to an answer: A large portion of the answers suffer from giving an answer before
the reasoning, which biases the subsequent reasoning. A more subtle error but still frequent in the
responses is “silently” pre-committing to an answer where the model will produce only relevant
evidence for one answer and not the other, leaving out important and relevant facts that should be
included.

Ignoring instructions: Many responses included reasoning and logic that went against the prompt
details, i.e., selecting a murderer on a strong motive solely because the strength of that motive rather
than the definition of a murderer being someone with a motive, means, and opportunity. Team
allocation also has multiple examples of the model asserting that two people can work together
despite being assigned to different jobs, contradicting the prompt.

Hallucination and invalid logic: Hallucinations appear in various ways within the chains of
thought, including assumptions of characters’ locations or actions as well as confusing pronouns
and entity relations, i.e., confusing what one person did with another person. Furthermore, invalid
claims or reasoning, i.e., stating unsound deductions or stating deductions with no evidence, are
frequent as well. A few times these hallucinations and invalid claims would lead the model to con-
tradict their previous logic resulting in contradicting answers that did not align with the reasoning
trace.

E     S TRUCTURED BASELINE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
E.1   D ECOMPOSED P ROMPTING

We test Decomposed Prompting (Khot et al., 2023) on the Murder Mystery domain. As each murder
mystery can be solved using the same high-level logical procedure (determining which suspect has
or is most likely to have a means, motive, and opportunity), we omit the Decomposer Prompt stage,
and use a fixed set of three sub-task prompts, each of which are specialized to identify one of means,
motive, or opportunity. The results of these sub-task prompts are then aggregated to determine the
system’s overall answer; in the event that both suspects are predicted to satisfy the same number of
criteria, the system guesses at random between them.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2    S YMBOLIC TOM

We test SymbolicTOM (Sclar et al., 2023) on the Object Placements domain. We use the model as
implemented by the authors with two changes. First, the resulting states that are used in creating the
graph are not precomputed and are instead queried on-the-fly using GPT-3.5. Second, if the model
abstains from answering, we randomly sample one of the answer choices. The data format originally
intended for SymbolicTOM was the format for ToMI (Le et al., 2019); however, our data is easily
translated into the format for SymbolicTOM through simple manipulation.

E.3    PAL

We test program-aided language models (Gao et al., 2022) on the Team Allocation domain. Given a
question, we first prompt LLMs to generate a Python program, and then execute the program using
the Python interpreter to obtain the final answer. We test PAL in both zero-shot setting and one-shot
settings.
For the zero-shot setting, we provide detailed instructions on how the program should be organized
for solving a question. As shown in Listing 32, the prompt asks for a program containing three
steps: (1) assign a value to the variables representing each person’s skill level on one of the two
tasks; (2) assign a value to the variables representing how well two people work together, and (3)
compute the scores for each of the options by adding up the scores for each person’s skill level
and the teamwork score. For the one-shot setting, we provide one demonstration of the question-
program pair in addition to the detailed instructions, which leads to better performance compared to
the zero-shot setting.


F     DATASET E XAMPLES

F.1   M URDER M YSTERIES


                                  Listing 3: Murder Mystery Example 1
In an adrenaline inducing bungee jumping site, Mack’s thrill−seeking adventure came to a gruesome end by a
 nunchaku; now, it’s up to Detective Winston to unravel the deadly secrets between Mackenzie and Ana.

Winston took a gulp of his black coffee, staring at the notes sprawled across his desk. A murder case at a
bungee jumping site was definitely out of the ordinary. Today’s victim was a young man named Mack, loud
mouthed and cocky by all accounts.

Mack was bungee jumping the day he was killed. Oddly enough, according to the records, no one else was
documented at the bungee jumping site that day, making this case even more peculiar. The first stop for the
day was to visit one of Mack’s housemates, a woman named Ana. They were seen leaving in the same vehicle
from their shared housing complex the morning of the murder, and it was time for Winston to dig deeper.

As he pulled into the shared housing driveway, a nondescript car came into sight. He learned from
neighbours that it was frequently used by multiple residents, but Ana had a peculiar interest in it. She would
insist on driving whenever with a group of friends, later meticulously cleaning the car after each use. An
idiosyncrasy of hers maybe, but a part of the puzzle nonetheless.

Winston knocked on the door, Ana opened it warily, twiddling a cleaning cloth and spray in her hands and
greeted him with a nervous nod. Ana gets nervous and fidgets with the cleaner and cloth when questioned.
Winston could sense palpable unease as he started asking her questions.

”Ana, did you not join Mack and the others for bungee jumping today?” Winston questioned, to which she
responded, ”I signed up to jump. But I didn’t end up going through with it.”

”Any particular reason you didn’t join the others, Ana?” Winston proceeded.

Ana took a deep breath, ”Well sir, my faith doesn’t really permit bungee jumping. Truth be told, I was
persuaded strongly by Mack. I had even signed up out of peer pressure but couldn’t push myself.”



                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It was true − Mack was insisting that everyone in the group should bungee jump. Mack had reportedly also
been vocal about ridiculing Ana’s faith, even encouraging others to join him in doing so. It was a significant
factor in their relationship.

”Ana, did you and Mack leave in the same car for the bungee jumping event this morning?” Winston gently
pushed further.

”Yes. Yes, we did. We always carpool.” She responded while anxiously using the cleaner and cloth on her car’
s dashboard. Her eyes flickered nervously back to Winston, expecting the next question.

Winston took a deep breath, standing up to leave, ”Alright Ana, that should cover everything for now. We’ll
be in touch.”

Ana nervously nodded without looking up from her cleaning, wringing the cloth repeatedly as Winston walked
away, left again with another piece to the enigmatic puzzle of Mack’s murder.

The day was getting older and Winston was getting more tired, but the case was fresh, and he wasn’t one to
back down. He tugged on his coat as he approached the bashful teen waiting for him by the police station.

”Mackenzie, it is?” he asked, extending his hand.

”Yeah, that’s right.” The slight lisp, overlaid with blanket anxiety, confirmed what the school reports
suggested.

”You were at the site when Mack... erm... you know,” Winston’s voice was methodical, calm −− almost
robotic. The suspicion on Mackenzie was not unfounded − the security cameras showed him buying nunchaku
a week before.

Mackenzie shifted on his feet, looking away before answering, ”Yeah, I was there.”

Winston pulled out a small notebook, ”What were you doing there, Mackenzie?”

”Bungee jumping, like Mack... Then I left. I didn’t... I didn’t do anything...” Mackenzie replied.

Internally, Winston sighed at the never−ending waterfall of teenage angst this case was turning into.

”Martial arts, huh?” Winston segued, gesturing to a bruise on Mackenzie’s knuckles. ”Nunchaku particularly
, I see? Training does include the use of those, correct?”

The change in Mackenzie’s demeanor mirrored the bitterness in the last month’s weather − dark eyes
replaced with ice−cold ones. ”Yeah,” he admitted, shrinking slightly.

Mackenzie always took pride in being the best at everything. So when Mack got everything he wanted − the
promotion to team captain, the respect, the attention − it was a hard pill for Mackenzie to swallow. Winston
remembered the team talk, Mackenzie was indeed the top candidate but it had gone to Mack instead.

What clinched it was Mackenzie’s remarks about Mack, echoing whispers of dispute and bickering, lost in the
crowded lunchroom. There were also multiple witness reports of the two seen arguing at the bungee jumping
site previously. Mackenzie had indeed said disparaging, almost emotional things about Mack − all stemming
from a potent brew of jealousy, Winston inferred.

Shifting later through the detritus of Mackenzie’s life, Winston discovered the nunchaku that matched the
forensics report. They were tucked away, but the layer of dust suggested they weren’t a favored possession
anymore. It wasn’t hidden, it was misplaced − discarded in the throes of developing maturity.

As the sun started to set, Winston could see witnesses, scattered across the park, repeatedly pointing to the
bungee jumping scaffolding. It occurred to him, then, the narrative of the past days. Mackenzie, jealous and
wronged, over and over, at the same sight. It was quite a sight.

Winston, shuffling back to the station, was left with one thought − Looks like Mackenzie had quite an eventful
week.

Who is the most likely murderer?

Pick one of the following choices:


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1 − Mackenzie
2 − Ana

You must pick one option. Before selecting a choice, explain your reasoning step by step. The murderer needs
to have a means (access to weapon), motive (reason to kill the victim), and opportunity (access to crime scene
) in order to have killed the victim. Innocent suspects may have two of these proven, but not all three. An
innocent suspect may be suspicious for some other reason, but they will not have all of motive, means, and
opportunity established.

If you believe that both suspects have motive, means, and opportunity, you should make an educated guess
pick the one for whom these are best established. If you believe that neither suspect has all three established,
then choose the suspect where these are most clearly established. Explain your reasoning step by step before
you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the
choice number)”

                         Listing 4: Murder Mystery Example 1 Reasoning Tree
Mackenzie is the murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Mackenzie has a means. | Deduced Fact
> > Mackenzie is highly skilled with nunchaku. | Deduced Fact
> > > Martial arts training includes nunchaku techniques. | Fact From Story
> > > Mackenzie practices martial arts, including nunchaku. | Fact From Story
> > > A person who practices martial arts, specifically nunchaku, can become highly skilled at using it. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> > Mackenzie owns nunchaku. | Deduced Fact
> > > Nunchaku were found in Mackenzie’s house. | Fact From Story
> > > Mackenzie was seen purchasing nunchaku. | Fact From Story
> > > When a person is seen purchasing a weapon and the same weapon is found in their possession, they
own the weapon. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > If a person owns and is proficient in using nunchaku, they have means to use it as a weapon in a crime. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> Mackenzie has an opportunity. | Deduced Fact
> > Mackenzie had an altercation with Mack at the bungee jumping site in the past. | Deduced Fact
> > > There are witnesses that saw Mackenzie and Mack arguing at the bungee jumping site previously. |
Fact From Story
> > > Mackenzie was seen at the bungee jumping site on the day of the murder. | Fact From Story
> > > Being at the location of a crime when it is committed and having a history of confrontation with the
victim at that location provides the opportunity to commit a crime. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Mackenzie was at the bungee jumping site at the time of the murder. | Deduced Fact
> > > Mackenzie admitted being at the site during the murder. | Fact From Story
> > > Witnesses saw Mackenzie at the site when the murder happened. | Fact From Story
> > > If someone is seen at the scene of a crime when it happens and they admit to it, they were present
during the crime, which provides opportunity. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Someone with a history of altercations at a specific location who is also present at the time of a crime in
that location potentially has the opportunity to commit the crime. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Mackenzie has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > Mack got the promotion that Mackenzie always wanted. | Deduced Fact
> > > The promotion went to Mack instead of Mackenzie. | Fact From Story
> > > Mackenzie was the top candidate for the promotion. | Fact From Story
> > > Losing a much−anticipated promotion to a rival can lead to extreme resentment and provide a motive
for harmful actions. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Mackenzie was jealous of Mack. | Deduced Fact
> > > Mack has things that Mackenzie has always wanted. | Fact From Story
> > > Mackenzie was overheard saying disparaging and jealous things about Mack. | Fact From Story
> > > Extreme jealousy can motivate someone to eliminate what they see as the cause of their unhappiness,
thereby providing a motive for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Intense jealousy can motivate someone to eliminate their rival. | Commonsense Knowledge
Ana is the murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Ana has an opportunity. | Deduced Fact
> > Ana was traveling in the same car as Mack to the bungee jumping site. | Deduced Fact
> > > No one else was documented at the bungee jumping site that day. | Fact From Story
> > > Ana and Mack were seen leaving in the same vehicle from their shared housing complex the morning
of the murder. | Fact From Story
> > > Being the only two people at a location gives you the opportunity to commit a crime there without
witnesses. | Commonsense Knowledge


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> > Ana was also at the bungee jumping site the same day as Mack. | Deduced Fact
> > > Ana had also signed up for bungee jumping that day. | Fact From Story
> > > Mack was bungee jumping the day he was killed. | Fact From Story
> > > Signing up for the same activity at the same location as the victim gives you the opportunity to be at
the crime scene. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Travelling together to the same location gives you the opportunity to commit a crime there. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> Ana has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > Ana frequently argued with Mack over their differing views on religion. | Deduced Fact
> > > Mack was insisting that everyone in the group should bungee jump. | Fact From Story
> > > Ana’s religion forbids bungee jumping. | Fact From Story
> > > A deep commitment to a religious doctrine that considers certain actions immoral or sinful can lead
to strong emotional reactions, including violence, when defiance of that doctrine is insisted upon. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> > Mack was a vocal critic of Ana’s religious beliefs. | Deduced Fact
> > > Mack encouraged others to ridicule Ana’s religious faith. | Fact From Story
> > > Mack repeatedly ridiculed Ana’s religious faith. | Fact From Story
> > > Persistent ridicule and disrespect of one’s closely held beliefs could lead to extreme reactions,
including violence. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Strong religious beliefs can lead to extreme actions, such as harm or murder, when those beliefs are
threatened or disrespected. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Keeps their car obsessively clean. And this is suspicious. | Deduced Fact
> > Ana constantly keeps a bottle of car cleaner and cloth in their pocket. | Deduced Fact
> > > Ana uses the cleaner immediately after anyone else uses the car. | Fact From Story
> > > Ana gets nervous and fidgets with the cleaner and cloth when questioned. | Fact From Story
> > > People who are unusually careful about a specific object often have an emotional or secretive
connection to that object. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Ana cleans the car immediately after every use. | Deduced Fact
> > > Ana insists on driving whenever with a group of friends. | Fact From Story
> > > Ana’s car is used by multiple people very frequently. | Fact From Story
> > > People often clean things used by many individuals to ensure it remains in their control and to remove
 any trace of others. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > People who obsessively clean something usually have something to hide or they are trying to remove
evidence. | Commonsense Knowledge

                                   Listing 5: Murder Mystery Example 2
In the haze of neon lights and the serving of a silent hand of fate, Timothy lies dead in a casino, a sai his cruel
 end, leaving the unruffled Detective Winston to interrogate suspects, Harry and Rosemary.

It had been a long day for Winston. The air was heavy with the scent of fresh coffee and the clamour of a
bustling restaurant kitchen. His eyes fell on a seasoned chef, Rosemary, as she deftly wielded her bladed tools
− knives, cleavers, graters − with calm precision. Watching her, it came as no surprise that Rosemary had
clocked several years in this industry.

Something in the room changed. Shouting ensued, then a loud crash that rang out above the normal kitchen
discord. Rosemary had hurled a metal pot across the room. The assistant, who stood close by, looked shocked
but unharmed. Winston decided it was his cue to intervene.

”Rosemary, care to explain what just happened?” Winston asked, stepping closer to the irate chef.

She gave him a guarded look before deliberately changing the subject, ”Did you know Timothy was a fan of
my stir fry? Ironic, isn’t it?”

Winston frowned slightly at the statement but decided to push forward. He knew how to dance around subjects
, but Rosemary seemed skilled at the bucolic ballet of the restaurant business.

”I’ve heard some disturbing claims, Rosemary,” Winston brought out his notebook, ”about the threats you’ve
been issuing to Timothy, and your hostility towards people of his nationality.”

At Winston’s words, Rosemary ran a weary hand over her face and sighed. ”Seems word gets around.”

”A public event, not long ago. You spoke openly about your, um−” Winston glanced down at his notes, ”−’
distaste’ for Chinese folks,” he pressed on, ”and you’ve been caught on tape making similar remarks towards
Timothy.”


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


”Is that a crime, detective?” Rosemary challenged.

”I’m just here to piece the puzzle together. I understand you take a particular interest in Asian culture −
antique Asian weapons in particular. I’ve seen your collection, Rosemary. Sais, even?” he prodded, hoping
for a reaction.

Rosemary’s gaze sharpened as she turned her back on him, busily cleaning her array of kitchen knives. She
didn’t confirm nor deny his observation. Noting her silence, Winston thanked her for her time and walked out
onto the casino floor, a maelstrom of thoughts whirling around his mind. He felt like he was leaving with more
 questions than when he had entered.

Winston took a good look at the crime scene, a corner of the bustling casino, cordoned off by the police tape.
Something felt grimly out of place among the bright lights and incessant chatter of the casino. He carefully
sifted through the conflicting information and people’s statements spinning in his head.

Time to get some answers, Winston thought, and made his way to his interviewee.

It was late in the day when he finally knocked on Harry’s door. A man in his early thirties, with a life−
hardened face glanced out at him skeptically.

”Harry, correct?” Winston asked.

”And who’s asking?” came the guarded reply.

”Detective Winston,” he flashed his badge, ”I’m here to ask you a few questions about Timothy.”

Harry’s eyes flashed, ”I’m not surprised,” he grumbled. ”Come on in then.”

As Winston made his way inside, he noticed the place bore a striking resemblance to traditional dojo settings.
A pair of sai swords caught his eye, arranged carefully on a display holder. A typical weapon of the martial
arts form Harry used to instruct.

”Nice collection.” Winston gestured towards the sai. ”You instruct?”

Harry looked back at the sai, ”Used to.”

Harry’s manner was gruff, but he seemed at home sharing his old days as a martial arts instructor. They
talked about martial arts, how Harry won several competitions, his daily training routine, which apparently
included practicing with the sai regularly. Harry’s days as a horse trainer surfaced later in the conversation.

”Got dealt a bad hand?” Winston inquired casually, nodding at the pile of losing horse race betting slips on
Harry’s coffee table.

Harry grunted, ”Yeah, you could say that.”

Winston knew Harry only had income from betting on races, and recently he had lost quite a few. Harry had a
 deep gambling debt with Timothy over his betting habits. Photography was not Winston’s hobby, but he
recalled Harry’s face distinctly in the casino cameras’ footage from before the murder took place. There were
rumors that Timothy was planning to expose Harry’s debt to the other horse owners, and the situation got
tough.

”Got into any recent arguments?” Winston asked.

Harry frowned and averted his eyes, ”Maybe...just one with Timothy at the casino.”

Winston nodded, keeping his expression neutral. The timing was unfortunate, he thought. And that debt wasn’t
going anywhere, especially with Harry having recently lost his job at the stables.

”Heard you were giving out loans?’ Winston asked.

Harry’s face stiffened, ”He needed money”, he replied, explaining that Timothy had lent him a large sum of
money specifically for his betting habit, a haunted expression crossing his face.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Winston stood up, concluding his visit, ”Just one last thing, Harry,” Winston queried, ”The VIP lounge, in the
casino? You’re familiar with it, aren’t you?”

Harry met Winston’s gaze, resignation in his eyes, ”Used to spend a lot of time there.”

As Winston exited the apartment, he couldn’t shake off the heavy feeling hanging in the air, leaving him with
more questions than answers. Good thing he was in a questioning mood.

Who is the most likely murderer?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − Harry
2 − Rosemary

You must pick one option. Before selecting a choice, explain your reasoning step by step. The murderer needs
to have a means (access to weapon), motive (reason to kill the victim), and opportunity (access to crime scene
) in order to have killed the victim. Innocent suspects may have two of these proven, but not all three. An
innocent suspect may be suspicious for some other reason, but they will not have all of motive, means, and
opportunity established.

If you believe that both suspects have motive, means, and opportunity, you should make an educated guess
pick the one for whom these are best established. If you believe that neither suspect has all three established,
then choose the suspect where these are most clearly established. Explain your reasoning step by step before
you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the
choice number)”


                         Listing 6: Murder Mystery Example 2 Reasoning Tree
Harry is the murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Harry has a means. | Deduced Fact
> > The martial art Harry practices uses the sai as a weapon. | Deduced Fact
> > > Sai is a commonly used weapon in the martial art that Harry used to instruct. | Fact From Story
> > > Harry used to be a martial arts instructor. | Fact From Story
> > > If someone used to instruct a martial art that commonly uses a certain weapon, they would know how
to use that weapon effectively. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Harry is a skilled martial artist. | Deduced Fact
> > > Harry’s training routine includes daily practice with the sai. | Fact From Story
> > > Harry has won several martial arts competitions. | Fact From Story
> > > Proficiency in a martial art and regular practice with a specific weapon implies skill in using that
weapon, which could provide the means for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Someone skilled in a martial art that uses a particular type of weapon will know how to use the weapon
effectively, thus providing a means for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Harry has an opportunity. | Deduced Fact
> > Harry is a frequent visitor to the casino due to his love for gambling. | Deduced Fact
> > > The murder took place in a secluded area of the casino that Harry is familiar with. | Fact From Story
> > > Harry was seen entering the casino before the murder took place. | Fact From Story
> > > If someone is familiar with the secluded areas of a building and was present before a crime was
committed, it is possible they had the opportunity to commit the crime. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Harry was at the casino at the time of the murder. | Deduced Fact
> > > Harry was seen at the casino arguing with Timothy earlier that night. | Fact From Story
> > > Harry has a deep gambling debt with Timothy. | Fact From Story
> > > A person with a motive, opportunity, means and caught in the proximity of the crime scene at the time
has a likelihood of being involved in the crime. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Regular visitors to a location will likely know the layout, the routines and patterns of the location,
providing them with the perfect opportunity to commit a crime. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Harry has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > Harry was unable to repay this debt. | Deduced Fact
> > > His only income was from betting on races, and he had lost his recent bets. | Fact From Story
> > > Harry lost his job at the stable. | Fact From Story
> > > Losing one’s job and dependance on an unstable income, like betting, can lead to inability to repay
debts. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Harry owed a substantial amount of money to Timothy. | Deduced Fact
> > > Timothy was planning to expose Harry’s debt to other race horse owners. | Fact From Story
> > > Timothy had lent a large sum of money to Harry for his betting habit. | Fact From Story


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> > > Exposure of a person’s substantial debt could damage their reputation and livelihood, especially if
their professional community became aware. This could provide sufficient reason to commit murder to prevent
 the debt’s exposure. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > A desperate need to escape financial debt can drive a person to commit extreme acts, such as murder. |
Commonsense Knowledge
Rosemary is the murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Rosemary has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > Timothy’s ethnicity is the same as the ethnicity that Rosemary has expressed disdain for. | Deduced Fact
> > > During a public event, Rosemary verbally expressed her hatred for Chinese people. | Fact From Story
> > > Timothy was of Chinese heritage. | Fact From Story
> > > Stereotypes or prejudices against a certain ethnicity can often lead individuals to commit harmful acts
 towards individuals of that ethnicity. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Rosemary has publically made derogatory remarks about Timothy’s ethnicity. | Deduced Fact
> > > Timothy has received threats from Rosemary in the past. | Fact From Story
> > > During a conversation caught on tape, Rosemary publicly stated her dislike for Timothy due to his
ethnicity. | Fact From Story
> > > People who make public derogatory remarks and threats towards another’s ethnicity may be
compelled to commit harmful actions, such as murder, against individuals of that ethnicity. | Commonsense
Knowledge
> > Discrimination against a certain ethnicity can lead one to commit harmful actions towards individuals of
 that ethnicity, providing a possible motive for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Rosemary has a means. | Deduced Fact
> > Rosemary has access to bladed weapons like a sai. | Deduced Fact
> > > Rosemary is fond of Asian culture and collects antique Asian weapons, including sais. | Fact From
Story
> > > Rosemary works in a high−end kitchen that uses various bladed utensils. | Fact From Story
> > > If a person works with similar tools and collects antiques in line with the murder weapon, they could
potentially have access to it. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Rosemary is proficient in using bladed instruments due to her role as a chef. | Deduced Fact
> > > Training and working as a chef involves the use of various bladed tools. | Fact From Story
> > > Rosemary has years of experience as a chef. | Fact From Story
> > > Having years of experience using bladed tools provides the skills needed to use a bladed weapon like
a sai. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Proficiency and access to bladed weapons imply the ability to use a sai effectively, providing the means
for murder. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Has unexplained and sudden mood swings. And this is suspicious. | Deduced Fact
> > When asked, Rosemary does not explain her anger. | Deduced Fact
> > > Rosemary refuses to answer and changes the subject. | Fact From Story
> > > Rosemary was asked about her sudden anger. | Fact From Story
> > > People who refuse to answer direct questions often have something to hide. | Commonsense
Knowledge
> > Rosemary suddenly snaps at a kitchen assistant. | Deduced Fact
> > > The assistant did not provoke this reaction. | Fact From Story
> > > Rosemary threw a pot across the kitchen. | Fact From Story
> > > People usually don’t snap and exhibit violent behavior without provocation unless there are deeper
issues. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Unexplicable mood swings often raise suspicions about a person’s behavior and intentions. |
Commonsense Knowledge


F.2   O BJECT P LACEMENTS

                                 Listing 7: Object Placement Example 1

Across the room, Danny, the diligent studio assistant, was doing his due diligence, keeping the earphones
nestled in the recording booth. His aim was to ensure an optimized and meticulous environment for recording,
 a testament to his commitment to their shared mission. They were all aware of the arrangement − the
notebook on the producer’s desk, the earphones in the recording booth. Their shared consciousness of these
items only intensified the anticipation; they were eager to turn the contents of a weathered notebook into a
world−class album.

Ricky, with his weathered notebook of potent lyrics in hand, gently places it onto the piano. An air of
creativity and anticipation lingers in the room, everyone aware that this was the first instrumental step in the
creation of their masterpiece. In sync with the palpable creative energy, Ricky was engrossed in perfecting the


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 rhythm of his song, preparing himself for an intense day ahead. Not too far away, Emma was sincerely
engrossed in her role of musically steering the session. She was focussed on Ricky’s progress, her eyes
constantly monitoring him and her mind alive with ideas to enhance the music.

Meanwhile, Danny was diligently covering every corner of the studio. He was making his rounds, ensuring
that the studio was prim and proper for Ricky’s crucial session. As part of his tasks, he passed by Ricky
several times, always careful not to interrupt the artist’s flow.


Emma, engrossed in her thoughts, deftly moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. She is preparing to
tweak the sound settings, pre−empting Ricky’s need for perfect audio in his performance. Diverting from his
rounds, Danny found himself in the midst of a stirring conversation with a visiting sound engineer. Knowledge
 flowed between them, illuminating the studio’s atmosphere, the engineer’s insight bringing a new perspective
 into Danny’s role. Ricky, ensconced in his own world, was in deep discussion with the blank page before him.
 The daunting silence of the empty studio buzzed with his focus, as he honed his lyrics to perfection in a space
separate from the producer’s. The visitor, oblivious to the careful choreography of the studio session, stood
blocking Danny’s general overview of the studio space.

Delicately lifting Ricky’s notebook, Danny orchestrates its move to the producer’s desk. At the desk, he
glimpses a pair of earphones indirectly drawing his attention amidst his routine of tidying up. Emma, from the
 isolated interior of a sound−proofed booth, lent her ears diligently to already recorded tracks, pouring over
them for any room for improvement. Being lost in the music was her way of paying homage to her craft − an
unspoken ritual she followed each time she embarked on a music production journey. The entirety of her focus
 was consumed by the musical notes and rhythm filtering through the studio speakers.

Concurrently, Ricky was absorbed in the act of playing his guitar. His fingers navigated deftly over the strings
, lost in an intimate dance with the instrument. As he played, the melodic strums reverberated throughout the
studio, filling it with an infectious pulse that hinted at the birth of yet another musical masterpiece. Despite
the flurry of activity around him, Ricky was lost in a world of his own, operating on a singular vision of
delivering his best performance.

In the meantime, Danny was continuing his cautious management of the studio, ensuring that everything fell
into place for the optimum recording session. His watchful eyes were scanning every corner, taking stock of
the minor details that could impact the session. However, the design of the studio didn’t allow for an
unrestricted view into all the corners. The sound booth, where Emma was engrossed in her work, was out of
his visual range. The seclusion provided by the booth, although crucial for immersive work, also acted as a
barrier for Danny’s comprehensive vigilance.

As the day progressed, the studio was entwined in a concerted symphony of dedication and workmanship, the
trio, each engrossed in their pursuit, working together to create the best version of Ricky’s impending album.
As the final note of the day rang through the studio, each person revelled in the satisfaction of another day
done right, another step closer towards the realization of Ricky’s artistic vision.

Within the dynamic dance of the day’s events, the relationships of the trio sang a compelling tune. Each
individual played their crucial part in the creation of the impending masterpiece − Ricky with his raw talent,
Emma with her passion for perfection, and Danny with his meticulous eye for detail. And as the lights faded
on another day of creation, they could sense the beginning of an important chapter in their artistry, a silence
collecting the scattered notes of the day, signing off on another critical step in the journey of Ricky’s
upcoming album.

Based on this story, we want to identify where someone believes that a certain object is at the end of the story.
In order to do that, you need to read the story and keep track of where they think the object is at each point.
When an object is moved, the person may observe its new location if they saw it move.

To see where an object ends up, they must be able to see the location that it moves to and not be too distracted
 by what they are doing. If they do not observe the object moving, then they will still believe it to be in the last
location where they observed it.

Which location is the most likely place Danny would look to find the earphones given the story?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − piano
2 − producer’s desk
3 − recording booth



                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


You must pick one option. Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you
generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”


                        Listing 8: Object Placement Example 1 Reasoning Tree
A worn, leather−bound notebook contains all of Ricky’s song lyrics, a crucial piece for his upcoming studio
session. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> opening scene | Deduced Fact
> > Danny sees the notebook at the producer’s desk. | Fact From Story
> > Danny sees the earphones at the recording booth. | Fact From Story
> > Emma sees the notebook at the producer’s desk. | Fact From Story
> > Emma sees the earphones at the recording booth. | Fact From Story
> > Ricky sees the notebook at the producer’s desk. | Fact From Story
> > Ricky sees the earphones at the recording booth. | Fact From Story
> Ricky moves the notebook to the piano. Because, Ricky needs his lyrics close while he works on the piano
to compose his melodies. | Deduced Fact
> > Danny saw the notebook move to the piano. | Deduced Fact
> > > Ricky was in his line of sight during this tidying session. | Fact From Story
> > > Danny was doing his usual rounds in the studio to tidy up. | Fact From Story
> > > Being in someone’s line of sight means they can see what you are doing. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Emma saw the notebook move to the piano. | Deduced Fact
> > > Emma’s role as a producer involves overseeing the artist’s creative process. | Fact From Story
> > > Emma was monitoring Ricky’s progress with his current song. | Fact From Story
> > > Performers are typically observed by their producers during a creative process. | Commonsense
Knowledge
> Emma moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. Because, Emma decided to adjust some sound settings
and needed the earphones at her desk for that. | Deduced Fact
> > Danny did not see the earphones move to the producer’s desk. | Deduced Fact
> > > The visitor was standing in a spot blocking Danny’s view. | Fact From Story
> > > Danny was engrossed in a conversation with a visiting sound engineer. | Fact From Story
> > > When someone is distracted by a conversation and their view is blocked, they can’t perceive actions
occurring beyond their line of sight. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Ricky did not see the earphones move to the producer’s desk. | Deduced Fact
> > > The lyric composing session took place in a different area than where Emma was. | Fact From Story
> > > Ricky was absorbed in a lyric composing session. | Fact From Story
> > > When someone is focused on a task in a different area, they are usually unable to observe actions
happening outside of that area. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Danny moves the notebook to the producer’s desk. Because, Danny is tidying up the studio, and he believes
 the notebook would be safer at the producer’s desk. | Deduced Fact
> > Danny saw the earphones at the producer’s desk when moving the notebook. | Fact From Story
> > Emma did not see the notebook move to the producer’s desk. | Deduced Fact
> > > The sound booth has no visual access to other areas of the studio. | Fact From Story
> > > Emma was reviewing some audio recordings inside a sound−proofed booth. | Fact From Story
> > > If a person is inside a closed area without visual access to other parts of their environment, they can’t
see what actions transpire in those other parts. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Ricky did not see the notebook move to the producer’s desk. | Deduced Fact
> > > His eyes were closed as he focused on feeling the music. | Fact From Story
> > > Ricky was engrossed in playing guitar. | Fact From Story
> > > When someone’s eyes are closed, they cannot see what is transpiring in their surroundings. |
Commonsense Knowledge


                                  Listing 9: Object Placement Example 2
Richard, ever the diligent pilot, keeps his eye on the horizon and his flight manual. He keeps it conveniently
placed in the cockpit, within arm’s reach. Lisa, with the same dedication to the job, ensures that the safety
booklet is tucked away in storage for quick access. Tom, the copilot, is always ready to assist Richard,
familiar with the careful locations of the flight manual and safety booklet. Their tireless commitment to safety
and preparedness was evident; everyone was aware, ready, and knew exactly where the crucial objects were
located.

With a disciplined stride, Richard carries the flight manual to his office. Placing it down, he feels a sense of
satisfaction, knowing he can review and improve his protocol knowledge at his leisure. Despite the din of
commotion around her, flight attendant, Lisa, was caught up in instructing a fresh recruit on the necessity of
excellent beverage service, ensuring that passenger comfort was meticulously addressed. In tandem with this,


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pilot Richard left the vicinity, clutching something tightly as he intrepidly ventured forth. With a show of
respect for his partner’s goal of constant preparation, Tom, the reliable copilot was closely following Richard,
 heading in the same direction. All actions undeniably affirmed their unwavering commitment to safety,
readiness, and flawless execution of cabin operations.


Slipping the flight manual under his arm, Tom headed straight toward the cockpit. His determined footsteps
echoed his intent − another successful and incident−free flight. Whilst Richard found himself deeply
engrossed in a task elsewhere, Lisa was indulging a passenger in pleasant banter, discussing their travel
experiences. The hums of the conversation did little to fill the vast distance that separated Lisa and the
engaged passenger from Tom and Richard. Lisa’s laughter, dancing on the edge of the lively chatter within
the aircraft, signaled her absorption in the conversation.

Simultaneously, Tom navigated the plane, making his move amid the quiet of lesser trodden areas of the
aircraft. His path, charted away from the watchful gaze of Richard, led him back to the heart of operation −
the cockpit.


Unbroken strides took Lisa towards the passengers seating area, a bundle of safety booklets firmly clutched
against her chest. The leak of anticipation curled up around her lips as she began resupplying each seat,
ready to welcome new passengers onboard. At the same time, Lisa, with her trademark charm, was diligently
restocking the passenger seating area. Her hands swiftly moved in rhythm, ensuring that all was in order and
ready for the hopeful passengers about to embark on their journey. Meanwhile, Richard, consistent with his
role as the meticulous pilot, was thoroughly engrossed in the pre−flight checks located in another section of
the plane. Despite not being in the same vicinity, Lisa and Richard’s dedication to duty created a seamless
link between the front and back of the aircraft.

Elsewhere, Tom, the faithful copilot, was discussing painstaking flight procedures with Richard. Their
commitment to precise execution was evident in the quiet confidence that reverberated along with their
diligent pace. Their work was choreographed like an unobserved ballet, an underpinning rhythm of safety and
 reliability in the background. As the trio ventured forth in their tasks, an unseen thread of unwavering
readiness connected them, even with the distance that separated them physically. Their concentrated efforts in
 different sectors of the plane echoed a well−tuned rhythm of safety that reverberated throughout. Together,
their individual tasks interwove to create a strong fabric of confidence, preparing the plane and its occupants
for the journey ahead.

In conclusion, the meticulously choreographed routine of Richard, Lisa, and Tom painted a picture of
steadfast dedication and commitment. Their collective endeavor towards precision and safety lays the
foundation for a journey where safety and comfort were harmoniously entwined. Despite their varying roles
or positions within the aircraft, the trio’s dedication is a testament to the unwavering commitment to air
travel’s highest standards.

Based on this story, we want to identify where someone believes that a certain object is at the end of the story.
In order to do that, you need to read the story and keep track of where they think the object is at each point.
When an object is moved, the person may observe its new location if they saw it move.

To see where an object ends up, they must be able to see the location that it moves to and not be too distracted
 by what they are doing. If they do not observe the object moving, then they will still believe it to be in the last
location where they observed it.

Which location is the most likely place Lisa would look to find the flight manual given the story?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − cockpit
2 − office
3 − passenger seating area
4 − storage

You must pick one option. Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you
generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”

                        Listing 10: Object Placement Example 2 Reasoning Tree
An airline pilot, Richard, has his flight manual with him all the time; flying without it is against safety
protocols. | Deduced Root Conclusion


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> opening scene | Deduced Fact
> > Lisa sees the flight manual at the cockpit. | Fact From Story
> > Lisa sees the safety booklet at the storage. | Fact From Story
> > Richard sees the flight manual at the cockpit. | Fact From Story
> > Richard sees the safety booklet at the storage. | Fact From Story
> > Tom sees the flight manual at the cockpit. | Fact From Story
> > Tom sees the safety booklet at the storage. | Fact From Story
> Richard moves the flight manual to the office. Because, After finishing his shift, Richard took the manual
with him to his office to review some protocols. | Deduced Fact
> > Lisa did not see the flight manual move to the office. | Deduced Fact
> > > Richard left the area while Lisa was engrossed in her teachings. | Fact From Story
> > > Lisa was instructing a new flight attendant about beverage service. | Fact From Story
> > > When someone is concentrated on a task, they are often unaware of the surrounding activities. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> > Tom saw the flight manual move to the office. | Deduced Fact
> > > Richard was carrying something when they were walking. | Fact From Story
> > > Tom was walking in the same direction as Richard. | Fact From Story
> > > When you walk in the same direction as another person, you are usually able to see what they are
carrying. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Tom moves the flight manual to the cockpit. Because, As part of his role, Tom made sure the manual was
back in the cockpit before their next flight. | Deduced Fact
> > Lisa did not see the flight manual move to the cockpit. | Deduced Fact
> > > Lisa and the passenger were conversing at a considerable distance from Tom and Richard. | Fact
From Story
> > > Lisa was absorbed in a conversation with a passenger about their travel experience. | Fact From Story
> > > Typically, you do not notice activity outside of your immediate conversation when you are fully
immersed in it. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Richard did not see the flight manual move to the cockpit. | Deduced Fact
> > > Tom moved while Richard was not in a position to observe him. | Fact From Story
> > > Richard was in a different area performing an essential task. | Fact From Story
> > > If someone is not present in the same location, they cannot witness the actions taking place there. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> Lisa moves the safety booklet to the passenger seating area. Because, Lisa was restocking the safety
booklets in the passenger seating area for the incoming passengers. | Deduced Fact
> > Richard did not see the safety booklet move to the passenger seating area. | Deduced Fact
> > > Richard was in another section of the airplane working on the pre−flight dossier. | Fact From Story
> > > Lisa was restocking when Richard was busy with document checks. | Fact From Story
> > > Busy individuals, especially when focused on a separate area and task, are unlikely to spot any
movements outside their area. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > Tom did not see the safety booklet move to the passenger seating area. | Deduced Fact
> > > Lisa and Tom were not in the same location at the time. | Fact From Story
> > > Tom was engaged in a review of procedures with Richard. | Fact From Story
> > > If two people are not in the same place at the same time, they cannot witness each other’s activities. |
Commonsense Knowledge



F.3   T EAM A LLOCATION

                                 Listing 11: Team Allocation Example 1
Amidst the vibrant chaos of the Redwood Zoo, nestled in the heart of the city’s sprawling jungle, the task of
assigning roles was a crucial cog in the machinery of its operation. As the manager, the responsibility of
allocating Olivia, Alex, and Mia to the positions of Animal Caretaker and Exhibit Cleaner presented an
intriguing conundrum. Each individual, with their distinct personalities and skill sets, added a layer of
complexity to this assignment puzzle.

Let’s begin with Alex, the tall lad with bright eyes, whose history with the mighty beast of the animal kingdom,
 lacked a certain comfort. The lad, known to express an almost innate unease around animals larger than him,
 fell short of the prerequisites for an Animal Caretaker. His comfort zone extended to the four−legged
companions in our homes, a sentiment I withheld from the petting zoo section of our park. Yet, his association
and collaboration with Mia had seen quite the successes in their high school club’s fundraising initiatives.

However, his relationship with the gentle Olivia was not as seamless. Alex often mentioned feeling ostracized
due to Olivia’s tendency to maintain her distance. This seemingly innocent avoidance stirred disquiet within


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our hushed ranks. And all this, stemming from a disagreement rooted in their previous shared workplaces.
Unresolved perhaps, but a factor nonetheless.

Then, there was Mia, the determined bright spark, whose affinity for cleanliness would often bemuse us. She
would spend her spare time in her immaculate home cleaning and reorganizing, while her enthusiasm for a
spotless Exhibit could not be underestimated. However, her overly thorough methods would invariably result
in clashes with Olivia, who criticized her for crossing some form of unspoken boundary.

Mia too had her phobias, the gravelly roars of the zoo’s majestic lion had once left her shaken and worried.
Loud noises had a similar effect leaving her in a state of nervous terror, much like that of the petite animals
held within our barriers. Yet, she was all smiles and peasant conversation around Alex during lunch breaks,
sharing a sense of humor that lightened the mood of our everyday grind.

Finally, subdued Olivia, a soul strangled with allergies, and a deep−seated fear for wild animals. An incident
with a chimp in her past wove tales of nightmarish betrayal, enough to send her away from the animal
exhibits during her zoo visits. Potent elements of dust and pollen resulted in uncontrolled sneezing fits, a
remainder from her days at the school as a custodian, responsible for the cleanliness and maintenance.

Three souls; Animals to be cared for, Exhibits to be cleaned. Assigning them was always going to be an
enigma for anyone navigating the zoological labyrinth. Love for animals, discomfort, alliances, conflicts;
each factor extraordinarily crucial in shaping not just the overall productivity but also the personal growth of
each of these individuals at the Redwood Zoo.

Given the story, how would you uniquely allocate each person to make sure both tasks are accomplished
efficiently?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − Animal Caretaker: Alex, Exhibit Cleaner: Mia and Olivia
2 − Animal Caretaker: Olivia, Exhibit Cleaner: Alex and Mia
3 − Animal Caretaker: Mia, Exhibit Cleaner: Alex and Olivia

You must pick one option. The story should allow you to determine how good each person is at a skill.
Roughly, each person is either great, acceptable, or bad at a task. We want to find an optimal assignment of
people to tasks that uses their skills as well as possible. In addition, one task will have to have two people
assigned to it. The effectiveness of their teamwork (great team, acceptable team, or bad team) also impacts
the overall quality of the assignment.

When two people need to work on a task and one is bad at it, they don’t necessarily benefit from the other
person being good, unless they work well together.

With different strengths, weaknesses, and interpersonal dynamics at play, you should allocate your team to
find the single assignment to ensure that the tasks overall are completed as effectively as possible.

 Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”
 ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”

                        Listing 12: Team Allocation Example 1 Reasoning Tree
A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits. | Deduced Root
Conclusion
> Olivia is bad at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Olivia experienced sneezing fits and allergies during her custodial job at a school where cleaning was
part of her task. | Fact From Story
> > Olivia mentioned her allergy to dust and pollen. | Fact From Story
> > Someone who is allergic to dust and pollen would have a hard time performing tasks like cleaning an
exhibit, which often involves dusting and exposure to pollen. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Olivia is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Olivia often avoids the animal exhibits during her visits to the zoo. | Fact From Story
> > Olivia has admitted her fear of wild animals due to a past traumatic experience with a chimp. | Fact
From Story
> > If someone admits fear of wild animals and purposely avoids them, they’re unlikely to do a good job as
an animal caretaker, which requires close and frequent interactions with animals. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Mia is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Mia mentioned a discomforting encounter with a roaring lion that left her shaken. | Fact From Story
> > Mia gets nervous and excessively worried at loud noises. | Fact From Story


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> > If someone gets unnerved by loud animal noises and had a bad experience with them in the past, they’re
unlikely to be a good animal caretaker as zoos usually have animals that can be loud. | Commonsense
Knowledge
> Mia is good at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Mia showed enthusiasm when she found out about the cleaning tasks at the zoo, expressing her belief
that the exhibitors need to mirror the animals’ natural habitats as closely as possible. | Fact From Story
> > Mia insists on a spotless living environment, often spending free time in her own home cleaning and
organizing. | Fact From Story
> > Somebody who prioritizes cleanliness in their own life is likely to be meticulous in cleaning tasks at
work, especially if they express enthusiasm for the task. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Alex is okay at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Alex has shown mild interest in keeping his surroundings neat, but he doesn’t go out of his way to tidy up
. | Fact From Story
> > Alex sometimes voluntarily helped with exhibit cleaning when he was a volunteer at a cat shelter. | Fact
From Story
> > If someone voluntarily cleans up in past experiences and has a moderate interest in it, he or she could
probably do okay in a cleaning job, even if they do not excel. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Alex is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Alex expressed in the past no desire to pursue furthering his knowledge of animals outside of pets. | Fact
From Story
> > Alex admitted that he feels uncomfortable around animals larger than him. | Fact From Story
> > If someone is uncomfortable around large animals and has no interest in expanding his knowledge of
animals, they probably won’t be good at a job that involves taking care of a variety of animals, some of which
can be large. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Alex and Mia work okay together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > At lunch breaks, Alex and Mia engage in friendly conversations and share a similar sense of humor. |
Fact From Story
> > Alex and Mia used to cooperate well in the same high school club, often collaborating on fundraising
initiatives. | Fact From Story
> > If two people have cooperated well in the past and have good social interactions, they are likely to work
okay together. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Olivia and Alex work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Alex expressed his discomfort around Olivia, mentioning how her avoidance makes him feel ostracized. |
 Fact From Story
> > Olivia avoids Alex during their shared shifts because of an old workplace disagreement. | Fact From
Story
> > If two coworkers actively avoid each other due to past conflicts, they likely can’t work together
effectively. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Olivia and Mia work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Mia finds Olivia too passive and non−confrontational, which results in stewing resentment and lack of
open communication. | Fact From Story
> > Olivia has explicit disagreements with Mia’s work habits, often criticizing her for cleaning the exhibits
too thoroughly. | Fact From Story
> > If individuals have fundamental disagreements about work ethics and habits and lack of open
communication, it is unlikely they will work well together. | Commonsense Knowledge

                                 Listing 13: Team Allocation Example 2
As the overseer of the local Poetry Palace, I am privileged to know my poets and judges not just as employees,
 but also as friends. Today, we found ourselves in the throes of preparing for an upcoming poetry event. A
challenging puzzle presented itself: the roles of recitation and scoring needed to be allocated among my
dedicated trio: Rachel, David, and Lily.

Rachel, a spirited woman with a wide grin, had always been a passionate poet. However, her work habits
could be called into question, according to David. She tended to be more laid back and unstructured, which
David considered a flaw. Lily too, had tangled with Rachel in the past, when she had offered some critiques
on Rachel’s poetry − critiques that were not well−received, leading to a heated argument and a grudge that
still lingered between them. Rachel’s reaction reflected her struggle with accepting feedback from others. Her
tendency to judge poetry personally over objectively, even letting her opinion of a poet color her scores, was
also an issue.

David, on the other hand, was a connoisseur of the poetic word. He boasted a deep understanding and
appreciation for a wide spectrum of poetry styles, which revealed itself when he shared comprehensive and
incisive feedback with poets. Yet, David had flaws of his own. He was known for his sarcasm, a trait
particularly hurtful to Lily due to remarks about her mild stutter. Tensions between them had escalated into a


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


silent disagreement. Moreover, while David’s knowledge of poetry was vast, his voice was not the musical
instrument required for an engaging recitation. His monotone delivery and self−conscious fear of boring
people made him shy away from recitations.

Lastly, there was Lily. Although her speech bore the unique quirk of a mild stutter which became emphasized
when she was nervous or faced a large crowd, she was an ardent poetry enthusiast. At home, she had a
routine of reading and analyzing poems, propelling her understanding of poetry. She had earned her stripes
by taking literature classes in college, including a course dedicated entirely to poetry. However, David’s
sarcastic remarks about her stutter had marred her morale, and she was already apprehensive about
performing in front of large crowds.

As I watched them, my thoughts spun with the complexity of their dynamic− the strengths and weaknesses of
each individual, the silent feuds, and shared enthusiasm for poetry. Balancing it all was a tough job, but as
the manager, the responsibility sat squarely on my shoulders. The event was quickly approaching and I had to
decide who would recite and who would score− a decision that, I hoped, would inspire personal growth, heal
strained relationships, and ultimately make the event a success.

Given the story, how would you uniquely allocate each person to make sure both tasks are accomplished
efficiently?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − Recitation: David, Scoring: Lily and Rachel
2 − Recitation: Lily, Scoring: David and Rachel
3 − Recitation: Rachel, Scoring: David and Lily

You must pick one option. The story should allow you to determine how good each person is at a skill.
Roughly, each person is either great, acceptable, or bad at a task. We want to find an optimal assignment of
people to tasks that uses their skills as well as possible. In addition, one task will have to have two people
assigned to it. The effectiveness of their teamwork (great team, acceptable team, or bad team) also impacts
the overall quality of the assignment.

When two people need to work on a task and one is bad at it, they don’t necessarily benefit from the other
person being good, unless they work well together.

With different strengths, weaknesses, and interpersonal dynamics at play, you should allocate your team to
find the single assignment to ensure that the tasks overall are completed as effectively as possible.

 Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”
 ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”

                        Listing 14: Team Allocation Example 2 Reasoning Tree
A poetry event needs poets to recite and judges to score. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Lily is okay at scoring. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Lily often reads poems at home and analyzes them in her free time. | Fact From Story
> > Lily took a few literature classes in college including Poetry and Literature 101. | Fact From Story
> > If a person has studied a similar subject and practices it often, they may have at least some competence
in it. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Lily is bad at recitation. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Lily has a mild stutter that becomes more pronounced when she is nervous. | Fact From Story
> > Lily often gets stage fright when speaking in front of a large crowd. | Fact From Story
> > If a person gets nervous in front of a crowd and has a speech issue, like stuttering, they’re likely to be
bad at reciting poetry in front of an audience. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Rachel is bad at recitation. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > When Rachel gets feedback, she struggles to take it to heart and improve. | Fact From Story
> > Rachel has been told before that her rhythm and pacing when reading poetry is off. | Fact From Story
> > If a person cannot maintain rhythm and pacing while reciting poetry, and they do not take feedback well,
 they will likely be poor at recitation. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Rachel and Lily work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Rachel holds a grudge towards Lily after this incident. | Fact From Story
> > Lily gave Rachel critique on her poetry once which resulted in an argument. | Fact From Story
> > If two people have held a grudge over a work−related incident, they’ll likely struggle to work effectively
together. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Rachel and David work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > David finds Rachel’s work habits to be too laid back and unstructured. | Fact From Story


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> > Rachel feels that David doesn’t respect her opinions and ideas. | Fact From Story
> > When two people have differing work habits and do not respect each other’s methods, they typically don’
t work well together. | Commonsense Knowledge
> David and Lily work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Lily has overheard David making these remarks and it has led to a silent disagreement between them. |
Fact From Story
> > David makes sarcastic remarks about Lily’s stutter which hurts her feelings. | Fact From Story
> > If workers have unresolved disagreements or conflicts, they usually have trouble cooperating and
working well together. | Commonsense Knowledge
> David is bad at recitation. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > David never practiced recitation fearing he would bore people. | Fact From Story
> > David has a monotone voice that lacks the inflection needed for engaging poetry recitation. | Fact From
Story
> > A monotone voice and lack of practice in recitation can make a person bad at reciting poetry. |
Commonsense Knowledge
> David is good at scoring. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > David has a deep understanding and appreciation for a variety of poetry styles. | Fact From Story
> > David shares comprehensive and constructive feedback with poets. | Fact From Story
> > If someone is well−versed in poetry and has a knack for providing constructive criticism, they would
likely be a good judge at a poetry event. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Rachel is bad at scoring. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> > Rachel admitted to having difficulty separating her personal biases from her judgement of the poetry. |
Fact From Story
> > Rachel often makes scores based on her personal feelings about the poet, not the poem’s content or
structure. | Fact From Story
> > If a person admits they struggle to judge work objectively due to their feelings towards the individuals
involved, they will likely be bad at judging a competition objectively. | Commonsense Knowledge



G      B UILDING THE DOMAINS
G.1     T REE C ONSTRUCTION A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 The recursive reasoning tree expansion algorithm.
    Input: The scenario s. The current reasoning tree T . Output: Tree is expanded in-place.
    function C REATE D EDUCTION(T, node, max depth, depth)
       for child in node.children do
           child.children ← PromptLM(T1 , . . . , Tm | s, child, G)
           if VALIDATE(child.children) and depth < max depth then
               C REATE D EDUCTION(T, child, max depth, depth + 1)



G.2     M URDER M YSTERY

Tree construction prompt (per deduction)
             Listing 15: Murder Mystery Deduction Prompt for the Tree Completion stage
Your task is to generate a logic tree for a story, as shown in the example. In this tree, each fact should be
deduced from its immediate children. If a deduced fact already has a name, do not overwrite it.

Type of story:

We are creating a murder mystery. A murder mystery needs to have a complex web of evidence that leads to a
means, motive, and opportunity for a suspect, which will make them a likely murderer. When writing a murder
 mystery, the story should take the point of view of the detective. Evidence should be collected through
investigation, including things like interrogation, hearing conversations, reading past criminal records,
looking at mail or trash, and other normal modes of detecting evidence.

1. Each fact in the tree must follow via logical deduction from its children.
2. All Fact From Story nodes and the Commonsense Knowledge node must be relevant to the deduction they
yield.
3. Each root fact is labeled with a source (Fact from Story or Commonsense Knowledge).


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4. A Fact From Story should be a statement about a character, place, or object in the story.
5. Commonsense Knowledge should be a fact that most people will know and agree with. It should not
explicitly reference any characters in the story.
6. Commonsense Knowledge should be used as a deduction rule that when the sibling facts are applied to it
they yield the parent deduced fact.
7. The tree you generate must match the structure of the tree I give you.

A suspect has a means when they have access to the murder weapon.
A suspect has a motive when the suspect has reason to kill the victim.
A suspect has an opportunity when they were at the crime scene.

Here’s an example.

Scenario:


Victim: Victoria
Crime scene: Home
Murder weapon: Gun
Suspect: James
Suspect’s role in story: Brother
Suspect’s motive: Financial gain


Current Tree:
James is a murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> James has a means | Deduced Fact
> > James has practiced shooting guns. | Fact From Story
> > James owns guns | Fact From Story
> > If you both own and practice using guns then you have the ability to murder someone. | Commonsense
Knowledge
> James has a motive. | Deduced Fact
> > James was violently desperate for cash. | Fact From Story
> > James was violently desperate for Victoria’s cash | Fact From Story
> > When someone is violently desperate they may go to extreme measures to accomplish a task, including
murderer. | Commonsense Knowledge
> James has a opportunity. | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
James has a opportunity.
> Fact From Story
> Commonsense Knowledge

Output:
James has a opportunity.
> James has access to Victoria’s house. | Fact From Story
> Having access to someones house gives you the opportunity to murder them. | Commonsense Knowledge
Here is another example.

Scenario:

Story Information:
Victim: Harry
Crime scene: Racetrack
Murder weapon: Shovel
Suspect: Claire
Suspect’s role in story: Running buddy
Suspects motive: To prevent someone else harm


Current Tree:
Claire is a murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Claire has a means. | Deduced Fact
> > Claire is a farmer | Fact From Story
> > Farmers typically use gardening tools like shovels in their work. | Commonsense Knowledge


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> Claire has a motive. | Fact From Story
> Claire has an opportunity | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Claire has a motive.
> Fact From Story
> Fact From Story
> Commonsense Knowledge

Output:
Claire has a motive.
> Claire loves Brian deeply. | Fact From Story
> Harry threatened Brian. | Fact From Story
> Deep and passionate love can push people to do extreme things like murder when that loved one is
threatened. | Commonsense Knowledge
Here is another example.

Scenario:

Victim: Jared
Crime scene: Public park bench
Murder weapon: Heroin overdose
Suspect: Jose
Suspect’s role in story: Drug user
Suspects motive: Public humiliation


Current Tree:
Jose is a murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Jose has a means. | Fact From Story
> Jose has a motive | Fact From Story
> Jose has an opportunity. | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Jose has a means.
> Fact From Story
> Fact From Story
> Commonsense Knowledge

Output:
Jose has a means.
> Jose has access to heroin. | Fact From Story
> Jose knows how much heroin is needed for an overdose. | Fact From Story
> Having access to heroin and knowing how much heroin is required to overdose implies you could have
intentionally given the victim a dose of lethal heroin providing a means for murder. | Commonsense
Knowledge

Your Turn.

Scenario: Victim: Tessa
Crime Scene: kitchen
Murder Weapon: poisonous gas
Suspect: Penelope
Role in story: Tarot Reader
The suspect’s motive: To protect a secret

Current Tree:
Penelope is the murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Penelope has a means. | Deduced Fact
> Penelope has an opportunity. | Deduced Fact
> Penelope has a motive. | Deduced Fact

Entailment Step to Complete:
Penelope is the murderer.
> Penelope has a means. Because,


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


> > Fact From Story
> > Fact From Story
> > Commonsense Knowledge

Output:

Validator prompt for GPT-3 and GPT-4
      Listing 16: Murder Mystery Deduction Validation Prompt for the Tree Completion stage
We are writing a murder mystery and to do so we are creating a narrative guide of evidence. We are proving a
 means (access to the murder weapon) right now. Does this deduction in any way prove or help to prove a
motive (reason to kill) or an opportunity (access to the crime scene) given the description of the mystery
below.

Victim: Tessa
Crime Scene: kitchen
Murder Weapon: poisonous gas
Suspect: Penelope
Role in story: Tarot Reader
The suspect’s motive: To protect a secret

The Deduction:
Penelope has a means.
> Penelope was witnessed purchasing an unusual quantity of chemicals the day prior. | Fact From Story
> Records show Penelope studied chemistry and alchemy extensively. | Fact From Story
> One can use their knowledge of chemistry and alchemy to create a poisonous gas if they possess the
necessary chemicals. | Commonsense Knowledge

Write your answer in the following format:
ANSWER: (yes/no)

Intro prompt (introduce victim and suspects)
                    Listing 17: Murder Mystery Intro Creation for Story Generation
Create an intro for this murder mystery. It should only be 1 or 2 sentences. Only write the intro nothing else.

Scenario:
Tessa was killed with a poisonous gas at a kitchen. Detective Winston is on the case, interviewing suspects.
The suspects are Penelope, Melody.

Output:

Chapter prompts
              Listing 18: Murder Mystery Chapter Prompt for the Story Generation stage
We are creating a murder mystery. A murder mystery needs to have a complex web of evidence for a suspect.
When writing a murder mystery, the story should take the point of view of the detective. Evidence should be
collected through investigation, including things like interrogation, hearing conversations, reading past
criminal records, looking at mail or trash, and other normal modes of detecting evidence.

We will give you a list of facts to use when writing your story. You must include all the facts in the list. Never
state deduced facts or conclusions. The story should stick to the fact list pretty closely.

You will write a chapter for the murder mystery. This should not introduce the murder or victim, but strictly
follow a detective slowly interviewing and detecting the suspect. Use the list below as a guide.

Rules:
1. Only write the contents of the chapter, do not write a title or number it. This text must be easily placed in a
larger story.
2. Never say a suspect has a means
3. Never say a suspect has a motive
4. Never say a suspect has an opportunity


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5. Never hint at a suspect having or not having a means, motive, or opportunity. 3. Never hint at or explicitly
say a deduced fact.
6. Never say a suspect is a murderer. It’s a puzzle that the reader is supposed to guess and deduce!
7. Write the story from the perspective of a detective uncovering clues through various methods that normal
detectives use (interrogation, notes, stake−outs, etc.)
8. Never make mental notes, point out suspicious facts, nor make connections. Let the reader do this.

Include as many sentences as needed to write each fact from the list of facts. Also include up to 10 sentences
of dialogue.

Here is an example:

Suspect and crime information
Victim: Dora
Crime Scene: Remote forest
Murder Weapon: Knife
Suspect: Willard
Role in story: Grounds keeper
The suspect’s motive: Religious sacrifice

You are detective Winston.
Facts you must include:
− A witness saw someone with a spaghetti face and green ears
− Willard is a groundskeeper for a local school
− Willard also provides services to nearby residents like house painting, lawn care, etc.
− Willard painted a nearby home green.
− Willard was in a horrible fire when he was a child.
− Willard’s family has been in the local area for multiple generations
− Long ago, the local area had religious extremists around them, all participating in occult activities.
− Willard and his immediate family were all handymen of some sort.
− Willard believes in respecting his elders and ancestral history.
− Dora had written about joining a new church nearby.
− A friend of Dora mentioned worrying about Dora’s involvement with a new cult−like group of friends.

Output:

Winston took a long drag from his cigarette while reviewing the crime scene photos. He was hardened to
common grotesqueries of his line of work, but the murder of Dora sparked something in him... a calling into
the void.

The only hard evidence he had in this case was an eyewitness of a monster... a spaghetti face, green−eared
monster. That, and the fact that Dora had been exploring some new church... or perhaps a cult, depending on
who you asked. Cults had a history of leaving a bad taste in people’s mouths here... having some very dark
pasts in the local area.

Winston put his cigarette out, placed the photos down, and set out for his following suspect interview with
Willard.

The smell of fresh−cut grass washed over Winston as the local groundskeeper of the local elementary shut off
his mower.

”Howdy, Mister,” − Willard said with a rich southern twang.

”Howdy...” Winston said carefully, trying to match the southern pleasantries he wasn’t all too familiar with.

”You, Willard?” Winston inquired.

”Well, sure I am!” He chuckled, ”Been him for a while now, I suppose.”

”You do a lot of work for the school here?”

”Heh, yes, sir, I do. My family and I have been helping out the local schools and locals with standard chores
.” noticing Winston motioning for him to continue, Willard explained further, ”You know, like painting houses,
 cutting people’s lawn... well heck, just a couple days ago I painted that green house over yonder.” Willard
said, pointing out across the schoolyard.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Winston couldn’t help but notice that Willard had a severe burn scar across the bottom half of his face, which
had previously been hidden by sweat and grass shavings.

*Ring* *Ring* − Winston was getting called away, back to the office, so he had to make a quick excuse to get
away.

”You know the way back to Highway 45?” Winston asked. ”Sure,” Willard replied with a grin, ”You take two
lefts here, then about 12 miles down, you’ll hit it.”

Winston smiled, ”You sure do know your way around here,” he said. ”Hah, well, sir, my families have been
here for... for a long, long time. I take great pride in my ancestry and family history here...”

With that, Winston got in his car and left.

−−−

Your turn.

Suspect and crime information
Victim: Tessa
Crime Scene: kitchen
Murder Weapon: poisonous gas
Suspect: Penelope
Role in story: Tarot Reader
The suspect’s motive: To protect a secret

You are detective Winston.

Facts you must include:
− Tessa found incriminating letters connecting Penelope to past crimes
− Penelope was seen leaving Tessa’s place immediately before the time of the murder.
− Records show Penelope studied chemistry and alchemy extensively.
− Penelope was seen arriving at Tessa’s house before the murder took place.
− Penelope was witnessed purchasing an unusual quantity of chemicals the day prior.
− Penelope reacted strongly with fear when Tessa confronted her about the letters
− Penelope was seen reading books about poisonous gases
− Penelope was alone in Tessa’s kitchen during the tarot reading session.
− No one saw Penelope leave Tessa’s place before the discovery of murder.
− Penelope was cryptically speaking about the perfect crime that leaves no traces
− Tessa had confronted Penelope about those past crimes.
− Tessa knew about Penelope’s past crimes.

Output:


During the Tree Template Construction stage, we sample the victim’s name, the murder weapon,
and the crime scene. For every suspect, we also sample the suspect’s name, motive, a suspicious
fact, and their role in the story (usually a job or relation to the victim). We can use the sampled
information from the Tree Template Construction stage to create the gold fact set F .
Once we have all these sample, we choose one suspect to be the murderer; this suspect will have the
facts: “[suspect] has a means”, “suspect has a motive”, and “suspect has an opportunity” to the gold
set of facts F . All other suspects have two of the “MMO” facts (the ones listed above); the third fact
for innocent suspects is suspicious facts that do not contribute to solving the murder (for example,
“[suspect] enjoys reading murder mystery novels.”)
Once each suspect has three facts in the set F , we can begin the tree construction process. However,
in the prompt, we ensure that the details of the suspect (like their motive) are included so that when
we build a tree for the fact “[suspect] has a motive,” the reasons for having a motive are still linked
to the sampled motive from the Tree Template Construction stage.
Because many of the trees are already made for each suspect, we will create a “contrastive example”
for each mystery where we simply set the murderer to another suspect. We can then reuse most of
the trees from the previous mystery and only have to prove two new ones and then generate the story.


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use validators during the reasoning tree construction process ensure that the deductions being
generated are correct and meaningful. When proving a means, we check the generation from GPT-4
for any mention of “motive” or “opportunity” including key items in the story that might relate to
them (like the crime scene). If these are mentioned, we re-prompt GPT-4 for another deduction. We
repeat this process for motive and opportunity.
To further increase the validity of the murder mysteries generated, we also implemented a story
validator during the narrative generation. The story validator prompts GPT-4 to check the entailment
of each scenario-specific fact S(T ) given the story. If any fact is not entailed by the story, we prompt
GPT-4 to rewrite the story and ensure that fact is entailed.

Suspicious Facts The suspicious facts were useful to control for a length bias where the murderer
was described in longer and more explicit terms than the non-murderer. We also considered nega-
tions of facts like “Sophia has no motive to kill Emily”, but these often led to easy mysteries where
GPT-4 would explicitly rule out a suspect. Suspicious facts blend in with the narrative, provide
balance, and do not modify the ground-truth reasoning.

G.3    O BJECT P LACEMENTS

Listing 19: OP scenario creation for generating items, people, roles, etc. in the Domain Injection
stage
Use the given scenario description to create a list of objects, people, and locations as well as where some
items are currently located and the correct items that people want. The idea is that someone really needs
something in this scenario.

Include one item and location that are relevant to the scene but aren’t necessarily relevant to the scenario.
For example, coffee beans might be relevant to a coffee shop, but not so relevant for the scenario of someone
looking for the milk.

In the correct assignment and outcome, the person who gets an item in the If clause must be different than the
person in the Then clause. See the example.

Rules:
1) You must use names of real people, describe their role in the story after the comma. For example, ”Luis,
customer” or ”Adam, lawyer” etc. always use real names like ”Berry” or ”Cynthia”.
2) You must use tangible small items, do not use ideas ”a performance” for example, do not use large items
like ”a tv”. Instead use small, easily moved items like ”Iphone”, ”Notebook”, ”Laptop” etc.
3) The locations you pick must be able to house the items you made. So if you said ”Golf club” was an item,
all locations must be able to fit a golf club in them, you would not say ”coat pocket” for example.

Here’s an example

Description: Sarah is making coffee at her work, she wants to use almond milk for her customer.

Output:

Items: almond milk; regular milk; almond milk coffee; regular milk coffee; coffee beans
People: Sarah, a barista; Luis, a customer; John, a customer
Locations: Fridge; Shelf; Counter; Storage Closet

Located: Almond Milk −> Fridge
Located: Regular Milk −> Counter

CORRECT −− format (If: someone −> (gets) Something. Then: Another person −> (gets) something they
want.)
If: Sara −> Almond Milk
Then: Luis −> Almond Milk Coffee

Your turn!

Description: Mason, a magician, has his magic deck of cards which are essential for his performance.



                                                      38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Output:

          Listing 20: OP Prompt for generating plausible moves in the Domain Injection stage.
You are going to continue our story that we have written by writing a short description of this event that will
happen next. Only write about the move, do not add any additional information.

Never say ”someone didn’t see something” or infer someones ability to infer where something is. Never say ”
Unbeknownst” or anything like this!
Here is an example.

Only write one or two sentences. It should be a very short continuation.

Description: Timmy was angry at Bob for cheating his way into the job Timmy deserved! So he started
throwing away Bobs possessions.

Character:
Name: Timmy
Role in story: A recent graduate who is sharing an apartment.
Motivation in story: Timmy is angry because he interviewed for a job that his roommate got, but only because
he cheated.

Event:
− Timmy moves the car keys to the trash bin. Because, Timmy was angry with Bob and wanted to throw away
his keys.
− Timmy saw the iphone at the trash bin when moving the car keys.

Output: With an angry thrust, the keys clanked against the tin trash bin. An unexpected *smack* followed
though... curiosity overtaking his anger, Timmy looked in the trash and saw the iphone in there as well.

Here is another example.

Description: Carol had just moved into her new apartment, but, the previous tenant made a huge mess! The
landlord wouldn’t do anything, so it looks like she has to clean it all up herself.

Character:
Name: Carol
Role in story: Just moved into a new messy apartment.
Motivation in story: Carol wants to clean her new apartment that was left a mess by the previous tenant and
has exactly no help from management.

Event:
− Carol moves the noodles to the pantry. Because, Carol was excited to have a clean apartment finally, and
the noodles were the last step!

Output: Carol excitingly places the noodles back into the pantry. What was once thought of as a never ending
onslaught of trash and random items finally concluded and the apartment was finally clean again!

Your turn.

Description: Ricky, with his weathered notebook in hand, was ready for a full day’s studio session. His aim:
perfect his upcoming album, for which his notebook was crucial. Emma, his producer and confidante, eager to
 bring Ricky’s lyrics to life, shared Ricky’s enthusiasm for the project. Meanwhile, Danny − the diligent studio
 assistant − was making sure all elements of the studio were meticulously managed for the recording session.

Character:
Name: Emma
Role in story: Music Producer
Motivation in story: Emma wants to support Ricky’s creative process and record outstanding music to
advance both Ricky’s career and her own reputation as a successful music producer.

Event:
− Emma moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. Because, Emma decided to adjust some sound settings
and needed the earphones at her desk for that.



                                                       39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Output:
In the heart of the bustling studio, Ricky, Emma, and Danny readied themselves for a day of creating magic.
Ricky, holding the helm as the gifted singer−songwriter, was poised for perfection, his precious notebook of
lyrics awaiting its call to duty on the producer’s desk. Emma, their dutiful and talented producer, was just as
eager to breathe life into Ricky’s lyrics. She was cognizant of the notebook’s place at her desk, awaiting the
melodies they would cultivate together.

Across the room, Danny, the diligent studio assistant, was doing his due diligence, keeping the earphones
nestled in the recording booth. His aim was to ensure an optimized and meticulous environment for recording,
 a testament to his commitment to their shared mission. They were all aware of the arrangement − the
notebook on the producer’s desk, the earphones in the recording booth. Their shared consciousness of these
items only intensified the anticipation; they were eager to turn the contents of a weathered notebook into a
world−class album.

Ricky, with his weathered notebook of potent lyrics in hand, gently places it onto the piano. An air of
creativity and anticipation lingers in the room, everyone aware that this was the first instrumental step in the
creation of their masterpiece. In sync with the palpable creative energy, Ricky was engrossed in perfecting the
 rhythm of his song, preparing himself for an intense day ahead. Not too far away, Emma was sincerely
engrossed in her role of musically steering the session. She was focussed on Ricky’s progress, her eyes
constantly monitoring him and her mind alive with ideas to enhance the music.

Meanwhile, Danny was diligently covering every corner of the studio. He was making his rounds, ensuring
that the studio was prim and proper for Ricky’s crucial session. As part of his tasks, he passed by Ricky
several times, always careful not to interrupt the artist’s flow.


            Listing 21: OP deduction prompt for the Entailment Tree Construction stage.
We are creating a story where people are going to move a lot of items many times. The goal of the story is to
be interesting and unique but also have a clear tracking of where objects are so we can quiz readers and
language models later on about the world state and about who knows what.

To make this story, we’ve created a tree structure that outlines the narrative and updates to the world. Your
job is to fill out the entailment trees that prove a person saw or did not see an event happen.

An entailment tree is a tree structure where intermediate nodes are entailed by their children. They create a
natural language reasoning proof for some collection of facts.


To fill out this tree we need to complete an entailment. Completing an entailment is akin to filling out one
subtree of the entailment tree. To fill in this step, you must follow the structure of the step.

Facts From Story are facts that will be explicitly stated when we write the story.
Commonsense Knowledge are facts that most people would agree are true and don’t need to be explicitly said
.
Complex Facts are facts that will be entailed by simpler facts from the story (they will be filled in later
through a recursive call back to you!)

All facts for the step must combine to entail the root parent fact.

No facts may contradict the current structure tree.

Do not include facts about other people, focus on the facts for the person who is seeing or not seeing
something move.

Always match the exact structure of the entailment step I give you. Give the same number of Facts From Story
and Commonsense Knowledge facts. Give them in the same order as well.

Never explicitly say someone didn’t see something or did see something. Your job is to provide facts that
suggest this. For example, if May saw Greg move something, we might say ”May was watching Greg while
doing her chores”, and that ”by watching someone, you are seeing what they are doing”. Notice we describe
the physics of seeing something, but we don’t outright say that someone saw something.

Never mention an item being moved or reuse an item. For example, if theres a fact like ”Greg didn’t see his
iphone” and you are proving why ”Joel didn’t see the apple move”, never reuse Greg’s iphone in your facts.


                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our program strictly controls where items are placed, we don’t want you introducing item placements we
haven’t accounted for.

Each fact should be crucial to the deduction. Intentionally leave out details so that the other facts can account
for them. If one fact is missing, the conclusion should not be entailed. Try not to reuse the same facts.

Always use the persons name instead of a pronoun like ”He” or ”She”, if you know someones name, use the
name.

Only perform one deduction at a time. Your deduction should match the ”Entailment Step to Complete”
template exactly so we can parse it later on.

Here’s an example.

Scenario:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar.

Current Tree:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Opening Scene | Deduced Fact
> > Paul sees the microphone at the stage. | Fact From Story
> > Alice sees the microphone at the stage. | Fact From Story
> > Paul sees the beer at the bar. | Fact From Story
> > Alice sees the beer at the bar. | Fact From Story
> Paul moves the beer to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > Alice did not see the beer move to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > Alice was facing away from the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > > Alice was talking to another patron. | Fact From Story
> > > > The other patron was facing the table. | Fact From Story
> > > > Usually people talk to each other while facing each other, so if one person is looking in one
direction the other person is looking in the opposite direction. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > > If someone is facing away from something else, they cannot see things transpire near that something
else. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Alice moves the microphone to the table | Deduced Fact
> > Alice saw the beer at the table when moving the microphone. | Fact From Story
> > Paul saw the microphone move to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > Paul was drinking the beer at the table. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > > When something happens where a person is at, they usually see things that are happening there. | Fact
 From Story
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. | Deduced Fact
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar.
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because in the story we find out,
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. Because in the story we find out,
> > > Fact From Story
> > > Fact From Story
> > > Commonsense Knowledge

Output:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar.
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because in the story we find out,
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. Because in the story we find out,
> > > Alice tricked Paul into looking ”over there”. | Fact From Story
> > > Alice pointed in the opposite direction of the trash can to Paul. | Fact From Story
> > > If you trick someone into looking elsewhere, they cannot see what happens in the other direction. |
Commonsense Knowledge

Your Turn.

Scenario: Mason, a magician, has his magic deck of cards which are essential for his performance.

People in the story:
− Mason, a magician


                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− Adam, an audience member
− Patricia, an assistant

Respect the peoples roles when creating deductions and try to create motivations for them in the story that
would influence if they see or do not see an event.

Current Tree:
Mason, a magician, has his magic deck of cards which are essential for his performance. | Deduced Root
Conclusion
> opening scene | Deduced Fact
> > mason sees the top hat at the props table. | Fact From Story
> > mason sees the magic deck of cards at the backstage room. | Fact From Story
> > adam sees the top hat at the props table. | Fact From Story
> > adam sees the magic deck of cards at the backstage room. | Fact From Story
> > patricia sees the top hat at the props table. | Fact From Story
> > patricia sees the magic deck of cards at the backstage room. | Fact From Story
> mason moves the top hat to the stage. | Deduced Fact
> > adam did not see the top hat move to the stage. | Deduced Fact
> > patricia did not see the top hat move to the stage. | Deduced Fact
> patricia moves the magic deck of cards to the props table. | Deduced Fact
> > mason saw the magic deck of cards move to the props table. | Deduced Fact
> > adam saw the magic deck of cards move to the props table. | Deduced Fact
> mason moves the magic deck of cards to the stage. | Deduced Fact
> > adam did not see the magic deck of cards move to the stage. | Deduced Fact
> > patricia saw the magic deck of cards move to the stage. | Deduced Fact

Entailment Step to Complete:
Mason, a magician, has his magic deck of cards which are essential for his performance.
> mason moves the top hat to the stage. Because in the story we find out,
> > adam did not see the top hat move to the stage. Because in the story we find out,
> > > Complex Fact
> > > Complex Fact
> > > Commonsense Knowledge

Output:

                 Listing 22: OP Intro generation prompt for the Story Generation stage

Create an opening scene description for a story. It will be short. Only write about the objects we list out and
their location. Your story MUST include each item and their location from the list. Your story also MUST
indicate that all the people we give you saw the location of all these items!

You may use the description to infer the correct scenery to describe, but are only allowed to talk about the
facts presented in the list.

You must state that everyone knows where everything is, ”They were all aware of each items location” or
something like that is a safe way to ensure this condition is met. Try to make this coherent with the story
though. For example, if someone doesn’t know the exact location you could say ”Everyone was aware that the
 item was somewhere in the location, and they definitely all knew that the other item was in the other location
”, or something like this.

Here is an example.

Description: Alex is making Ramen and needs the noodles to cook.

Items and Locations:
− The pans are at the stove.
− The noodles are at the fridge.
− The kitchen knife is at the table.

Character 1:
Name: Alex
Role in story: A want to be chef
Motivation in story: To make a bowl of ramen.


                                                       42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Character 2:
Name: Carol
Role in story: the roommate
Motivation in story: Hanging out with Alex, she is also hungry.

Character 3:
Name: Joshua
Role in story: A random visitor
Motivation in story: Joshua was a friend of Alex but showed up unannounced and hungry.

Output: Alex and Carol were having a peaceful evening hanging out. Both getting a bit peckish, they decided
to eat some ramen, which Alex had been practicing making for awhile now. Everyone knew Alex was the ”
Chef Friend”, meaning that he was always cooking something delicious up. In fact, that’s why a hungry
friend, who showed up unannounced, Joshua decided to show up. All three of them noticed that the pans were
already on the stove, perfect for ramen making! The kitchen knife was on the table, and the noodles were in
the fridge.

Your turn.

Description: Ricky, with his weathered notebook in hand, was ready for a full day’s studio session. His aim:
perfect his upcoming album, for which his notebook was crucial. Emma, his producer and confidante, eager to
 bring Ricky’s lyrics to life, shared Ricky’s enthusiasm for the project. Meanwhile, Danny − the diligent studio
 assistant − was making sure all elements of the studio were meticulously managed for the recording session.

Items and Locations:
− the notebook is at the producer’s desk
− the earphones are at the recording booth

Character 1:
Name: Ricky
Role in story: Singer−Songwriter
Motivation in story: Ricky is motivated to create his best music using his trusty notebook filled with personally
crafted lyrics.

Character 2:
Name: Emma
Role in story: Music Producer
Motivation in story: Emma wants to support Ricky’s creative process and record outstanding music to
advance both Ricky’s career and her own reputation as a successful music producer.


Character 3:
Name: Danny
Role in story: Music Studio assistant
Motivation in story: Danny’s aspiration is to maintain an organized and conducive environment for Ricky’s
recording session.

Output:

Listing 23: OP Prompt for generating a short description of why and how someone moved an item.
Write a short description of this event happening. Only write about what is happening.

You will never add additional information! Never say ”someone didn’t see something” or infer someones
ability to infer where something is. Never say ”Unbeknownst” or anything like this!
Here is an example.

Facts:
− Timmy moves the car keys to the trash bin.
− Timmy saw the iphone at the trash bin when moving the car keys.

Output: Being ever clever and funny... in his own way... Timmy moved the keys to the trash bin. While he was
doing that, he couldn’t help but notice someone had put the iphone in the trash can too.



                                                       43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here is another example.

Facts:
− Carol moves the noodles to the pantry.

Output: Carol, wanting to be cleanly, moved the noodles into the pantry.

Your turn.

Facts:
− mason moves the top hat to the stage.

Output:

               Listing 24: OP prompt for creating a paragraph on people’s observations.
Continue the story we have written so far by writing about the observational facts below. Only write about the
 facts and do not add new information. Never say ”Someone saw” or ”Did not notice” and never indicate if
someone sees something, unless the only fact you have is ”someone sees X”.

Stick to the facts, there will be more information about the story that you can use to set the tone, but you
should always use the facts as the main guide for the story.

Never mention the key items in the story:
− earphones
− notebook

There will be another event after this paragraph, so end this paragraph abruptly sticking only with the facts.
Make no general statements. The last sentence should be something about the facts we listed out only. It
should be a complete sentence.

Your story should take place during the most recent move. So while this is happening:

”Emma, engrossed in her thoughts, deftly moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. She is preparing to
tweak the sound settings, pre−empting Ricky’s need for perfect audio in his performance.”

the facts you will be writing about are happening at the same time.

Here is an example.

Description: Jerry, Marry and Timmy are getting ready for the day. Jerry has a huge meeting that he needs to
prep for. Marry is excited to help Jerry for his meeting and to hear about it later that day. Timmy was getting
ready for his test, but is being a bit inconsiderate to his dad, Jerry, with respect to his big meeting.

Character 1:
Name: Jerry
Role in story: the husband
Motivation in story: Jerry had a huge meeting coming up, one that could decide the fate of his career.

Character 2:
Name: Marry
Role in story: the wife
Motivation in story: Marry is always super supportive and wants the best for her family.

Character 3:
Name: Timmy
Role in story: the son
Motivation in story: Timmy has a huge test coming up in his school which he is nervous for and accidentally
makes him a bit inconsiderate to everyone else.

Observational Facts:
− Jerry is cooking breakfast
− The trash bin is not in the kitchen.
− Marry is outside watering her garden.
− Marry has a window into the room with the trash bin.


                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Output: Jerry was hungry before he starts his day, so he was cooking his breakfast. The kitchen turned out to
not have the trash bin though. Marry, always with her green thumb, was watering her garden and could see
the trash bin through a nearby window.

Your turn.

Description: Ricky, with his weathered notebook in hand, was ready for a full day’s studio session. His aim:
perfect his upcoming album, for which his notebook was crucial. Emma, his producer and confidante, eager to
 bring Ricky’s lyrics to life, shared Ricky’s enthusiasm for the project. Meanwhile, Danny − the diligent studio
 assistant − was making sure all elements of the studio were meticulously managed for the recording session.

Character 1:
Name: Ricky
Role in story: Singer−Songwriter
Motivation in story: Ricky is motivated to create his best music using his trusty notebook filled with personally
crafted lyrics.

Character 2:
Name: Emma
Role in story: Music Producer
Motivation in story: Emma wants to support Ricky’s creative process and record outstanding music to
advance both Ricky’s career and her own reputation as a successful music producer.

Character 3:
Name: Danny
Role in story: Music Studio assistant
Motivation in story: Danny’s aspiration is to maintain an organized and conducive environment for Ricky’s
recording session.

Observational Facts:
− Danny was engrossed in a conversation with a visiting sound engineer.
− Ricky was absorbed in a lyric composing session.
− The lyric composing session took place in a different area than where Emma was.
− The visitor was standing in a spot blocking Danny’s view.


Output:
In the heart of the bustling studio, Ricky, Emma, and Danny readied themselves for a day of creating magic.
Ricky, holding the helm as the gifted singer−songwriter, was poised for perfection, his precious notebook of
lyrics awaiting its call to duty on the producer’s desk. Emma, their dutiful and talented producer, was just as
eager to breathe life into Ricky’s lyrics. She was cognizant of the notebook’s place at her desk, awaiting the
melodies they would cultivate together.

Across the room, Danny, the diligent studio assistant, was doing his due diligence, keeping the earphones
nestled in the recording booth. His aim was to ensure an optimized and meticulous environment for recording,
 a testament to his commitment to their shared mission. They were all aware of the arrangement − the
notebook on the producer’s desk, the earphones in the recording booth. Their shared consciousness of these
items only intensified the anticipation; they were eager to turn the contents of a weathered notebook into a
world−class album.

Ricky, with his weathered notebook of potent lyrics in hand, gently places it onto the piano. An air of
creativity and anticipation lingers in the room, everyone aware that this was the first instrumental step in the
creation of their masterpiece. In sync with the palpable creative energy, Ricky was engrossed in perfecting the
 rhythm of his song, preparing himself for an intense day ahead. Not too far away, Emma was sincerely
engrossed in her role of musically steering the session. She was focussed on Ricky’s progress, her eyes
constantly monitoring him and her mind alive with ideas to enhance the music.

Meanwhile, Danny was diligently covering every corner of the studio. He was making his rounds, ensuring
that the studio was prim and proper for Ricky’s crucial session. As part of his tasks, he passed by Ricky
several times, always careful not to interrupt the artist’s flow.


Emma, engrossed in her thoughts, deftly moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. She is preparing to
tweak the sound settings, pre−empting Ricky’s need for perfect audio in his performance.


                                                       45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To generate the fact set F , we sample a collection of people, items, and locations. Only two items
can be used and we incorporate three moves which will force one item to be moved twice. We then
sample three plausible moves using GPT-4 that take the form of “x moves [item] to [location]”. For
everyone else not moving the item, they have a chance to see the move, “y sees [item] move to
[location]” or to not see the move, “y does not see [item] move to [location]”. We set the chance of
seeing a move to 0.33. These facts are grouped into the move and added to the fact set F .
During the reasoning tree construction, we apply a keyword lookup validator to ensure the de-
ductions being created are correct and meaningful. Specifically, we disallow any deductions that
mention key locations or key items in the story. This ensures the deductions are not vacuous and
state facts that could trivially solve the problem.

G.4    T EAM A LLOCATION

                       Listing 25: Constructing the scenario for Team Allocation
DESCRIPTION: A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits.
Use the given scenario description to create a list of three people, two tasks, and two skills. Each skill should
be associated with one of the tasks, and it should be that each skill is unique and orthogonal to the other and
it’s assigned task.

Rules
 1) Never indicate in someones name their title or that they are good at any particular skill or task. For
 example, never say ”Dr. Bob” as this implies they should be in charge of medical tasks.

Here’s an example

Description: A heavy flux of customers walk into the coffee bar, you have to assign workers to the register and
others to be baristas to handle the flow.

Output:

People: Sarah; Luis; John;
Tasks: Barista; Cashier
Skills: Can make coffee; Can handle customers

Your turn!

Description: A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits.

Output:

             Listing 26: Team Allocation Deduction prompt for the Tree Construction stage
We are creating a story about people being assigned to do certain jobs by a manager (you). You have to look
into the personal details of your worker, their past experiences, their likes and dislikes, and their social
interactions to determine what they are good and bad at doing.

To make this story, we’ve created a tree structure that outlines the narrative. Your job is to fill out the
entailment trees that prove a set of facts on how well someone does at a particular job or how well two people
 work together.

For the facts involving skills and jobs, make the facts story driven focusing on past experience and personal
details about the character. For example, if the fact is that ”George is bad at tennis” you might say that ”
George was never athletic growing up”, ”George actively avoids sporting events now” and ”If someone isn’t
athletic and avoids sporting events, they probably aren’t good at sports like tennis”.

For the facts involving teamwork, focus on the social element and how the two individuals have interacted in
the past. For example, if the fact is that ”George and Bill work well together” then you might say ”George
and Bill grab lunch from time to time.”, ”George and Bill were able to get a job done in average time working
 as a team last week”, ”If two people spend time together and are able to do adequate work together, then
they probably work well together.”


                                                       46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Most importantly, the facts should be interesting and personal; do not make them bland.

An entailment tree is a tree structure where intermediate nodes are entailed by their children. They create a
natural language reasoning proof for some collection of facts.

To fill out this tree we need to complete an entailment. Completing an entailment is akin to filling out one
subtree of the entailment tree. To fill in this step, you must follow the structure of the step.

Facts From Story are facts that will be explicitly stated when we write the story.
Commonsense Knowledge are facts that most people would agree are true and don’t need to be explicitly said
.
Complex Facts are facts that will be entailed by simpler facts from the story (they will be filled in later
through a recursive call back to you!)

All facts for the step must combine to entail the root parent fact.

No facts may contradict the current structure tree.

Always match the exact structure of the entailment step I give you. Give the same number of Facts From Story
and Commonsense Knowledge facts. Give them in the same order as well.

Each fact should be crucial to the deduction. Intentionally leave out details so that the other facts can account
for them. If one fact is missing, the conclusion should not be entailed. Try not to reuse the same facts.

Always use the persons name instead of a pronoun like ”He” or ”She”, if you know someones name, use the
name.

Here’s an example.

Scenario:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar.

Current Tree:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Opening Scene | Deduced Fact
> > Paul sees the microphone at the stage. | Fact From Story
> > Alice sees the microphone at the stage. | Fact From Story
> > Paul sees the beer at the bar. | Fact From Story
> > Alice sees the beer at the bar. | Fact From Story
> Paul moves the beer to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > Alice did not see the beer move to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > Alice was facing away from the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > > Alice was talking to another patron. | Fact From Story
> > > > The other patron was facing the table. | Fact From Story
> > > > Usually people talk to each other while facing each other, so if one person is looking in one
direction the other person is looking in the opposite direction. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > > If someone is facing away from something else, they cannot see things transpire near that something
else. | Commonsense Knowledge
> Alice moves the microphone to the table | Deduced Fact
> > Alice saw the beer at the table when moving the microphone. | Fact From Story
> > Paul saw the microphone move to the table. | Deduced Fact
> > > Paul was drinking the beer at the table. | Commonsense Knowledge
> > > When something happens where a person is at, they usually see things that are happening there. | Fact
 From Story
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. | Deduced Fact
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. Because,
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because,
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. Because,
> > > Fact From Story
> > > Fact From Story
> > > Commonsense Knowledge


                                                        47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Output:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. Because,
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because,
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. Because,
> > > Alice tricked Paul into looking ”over there”. | Fact From Story
> > > Alice pointed in the opposite direction of the trash can to Paul. | Fact From Story
> > > If you trick someone into looking else where, they cannot see what happens in the other direction. |
Commonsense Knowledge
Here is another example.

Scenario:
Your dog has just pooped on the neighbours yard. The neighbour glares in your direction and comes forward
... he says ”Hey you! What do you think you are letting your dog do on my nice yard right here!”

Current Tree:
Punch the neighbour square in the nose. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> It’ll look cool and this is a pro. | Deduced Fact
> > People think fighting is cool where you live. | Fact From Story
> > You would be fighting. | Fact From Story
> > Doing something people think is cool will make you cool too. | Commonsense Knowledge
> It’ll look cool unless... | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Jose has a means. Because,
> Fact From Story
> Fact From Story
> Commonsense Knowledge

Output:
Jose has a means. Because,
> Jose has access to heroin. | Fact From Story
> Jose knows how much heroin is needed for an overdose. | Fact From Story
> Having access to heroin and knowing how much heroin is required to overdose implies you could have
intentionally given the victim a dose of lethal heroin providing a means for murder. | Commonsense
Knowledge
Here is another example.

Scenario:

Victim: Jared
Crime scene: Public park bench
Murder weapon: Heroin overdose
Suspect: Jose
Suspect’s role in story: Drug user
Suspects motive: Public humiliation


Current Tree:
Jose is a murderer. | Deduced Root Conclusion
> Jose has a means. | Fact From Story
> Jose has a motive | Fact From Story
> Jose has an opportunity. | Fact From Story

Entailment Step to complete:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. Because,
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because,
> > Complex Fact

Output:
Paul and Alice are at a karaoke bar. Because,
> Alice moves the beer to the trash can. Because,
> > Paul did not see the beer move to the trash can. | Complex Fact

Your Turn.


                                                     48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scenario: A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits.

Current Tree:
A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits. | Deduced Root
Conclusion
> Olivia is bad at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Olivia is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Mia is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Mia is good at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Alex is okay at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Alex is bad at animal caretaker. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Alex and Mia work okay together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Olivia and Alex work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact
> Olivia and Mia work badly together. Because we find out in the story that, | Deduced Fact

Entailment Step to Complete:
A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits. Because,
> Olivia is bad at exhibit cleaner. Because we find out in the story that,
> > Fact From Story
> > Fact From Story
> > Commonsense Knowledge

Output:

          Listing 27: Team Allocation story creation prompt for the Story Generation stage
You will write a short story given the description of a scenario and a list of facts. You must include every fact
in the story.

You should take the role of a manager or leader, someone who can assign people to skills.

Your job is to find the perfect assignment of each person to a single skill. You will not say what this perfect
assignment is, that is left to the reader to decide.

Instead, you must write out the narrative as if it were a short story. Make this story coherent and flow nicely.

Most importantly, make this story interesting!

Start with an introduction.
Introduce each person:
− Olivia
− Alex
− Mia

And the tasks the manager has to assign them to (mention these by name in the beginning, i.e. ”And they all
had to be assigned to cleaning and sales” or something.):
− Animal Caretaker
− Exhibit Cleaner

Scenario description: A zoo requires caretakers for different animals and keepers for cleaning the exhibits.
Facts that you must include in your story:
− Alex admitted that he feels uncomfortable around animals larger than him.
− Alex and Mia used to cooperate well in the same high school club, often collaborating on fundraising
initiatives.
− Alex expressed his discomfort around Olivia, mentioning how her avoidance makes him feel ostracized.
− Alex expressed in the past no desire to pursue furthering his knowledge of animals outside of pets.
− Alex has shown mild interest in keeping his surroundings neat, but he doesn’t go out of his way to tidy up.
− Alex sometimes voluntarily helped with exhibit cleaning when he was a volunteer at a cat shelter.
− At lunch breaks, Alex and Mia engage in friendly conversations and share a similar sense of humor.
− Mia finds Olivia too passive and non−confrontational, which results in stewing resentment and lack of open
 communication.
− Mia gets nervous and excessively worried at loud noises.
− Mia insists on a spotless living environment, often spending free time in her own home cleaning and
organizing.


                                                        49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− Mia mentioned a discomforting encounter with a roaring lion that left her shaken.
− Mia showed enthusiasm when she found out about the cleaning tasks at the zoo, expressing her belief that
the exhibitors need to mirror the animals’ natural habitats as closely as possible.
− Olivia avoids Alex during their shared shifts because of an old workplace disagreement.
− Olivia experienced sneezing fits and allergies during her custodial job at a school where cleaning was part
of her task.
− Olivia has admitted her fear of wild animals due to a past traumatic experience with a chimp.
− Olivia has explicit disagreements with Mia’s work habits, often criticizing her for cleaning the exhibits too
thoroughly.
− Olivia mentioned her allergy to dust and pollen.
− Olivia often avoids the animal exhibits during her visits to the zoo.

Output:


           Listing 28: Team Allocation introduction rewrite for the Story Generation stage
I am writing a story that is similar to a word problem where a manager has to assign the right worker to a
task. Here’s the full story:

In the bustling world of the Redwood Zoo, at the crux of the city’s great jungle, the need for careful assigning
of roles played a major role in the smooth function of the behemoth. As the manager, the delicate balance of
where to assign Olivia, Alex, and Mia, to the roles of Animal Caretaker and Exhibit Cleaner was an intriguing
 puzzle to solve. Each with their unique temperament, skills, and admittedly, eccentricities, made the task all
the more interesting.

Let’s begin with Alex, the tall lad with bright eyes, whose history with the mighty beast of the animal kingdom,
 lacked a certain comfort. The lad, known to express an almost innate unease around animals larger than him,
 fell short of the prerequisites for an Animal Caretaker. His comfort zone extended to the four−legged
companions in our homes, a sentiment I withheld from the petting zoo section of our park. Yet, his association
and collaboration with Mia had seen quite the successes in their high school club’s fundraising initiatives.

However, his relationship with the gentle Olivia was not as seamless. Alex often mentioned feeling ostracized
due to Olivia’s tendency to maintain her distance. This seemingly innocent avoidance stirred disquiet within
our hushed ranks. And all this, stemming from a disagreement rooted in their previous shared workplaces.
Unresolved perhaps, but a factor nonetheless.

Then, there was Mia, the determined bright spark, whose affinity for cleanliness would often bemuse us. She
would spend her spare time in her immaculate home cleaning and reorganizing, while her enthusiasm for a
spotless Exhibit could not be underestimated. However, her overly thorough methods would invariably result
in clashes with Olivia, who criticized her for crossing some form of unspoken boundary.

Mia too had her phobias, the gravelly roars of the zoo’s majestic lion had once left her shaken and worried.
Loud noises had a similar effect leaving her in a state of nervous terror, much like that of the petite animals
held within our barriers. Yet, she was all smiles and peasant conversation around Alex during lunch breaks,
sharing a sense of humor that lightened the mood of our everyday grind.

Finally, subdued Olivia, a soul strangled with allergies, and a deep−seated fear for wild animals. An incident
with a chimp in her past wove tales of nightmarish betrayal, enough to send her away from the animal
exhibits during her zoo visits. Potent elements of dust and pollen resulted in uncontrolled sneezing fits, a
remainder from her days at the school as a custodian, responsible for the cleanliness and maintenance.

Three souls; Animals to be cared for, Exhibits to be cleaned. Assigning them was always going to be an
enigma for anyone navigating the zoological labyrinth. Love for animals, discomfort, alliances, conflicts;
each factor extraordinarily crucial in shaping not just the overall productivity but also the personal growth of
each of these individuals at the Redwood Zoo.

−−−

I want you to rewrite the introduction paragraph to introduce each person and the tasks. Do not assign people
 to a task (this is the question I want to ask the readers), just introduce them. Rewrite the introduction:

In the bustling world of the Redwood Zoo, at the crux of the city’s great jungle, the need for careful assigning
of roles played a major role in the smooth function of the behemoth. As the manager, the delicate balance of
where to assign Olivia, Alex, and Mia, to the roles of Animal Caretaker and Exhibit Cleaner was an intriguing


                                                       50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 puzzle to solve. Each with their unique temperament, skills, and admittedly, eccentricities, made the task all
the more interesting.

Make sure it includes:

Mentions to these peoples names (do not describe them)
− Olivia
− Alex
− Mia

And the tasks the manager has to assign them to (mention these by name in the beginning, i.e. ”And they all
had to be assigned to cleaning and sales” or something.)
− Animal Caretaker
− Exhibit Cleaner

It should be short. No longer than the original introduction.


In the Tree Template Construction stage, we build a matrix M where the first two columns are scores
for each person’s abilities on a task, and the last three are their relationship scores. Once we have
that matrix, we can generate facts for each person’s skill level and relationship score.
For skill level facts, we look at each person’s proficiency at a skill and set it either to “bad”, “okay”,
or “good”, then add to the fact set F , “[person] is [skill level label] at [skill]”.
For relationship scores, we look at each unique pair’s score and label it as either “badly”, “okay”, or
“well”. We can then add the fact, “[person 1] and [person 2] work [relationship label] together.” to
the fact set F .
Once we have all the facts in F we can pass these to the Reasoning Tree Construction stage. Team
Allocation required no validators in the construction of the reasoning tree nor the story to create
valid contexts.


H     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS , API C OST

H.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS : C REATING AND E VALUATING M U SR

Creating MuSR GPT-4 is used in all creation prompts for creating MuSR. We do not change any
parameters from the defaults when prompting GPT-4. Temperature and top-p are set to 1.0.
For the Murder Mystery domain, we set the maximum depth of the reasoning tree to 4. Only two
suspects are allowed to be included in the generation process. To add diversity, we sample a victim’s
name, a murder weapon, a crime scene, suspect names, suspect motives, suspect roles in the story,
and suspicious facts. All of these facts are used in the tree construction stage to guide the created
deductions to include more diversity.
For Object Placements, we set the maximum depth of the reasoning tree to 3. Only three moves are
allowed to be included in a story, and only two items which forces one item to be moved twice. The
chance for a person to see a move is set to 33%. To include diversity, we sample scenarios where
people need to move items around, then we sample their names, moves, and motivations for moving
the item.
Finally, for Team Allocation, we set the maximum depth of reasoning to 2. We sample a scenario
for diversity similar to Object Placements, then sample tasks and people’s names.

Evaluating MuSR During evaluation, we use the “gpt-4” and “gpt-3.5-turbo” chat endpoints.
For Llama2 and Vicuna models, we use Hugging Face’s implementations (Wolf et al., 2020) and
use bitsandbytes quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022) when running inference.2 No changes to the
inference parameters were made when sampling from the models. For all local models, we ran them
on on a machine with 4xNVIDIA RTX A6000 48GB cards.
   2
     We did not see any significant performance increases in some of the smaller models when we did not use
quantization.


                                                       51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Estimates of how long it takes to run one of our dataset domains as well as cost. All prices
and times are based off of GPT4 and the CoT+ 1-Shot prompt variant.
      Murder Mystery      Object Placements      Team Allocation
       Time      Cost      Time        Cost       Time        Cost
      2:00:00    $27      1:40:00      $23       2:10:00      $17


H.2     API C OSTS AND T IMES

Table 9 shows the average costs and times to run the evaluation of each domain using GPT4 with
the CoT+ 1-Shot prompt variant.

I     E VALUATION P ROMPTS AND O UTPUTS
I.1    E VAL P ROMPTS

Murder Mystery CoT+ evaluation prompt for Murder Mysteries.
                                 Listing 29: Murder Mystery COT+ Prompt
{{context}}

Who is the most likely murderer?

Pick one of the following choices:
{{answer choices}}

You must pick one option. Before selecting a choice, explain your reasoning step by step. The murderer needs
to have a means (access to weapon), motive (reason to kill the victim), and opportunity (access to crime scene
) in order to have killed the victim. Innocent suspects may have two of these proven, but not all three. An
innocent suspect may be suspicious for some other reason, but they will not have all of motive, means, and
opportunity established.

If you believe that both suspects have motive, means, and opportunity, you should make an educated guess
and pick the one for whom these are best established. If you believe that neither suspect has all three
established, then choose the suspect where these are most clearly established. Explain your reasoning step by
step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here,
including the choice number)”


Object Placement CoT+ evaluation prompt for Object Placements.
                               Listing 30: Object Placements COT+ Prompt
{{context}}

Based on this story, we want to identify where someone believes that a certain object is at the end of the story.
In order to do that, you need to read the story and keep track of where they think the object is at each point.
When an object is moved, the person may observe its new location if they saw it move.

To see where an object ends up, they must be able to see the location that it moves to and not be too distracted
 by what they are doing. If they do not observe the object moving, then they will still believe it to be in the last
location where they observed it.

Which location is the most likely place Danny would look to find the earphones given the story?

Pick one of the following choices:
{{answer choices}}

You must pick one option. Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you
generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”



                                                         52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Team Allocation CoT+ evaluation prompt for Team Allocation.
                                Listing 31: Team Allocation COT+ Prompt
{{context}}

Given the story, how would you uniquely allocate each person to make sure both tasks are accomplished
efficiently?

Pick one of the following choices:
{{answer choices}}

You must pick one option. The story should allow you to determine how good each person is at a skill.
Roughly, each person is either great, acceptable, or bad at a task. We want to find an optimal assignment of
people to tasks that uses their skills as well as possible. In addition, one task will have to have two people
assigned to it. The effectiveness of their teamwork (great team, acceptable team, or bad team) also impacts
the overall quality of the assignment.

When two people need to work on a task and one is bad at it, they don’t necessarily benefit from the other
person being good, unless they work well together.

With different strengths, weaknesses, and interpersonal dynamics at play, you should allocate your team to
find the single assignment to ensure that the tasks overall are completed as effectively as possible.

 Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”
 ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”

                                 Listing 32: Team Allocation PAL Prompt
{{context}}

Given the story, how would you uniquely allocate each person to make sure both tasks are accomplished
efficiently?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − {{choices[0]}}
2 − {{choices[1]}}
3 − {{choices[2]}}

You must pick one option. The story should allow you to determine how good each person is at a skill.
Roughly, each person is either great, acceptable, or bad at a task. We want to find an optimal assignment of
people to tasks that uses their skills as well as possible. In addition, one task will have to have two people
assigned to it. The effectiveness of their teamwork (great team, acceptable team, or bad team) also impacts
the overall quality of the assignment.

When two people need to work on a task and one is bad at it, they don’t necessarily benefit from the other
person being good, unless they work well together.

With different strengths, weaknesses, and interpersonal dynamics at play, you should allocate your team to
find the single assignment to ensure that the tasks overall are completed as effectively as possible.

Now let’s write a python function to solve it. Our program will contain three steps:

First, find out how good a person is at the two tasks. Assign it to a variable. Use 3 for great, 2 for acceptable,
and 1 for bad.
For example ‘Alice at speaking = 2‘ means a person Alice is acceptable at the task of speaking. When you
assign values to individual scores, show your supporting facts (excerpt from the question) in the comments.

Second, find out the cooperation score for two people, use 3 for great, 2 for acceptable, and 1 for bad.
For example ‘Alice with Bob = 3‘ means Alice works great with Bob. When you assign values to cooperation
scores, show your supporting facts (excerpt from the question) in the comments.

Third, find the score of each option, and choose the best scored option. Concretely, the score of an option of
assignment is the sum of all the scores, including individual scores and cooperation scores.
Hint: you can use ‘max([(option1 score, ’1’),(option2 score, ’2’),(option3 score, ’3’)])[1]‘ to find out the best
 option.


                                                        53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Please write a python function ‘assign task‘ which returns the answer choice in your response.


I.2   I NCORRECT E VALUATIONS FROM GPT-4

                               Listing 33: Murder Mystery Reasoning Error
In the cold echo of a deserted hockey rink, Otis was found dead from a grenade explosion, and now Detective
Winston must decipher the clues, suspecting Ervin and Andrew are somehow involved.

Detective Winston rubbed his temples while the facts flickered across his computer screen. Otis, the victim,
would most definitely be missed. His usual vibrant energy that filled the hockey rink was replaced by cold,
solemn silence.

Some contradictions needed to be resolved. The crime scene at the hockey rink was empty, both at the time of
the murder and throughout the investigation. Winston’s only lead was Andrew, who was an old military pal of
Otis. Winston heard that Andrew had recently switched his career to become a solo hiking guide. Indeed, a
remarkable part of his solo hikes was his ability to help hikers they came across on the way overcome
environmental dangers−a way of applying his skills acquired from his military service. It was an unusual
practice in the industry but allowed due to his military expertise in bomb disposal−an odd career choice for a
 man of such skills.

Winston drove to the outskirts of the town, where Andrew lived in a remote cabin. Andrew’s solo job didn’t
always welcome company, but that didn’t seem to bother him. Rumor had it that he uses his military skills to
help strangers on the trails overcome environmental dangers−detonating falling rocks, perhaps?

Once in the cabin, Winston noticed several hiking supplies meticulously arranged. He inspected them and
found, hidden strategically among the normal hiking necessities−food, water, emergency kit−were several
small explosives. Chills ran down his spine as he remembered a recent break−in at a military base.

”I see you have explosives mixed with your hiking guide supplies,” Winston said, trying to evoke a reaction.

Andrew replied calmly, ”Those are just for emergencies.”

Listening to Andrew, Winston remembered that Otis had been friendly with him. Otis was always open with
Andrew about his daily habits, even shared his calendar with him. Andrew was the only person who knew Otis
would be alone at the hockey rink that evening.

On his way out, Winston remembered Andrew’s frank words, ”I don’t like to hang out after work.”

It seemed somewhat true, living far from town, working alone, and being prone to avoid after−work hangouts.
 Winston thought to himself: Andrew did like to be alone. It all seemed so strange, the grenade murder, the
empty hockey rink, Andrew’s distant demeanor. However, he couldn’t draw any obvious conclusions just yet.
He needed more.

Detective Winston sat on the chilly bleachers of the local hockey rink, a place as familiar to him as it was to
Ervin, the mild−mannered Rabbi who had never missed a game. The rink was still splattered with telltale
signs of the merciless violence that had taken place there. Otis had been killed during a game, a seemingly
jovial event turned nightmarish by the unexpected detonation of a grenade.

Taking his eyes off the crime scene momentarily, he scanned his surroundings and spotted his next person of
interest: Ervin, a massive hockey fan, and a staunch supporter of their local team. His presence at the game
had been expected, as his dedicated attendance was part of the everyday routine. Some of the spectators had
mentioned Ervin stepping out of the stadium briefly, interestingly around the same time Otis was killed.

Not missing his beat, Winston approached Rabbi Ervin, who was still in deep shock at the loss of a fellow
spectator and friend, ”Rabbi Ervin?”

The Rabbi looked up to meet the detective’s prying eyes, ”I am Ervin, indeed. And you are?”

”I am Detective Winston, investigating the recent unfortunate event.”

Observing Ervin’s face closely, Winston began: ”The strangest thing happened a few days ago. Otis came to
me and told me he was planning to go to the authorities. He knew something was off, dangerous even. I guess


                                                       54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we didn’t react quickly enough. He mentioned your name, Ervin, and something about another life before the
synagogue...”

Ervin was quiet, his gaze distant but thoughtful. ”Yes, Otis did confront me. He saw me moving some funds
around. He saw, Detective, he saw me committing the crime which I’ve regretted every day since,” Ervin
confessed.

Winston let the confession sink in before shifting the subject subtly. ”I heard you were in the military?”

Ervin smiled, just barely, nodding with a touch of pride. ”Yes, I am a former military officer. Had a special
training in demolitions you see, before I found my calling in religion.”

Winston returned his smile, ”I suppose it’s a bit of a leap from demolitions to the pulpit.”

”Just a tad,” Ervin’s laughter is soft. ”But the old life stays with you in ways you wouldn’t expect. I’ve got a
collection of war memorabilia back home. host some of my friends over sometimes, they marvel at these
artifacts. I even got grenades in there. Nothing active, of course. They tend to catch the eye.”

Winston excused himself, leaving Ervin to mourn at the crash of their sanctuary of play turned battleground.

Who is the most likely murderer?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − Ervin
2 − Andrew

You must pick one option. Before selecting a choice, explain your reasoning step by step. The murderer needs
to have a means (access to weapon), motive (reason to kill the victim), and opportunity (access to crime scene
) in order to have killed the victim. Innocent suspects may have two of these proven, but not all three. An
innocent suspect may be suspicious for some other reason, but they will not have all of motive, means, and
opportunity established.

If you believe that both suspects have motive, means, and opportunity, you should make an educated guess
pick the one for whom these are best established. If you believe that neither suspect has all three established,
then choose the suspect where these are most clearly established. Explain your reasoning step by step before
you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the
choice number)”


[[MODEL OUTPUT]]


Looking at Detective Winston’s investigation into the characters of Ervin and Andrew, we can examine the
means, motive, and opportunity for each.

First, Andrew, an ex−military guy and Otis’s old friend, has a motive. His recent change to a hiking guide
involves using his expertise in bomb disposal which demonstrates the means. Interestingly, the explosives
noticed with the hiking supplies could very well be utilized for a crime like this. Additionally, his opportunity
is clear, as he knew Otis’ schedule, including his solitude in the hockey rink.

Ervin, the Rabbi and hockey fan, also has a motive, as his secret funds−moving activity was found out by Otis.
 Like Andrew, Ervin also has a military background and knowledge of demolitions, hinting at the means. His
opportunity lies in the fact that he was present at the hockey rink during the game, where Otis was killed, and
reportedly stepped out of the stadium briefly around the same timeframe.

However, Ervin’s collection of war memorabilia including grenades were described as ”nothing active.”
Unless this is a misdirection and he does possess live grenades, this could imply that his grenades wouldn’t be
 functional for the act. Andrew, on the other hand, has been found with actual explosives that are implied to
be active. We can also note that Andrew’s solitary activity and lifestyle further suggest his ability to commit
such a crime without leaving apparent witnesses.

Therefore, while both candidates present motive, means, and opportunity, it seems that Andrew’s capacity to
commit this crime is better substantiated. He has a clear opportunity knowing Otis’s schedule, an explicit
motive with his recent career change contrasted with his military prowess, and useful means evidenced by the
explosives found among his hiking supplies.


                                                       55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ANSWER: 2 − Andrew

[[Correct Answer]]

1

                              Listing 34: Team Allocation Reasoning Error
Amidst the vibrant chaos of the Redwood Zoo, nestled in the heart of the city’s sprawling jungle, the task of
assigning roles was a crucial cog in the machinery of its operation. As the manager, the responsibility of
allocating Olivia, Alex, and Mia to the positions of Animal Caretaker and Exhibit Cleaner presented an
intriguing conundrum. Each individual, with their distinct personalities and skill sets, added a layer of
complexity to this assignment puzzle.

Let’s begin with Alex, the tall lad with bright eyes, whose history with the mighty beast of the animal kingdom,
 lacked a certain comfort. The lad, known to express an almost innate unease around animals larger than him,
 fell short of the prerequisites for an Animal Caretaker. His comfort zone extended to the four−legged
companions in our homes, a sentiment I withheld from the petting zoo section of our park. Yet, his association
and collaboration with Mia had seen quite the successes in their high school club’s fundraising initiatives.

However, his relationship with the gentle Olivia was not as seamless. Alex often mentioned feeling ostracized
due to Olivia’s tendency to maintain her distance. This seemingly innocent avoidance stirred disquiet within
our hushed ranks. And all this, stemming from a disagreement rooted in their previous shared workplaces.
Unresolved perhaps, but a factor nonetheless.

Then, there was Mia, the determined bright spark, whose affinity for cleanliness would often bemuse us. She
would spend her spare time in her immaculate home cleaning and reorganizing, while her enthusiasm for a
spotless Exhibit could not be underestimated. However, her overly thorough methods would invariably result
in clashes with Olivia, who criticized her for crossing some form of unspoken boundary.

Mia too had her phobias, the gravelly roars of the zoo’s majestic lion had once left her shaken and worried.
Loud noises had a similar effect leaving her in a state of nervous terror, much like that of the petite animals
held within our barriers. Yet, she was all smiles and peasant conversation around Alex during lunch breaks,
sharing a sense of humor that lightened the mood of our everyday grind.

Finally, subdued Olivia, a soul strangled with allergies, and a deep−seated fear for wild animals. An incident
with a chimp in her past wove tales of nightmarish betrayal, enough to send her away from the animal
exhibits during her zoo visits. Potent elements of dust and pollen resulted in uncontrolled sneezing fits, a
remainder from her days at the school as a custodian, responsible for the cleanliness and maintenance.

Three souls; Animals to be cared for, Exhibits to be cleaned. Assigning them was always going to be an
enigma for anyone navigating the zoological labyrinth. Love for animals, discomfort, alliances, conflicts;
each factor extraordinarily crucial in shaping not just the overall productivity but also the personal growth of
each of these individuals at the Redwood Zoo.

Given the story, how would you uniquely allocate each person to make sure both tasks are accomplished
efficiently?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − Animal Caretaker: Alex, Exhibit Cleaner: Mia and Olivia
2 − Animal Caretaker: Olivia, Exhibit Cleaner: Alex and Mia
3 − Animal Caretaker: Mia, Exhibit Cleaner: Alex and Olivia

You must pick one option. The story should allow you to determine how good each person is at a skill.
Roughly, each person is either great, acceptable, or bad at a task. We want to find an optimal assignment of
people to tasks that uses their skills as well as possible. In addition, one task will have to have two people
assigned to it. The effectiveness of their teamwork (great team, acceptable team, or bad team) also impacts
the overall quality of the assignment.

When two people need to work on a task and one is bad at it, they don’t necessarily benefit from the other
person being good, unless they work well together.

With different strengths, weaknesses, and interpersonal dynamics at play, you should allocate your team to
find the single assignment to ensure that the tasks overall are completed as effectively as possible.


                                                       56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you generate should be ”
 ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”


[[MODEL OUTPUT]]


Reading through the story, we learn a lot about each individual’s strengths, weaknesses, fears, and
relationships.

Starting with Alex, we find that he has discomfort around large animals, which indicates he may not be suited
for the role of Animal Caretaker. However, Alex has a good working relationship with Mia from their previous
 fundraising activities. However, his relationship with Olivia is strained.

Next, we have Mia. She loves cleanliness and would likely be ideal for an Exhibit Cleaner role. Nonetheless,
she doesn’t get along well with Olivia and has a deep fear of large, loud animals. Her bond with Alex is
strong, as they share humorous exchanges during their breaks.

Finally, Olivia is mentioned. Her allergies and fear of wild animals make her a poor fit for the Animal
Caretaker role. She also seems to clash with Mia over cleaning methods. While her relationship with Alex is
not explicitly described as negative, Alex has stated that he feels left out by Olivia, suggesting a strained
relationship.

Given these insights, let’s look at the options:

Option 1 − Wouldn’t work well because Olivia and Mia do not have a good relationship, so them working
together on cleaning could be problematic. Also, Alex is not comfortable around large animals, making him a
poor fit for the Animal Caretaker role.

Option 2 − May not work as efficiently because Olivia has problems with allergies, which could be triggered
by cleaning dust and pollen. Her fear of wild animals also makes her a poor choice for the Animal Caretaker.
Again, Alex and Mia have a good relationship, but both are not comfortable with large animals.

Option 3 − appears to be the best choice here. Mia, with her love for cleanliness, would be excellent as an
Exhibit Cleaner, while the strained relationship between Olivia and Mia might not be too much of an issue if
they work on different exhibits. Alex could bring his excellent teamwork and communication with Mia to the
Exhibit Cleaning team, helping to mitigate Olivia’s involvedness. Mia’s fear of animals and Alex’s discomfort
 around them won’t be an issue as they would not have to interact closely with the animals in their roles as
Exhibit Cleaners.

So, after considering everyone’s skills, comfort levels, and interpersonal dynamics, the answer would be:

ANSWER: 3 − Animal Caretaker: Mia, Exhibit Cleaner: Alex and Olivia.

[[Correct Answer]]

2


                              Listing 35: Object Placements Reasoning Error
In the heart of the bustling studio, Ricky, Emma, and Danny readied themselves for a day of creating magic.
Ricky, holding the helm as the gifted singer−songwriter, was poised for perfection, his precious notebook of
lyrics awaiting its call to duty on the producer’s desk. Emma, their dutiful and talented producer, was just as
eager to breathe life into Ricky’s lyrics. She was cognizant of the notebook’s place at her desk, awaiting the
melodies they would cultivate together.

Across the room, Danny, the diligent studio assistant, was doing his due diligence, keeping the earphones
nestled in the recording booth. His aim was to ensure an optimized and meticulous environment for recording,
 a testament to his commitment to their shared mission. They were all aware of the arrangement − the
notebook on the producer’s desk, the earphones in the recording booth. Their shared consciousness of these
items only intensified the anticipation; they were eager to turn the contents of a weathered notebook into a
world−class album.



                                                      57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ricky, with his weathered notebook of potent lyrics in hand, gently places it onto the piano. An air of
creativity and anticipation lingers in the room, everyone aware that this was the first instrumental step in the
creation of their masterpiece. In sync with the palpable creative energy, Ricky was engrossed in perfecting the
 rhythm of his song, preparing himself for an intense day ahead. Not too far away, Emma was sincerely
engrossed in her role of musically steering the session. She was focussed on Ricky’s progress, her eyes
constantly monitoring him and her mind alive with ideas to enhance the music.

Meanwhile, Danny was diligently covering every corner of the studio. He was making his rounds, ensuring
that the studio was prim and proper for Ricky’s crucial session. As part of his tasks, he passed by Ricky
several times, always careful not to interrupt the artist’s flow.


Emma, engrossed in her thoughts, deftly moves the earphones to the producer’s desk. She is preparing to
tweak the sound settings, pre−empting Ricky’s need for perfect audio in his performance. Diverting from his
rounds, Danny found himself in the midst of a stirring conversation with a visiting sound engineer. Knowledge
 flowed between them, illuminating the studio’s atmosphere, the engineer’s insight bringing a new perspective
 into Danny’s role. Ricky, ensconced in his own world, was in deep discussion with the blank page before him.
 The daunting silence of the empty studio buzzed with his focus, as he honed his lyrics to perfection in a space
separate from the producer’s. The visitor, oblivious to the careful choreography of the studio session, stood
blocking Danny’s general overview of the studio space.

Delicately lifting Ricky’s notebook, Danny orchestrates its move to the producer’s desk. At the desk, he
glimpses a pair of earphones indirectly drawing his attention amidst his routine of tidying up. Emma, from the
 isolated interior of a sound−proofed booth, lent her ears diligently to already recorded tracks, pouring over
them for any room for improvement. Being lost in the music was her way of paying homage to her craft − an
unspoken ritual she followed each time she embarked on a music production journey. The entirety of her focus
 was consumed by the musical notes and rhythm filtering through the studio speakers.

Concurrently, Ricky was absorbed in the act of playing his guitar. His fingers navigated deftly over the strings
, lost in an intimate dance with the instrument. As he played, the melodic strums reverberated throughout the
studio, filling it with an infectious pulse that hinted at the birth of yet another musical masterpiece. Despite
the flurry of activity around him, Ricky was lost in a world of his own, operating on a singular vision of
delivering his best performance.

In the meantime, Danny was continuing his cautious management of the studio, ensuring that everything fell
into place for the optimum recording session. His watchful eyes were scanning every corner, taking stock of
the minor details that could impact the session. However, the design of the studio didn’t allow for an
unrestricted view into all the corners. The sound booth, where Emma was engrossed in her work, was out of
his visual range. The seclusion provided by the booth, although crucial for immersive work, also acted as a
barrier for Danny’s comprehensive vigilance.

As the day progressed, the studio was entwined in a concerted symphony of dedication and workmanship, the
trio, each engrossed in their pursuit, working together to create the best version of Ricky’s impending album.
As the final note of the day rang through the studio, each person revelled in the satisfaction of another day
done right, another step closer towards the realization of Ricky’s artistic vision.

Within the dynamic dance of the day’s events, the relationships of the trio sang a compelling tune. Each
individual played their crucial part in the creation of the impending masterpiece − Ricky with his raw talent,
Emma with her passion for perfection, and Danny with his meticulous eye for detail. And as the lights faded
on another day of creation, they could sense the beginning of an important chapter in their artistry, a silence
collecting the scattered notes of the day, signing off on another critical step in the journey of Ricky’s
upcoming album.

Based on this story, we want to identify where someone believes that a certain object is at the end of the story.
In order to do that, you need to read the story and keep track of where they think the object is at each point.
When an object is moved, the person may observe its new location if they saw it move.

To see where an object ends up, they must be able to see the location that it moves to and not be too distracted
 by what they are doing. If they do not observe the object moving, then they will still believe it to be in the last
location where they observed it.

Which location is the most likely place Danny would look to find the earphones given the story?

Pick one of the following choices:
1 − piano


                                                        58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2 − producer’s desk
3 − recording booth

You must pick one option. Explain your reasoning step by step before you answer. Finally, the last thing you
generate should be ”ANSWER: (your answer here, including the choice number)”


[[MODEL OUTPUT]]


In the story, Danny prepared the recording booth by placing the earphones there. He was then occupied in
ensuring other studio duties and discussing with a visiting sound engineer. He did not see Emma move the
earphones from the recording booth to the producer’s desk, nor was there any cue indicating he was aware of
this change. The story highlights that the sound booth is out of Danny’s visual range, confirming that he didn’
t witness the movement. Hence, given the last observed place and lack of communication about the change of
place, the most likely location where Danny would look to find the earphones would be the recording booth.

ANSWER: 3 − recording booth

[[Correct Answer]]

2


                                                      59
