Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SKILL - MIX : A FLEXIBLE AND EXPANDABLE FAMILY OF
EVALUATIONS FOR AI MODELS

 Dingli Yu1 Simran Kaur1 Arushi Gupta1
 Jonah Brown-Cohen2 Anirudh Goyal2 Sanjeev Arora1
 1
   Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
 2
   Google DeepMind



                                              A BSTRACT

         With LLMs shifting their role from statistical modeling of language to serving
         as general-purpose AI agents, how should LLM evaluations change? Arguably,
         a key ability of an AI agent is to flexibly combine, as needed, the basic skills it
         has learned. The capability to combine skills plays an important role in (human)
         pedagogy and also in a paper on emergence phenomena (Arora & Goyal, 2023).
         This work introduces SKILL - MIX , a new evaluation to measure ability to combine
         skills. Using a list of N skills the evaluator repeatedly picks random subsets of
         k skills and asks the LLM to produce text combining that subset of skills. Since
         the number of subsets grows like N k , for even modest k this evaluation will, with
         high probability, require the LLM to produce text significantly different from any
         text in the training set. The paper develops a methodology for (a) designing and
         administering such an evaluation, and (b) automatic grading (plus spot-checking
         by humans) of the results using GPT-4 as well as the open LLaMA-2 70B model.
         Administering a version of SKILL - MIX to popular chatbots gave results that, while
         generally in line with prior expectations, contained surprises. Sizeable differences
         exist among model capabilities that are not captured by their ranking on popu-
         lar LLM leaderboards (“cramming for the leaderboard”). Furthermore, simple
         probability calculations indicate that GPT-4’s reasonable performance on k = 5 is
         suggestive of going beyond “stochastic parrot” behavior (Bender et al., 2021), i.e.,
         it combines skills in ways that it had not seen during training.
         We sketch how the methodology can lead to a SKILL - MIX based eco-system of
         open evaluations for AI capabilities of future models. We maintain a leaderboard
         of SKILL - MIX at skill-mix.github.io.

1    I NTRODUCTION

As LLMs shift roles from mere statistical models of language to fairly general-purpose AI agents, the
inadequacy of existing evaluations—even those introduced within the past year—has become clear.
Yet, leading models routinely score over 90% on many evaluations (OpenAI, 2023).
Current evaluations on leaderboards test quantitative, scientific, and academic reasoning suffer from
serious limitations. Since they originate from human tests or textbooks, they are vulnerable to
training-set contamination, i.e., examples very similar to the ones on the evaluation ending up in the
training corpus of the model (OpenAI, 2023; Li, 2023). This is hard to measure given the immense
size of training corpora and the fact that the corpora are rarely released. The contamination issue
especially affects evaluations based upon human exams (whose difficulty is tied to being time-limited
and closed-book) since models are now being trained on technical textbooks as well as course
materials.1
A variant of the contamination issue is “cramming for the leaderboard.” It is possible to deliberately
train a model on data similar to those used in the leaderboard evaluations. Such datasets are easy to
generate from a small number of examples using existing strong models. If “cramming” happens
    1
      Studies have revealed significant anomalies on GPT-4’s performance on questions exams created after its
release (Narayan & Kapoor).


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Generation                                                  Grading

                Input: Write at most 2 sentences in the    Input: Could you please help me grade a student’s response to
                context of sewing that illustrate all of   the following question?
                the following skills: modus ponens, red    Question: Write at most 2 sentences in the context of sewing
                herring, and metaphor.                     that illustrate all of the following skills: modus ponens, red
                                                           herring, and metaphor.
                Generating model: If needles were the
                keys to crafting melodies, then every      Student’s Answer: If needles were the keys to crafting melodies,
                perfect stitch would be a note in a        then every perfect stitch would be a note in a harmonious
                                                           symphony; but speaking of symphonies, have you ever noticed
                harmonious symphony; but speaking          how the early bird's song sounds just like Mozart?
                of symphonies, have you ever noticed
                how the early bird's song sounds just      Grading rubric: Correctly illustrates skills (3 points). On topic (1
                like Mozart?                               point). Makes sense (1 point). At most 2 sentences (1 point).
                                                           Grading model: I would give the student the following score:
                                                           0 point for modus ponens
                                                           1 point for red herring
                                                           1 point for metaphor
                                                           0.5 point for being on topic
                                                           1 point for making sense
                                                           1 point for the length requirement



Figure 1: Left: Simplified depiction (with simplified prompt) of the generation stage of our eval-
uation. The full prompt appears in Appendix C.3.1. The generating model is given a topic (sewing)
as well as skills (modus ponens, red herring, metaphor), and asked to generate text demonstrating the
skills. The full prompt contains skill definitions and examples, which can be found in Appendix C.3.1.
Right: Simplified depiction (with simplified prompt) of the grading stage of our evaluation.
The grading model (not necessarily the same as the generating model) is given the generating model
output and grading instructions, and returns pointwise grading. The full grading prompt can be found
in Appendix C.3.2.

during pre-training, it becomes hard to detect. If it happens during fine-tuning, it may be detectable if
it ends up harming general-purpose language skills.
Yet another issue arising from the secrecy of the training corpus is that it is difficult to verify how
original the model’s text productions truly are. In a recent interview (Hinton & Ng), Hinton suggested
that a significant hurdle in current discussions of AI risk is absence of agreement among experts on
whether or not models have already gone past “stochastic parrots” behavior (Bender et al., 2021)—i.e.,
whether they are able to actually understand the world, or at a minimum produce novel thoughts or
“behavior” that they did not see in the training corpus.
Desiderata for next-generation evaluations: To sum up, we need evaluations that are: (a) clearly
relevant to general-purpose intelligence and language understanding; (b) easy for humans to design
and administer, including with academic-level resources; (c) resistant to training-set contamination
and “cramming for the leaderboard;” (d) capable of revealing LLM’s capability on producing novel
text that they did not see in the training corpus (Hinton & Ng), i.e., going beyond “stochastic” parrots
behavior (Bender et al., 2021); (e) easy to grade at scale (while allowing human spot-checking); (f)
easily upgradeable into harder evaluations in the future as models get stronger; and (g) comprehensible
at some level for the general public, including with respect to points (c) and (d).

1.1   SKILL - MIX

Our SKILL - MIX evaluation tests the model’s ability to produce sensible text satisfying natural con-
straints. It starts with a set of N skills (an example is: “use of metaphor”) that every LLM could
reasonably be expected to have encountered in its training set —say, because each skill has a
Wikipedia entry. SKILL - MIX also uses a list of T topics that have low, but non-negligible, probability
in any reasonable training corpus –e.g., “dueling,” “gardening.” SKILL - MIX (k) consists of randomly
picking a subset of k skills out of N , and a random topic out of T topics. The chat agent is then asked
to produce a short piece of text (say, 3 sentences) in the context of the selected topic and illustrate
all k selected skills. This evaluation can be easily administered using any set of skills and questions
and any k. The model is being required to do highly constrained text generation, whose difficulty
intuitively increases with k 2
    2
      The authors of this paper took an average of more than 7 minutes to answer SKILL - MIX (4). See Table 15
for some examples of text generated by humans vs. GPT-4.


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since the evaluation task consists of sampling a random k-tuple from a distribution, performance
can be estimated reliably with a few hundred runs of the model. Thus human grading is feasible
with modest budgets. We found that it is just as reliable to do auto-grading followed by human
spot-checking of the grading. We used two easily-available models GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)) and
LLaMA-2-70B-Chat (Touvron et al., 2023).
SKILL - MIX is easily tailored to a model’s capability by adjusting k, and in general larger models are
able to handle larger k (Section 1.2). In the future, as models get stronger, the evaluation can be
made harder by not only increasing k but also by adding new skills to our list, or by switching to
more difficult or specialized skills, or to topics that are rarer or more specialized. It is also possible to
create SKILL - MIX evaluations for special domains (e.g., coding or science) and for multi-modal data,
although we leave that for future work.
SKILL - MIX has two theoretical inspirations. The first are theories of human pedagogy and learning
(Forehand, 2005; Koedinger et al., 2012; 2023; Li et al., 2013), which have long focused on the ability
to combine skills. The other is a recent paper (Arora & Goyal, 2023) that gave a theory for how
complex skills emerge in LLMs when they are scaled up. The paper assumed that understanding small
pieces of text consists of applying k skills out of a large list of basic skills. Under some assumptions,
the paper showed that scaling up language models leads to improvement in proficiency at applying
k ′ -tuples of basic skills, where k ′ increases with scaling. (Roughly speaking, k ′ doubles when the
mode is scaled up 10x.) Its appendix included a few examples of text produced by current chatbots in
response to requests to combine a given set of skills, and that was an inspiration for our SKILL - MIX .
Difficulty of SKILL - MIX with increasing k. The intuition that the hardness of SKILL     - MIX increases
with k can be supported by a simple calculation. Given a list of N skills, there are Nk ways to choose
the subset of k skills. For N = 1000, this quantity exceeds 1010 when k = 4, and 1012 when k = 5.
Furthermore, the skills and topics are fairly rare in the corpus —e.g., the word “sushi” has a unigram
probability of 10−7 in Google n-grams (Google, 2012). Thus, the chance that the training corpus
contains a short piece of text on the chosen topic that exhibits the chosen set of k skills becomes very
small even for N = 100 (see Section 6). Such calculations are very relevant to be convinced that a
model is going past “stochastic parrots” behavior as well as has resistance to dataset contamination.
Paper Organization. Section 2 describes related prior work. Section 3 lays out design principles
for the evaluation: assembling the list of skills and topics, as well as the prompt used to administer it.
Section 4 describes the setup for auto-grading. Section 5 reports the experimental results. Section 6
gives the calculation for verifying that the model is going beyond stochastic parrots behavior. Section 7
sketches a future framework of several SKILL - MIX evaluations maintained by disinterested research
groups, with a secret list of skills and topics.

1.2   K EY F INDINGS
Section 5 shows results of administering SKILL - MIX (k) for different k to today’s leading models.
For proprietary models, the results are mostly in accord with prior expectations. GPT-4 ranks highest,
being able to perform reasonably even for k = 5. LLaMA-2-70B-Chat turns in a good performance,
somewhat below GPT-3.5 Turbo, which is in line with general consensus about its capabilities. For
most models, k = 3 already proves too tough.
Evidence of cramming for the leaderboard. Hugging Face’s Open LLM leaderboard (Beeching
et al., 2023), which is based upon EleutherAI’s evaluation harness (Gao et al., 2021), is seen as a
proving ground for open LLMs. Many models currently at the top of the leaderboard are LLaMA-
2 derivatives, and are ranked much higher than the corresponding LLaMA-2 model. However,
on SKILL - MIX these models perform poorly and worse than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat, suggestive of
cramming that significantly harmed general-purpose text skills (see Section 5). The recent Falcon-
180B-Chat (Almazrouei et al., 2023) also places higher on the leaderboard than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat,
and has been claimed to have capabilities between GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4 based upon this ranking.
Yet, it fares worse than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat on SKILL - MIX . Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 also did not
live up to claims of being significantly better than the corresponding LLaMA model.
Detecting saturation of an evaluation. AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) is a popular evaluation (with
an accompanying leaderboard) for text generation. It uses GPT-4 and a dataset of prompts to check
how often the model’s generated output “wins” against that of DaVinci003. AlpacaEval presents a
good case-study on the difficulties of creating good evaluations. Designed to give small open models


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a fighting chance in early 2023, it shows signs of saturation a mere 6 months later. Even 13B models
now win against DaVinci003 with probability exceeding 90%, and recently Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1
(built on the LLaMA-2 base models) climbed to the top, pushing GPT-4, by a hair, to second place.
Did LLM capabilities truly progress this much within 6 months? We find that the new champion
scores well on SKILL - MIX , and noticeably better than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat, but it is handily beaten
by GPT-4. In general, most reasonable models now get similar scores on AlpacaEval, but show widely
varying performances on SKILL - MIX , which suggests that AlpacaEval has lost its discriminative
ability. SKILL - MIX avoids this shortcoming by evaluating on constrained text generation, and using
k to adjust the difficulty.
Demonstrating capabilities beyond “stochastic parrot.” Whether or not current models are capable
of going past “stochastic parrots” behavior (Bender et al., 2021) remains a crucial topic of discussion
in the field (Hinton & Ng), and it is unclear what this would mean. In context of SKILL - MIX we
define it to mean: ability to correctly use combinations of skills + topic that it had not seen in the
training corpus. Our version of SKILL - MIX uses a list of skills each of which has a Wikipedia entry
or listing (and thus known to every LLM). As mentioned, GPT-4 generates correct answers with
reasonable probability for SKILL - MIX (k = 5), and we estimate that at least 1/3 of the time this
involves text that combines a mix of skills and topics that had not appeared in the training corpus.
For k = 6, we estimate the majority of the correct answers generated by GPT-4 to involve novel
combinations (see Section 6 and Appendix D for calculations). We are unable to find similar evidence
for any other model at this time.
Design principles for SKILL - MIX . We include ablation studies suggesting design principles for
new versions of SKILL - MIX : (i) auto grading setup (Section 4) (ii) deducting points for explicitly
mentioning skill names in the answer (Appendix C.6) (iii) filtering out common skills (Appendix
C.6). Our initial experiments involved a set of 101 skills selected from books and Wikipedia. Our
calculation in Section 6 suggests that including skills that have higher frequencies in the training
corpus makes SKILL - MIX easier. We identified 17 skills that appeared with rather high frequency in
the common crawl corpus. Omitting them from the evaluation appeared to make it much harder for
most models (see Section C.6). This second version is recommended.
2    P RIOR WORK
Arora & Goyal (2023) gives a mathematical model for skill emergence via LLM scaling. (In principle
it applies to non-text data as well, since it makes almost no assumptions about what “text” or “skills”
are.) The key assumption is that pieces of text involve random combinations of skills, and then
reductions in cross-entropy (which can happen on an arbitrary subset of text pieces) are shown to
imply improvements in both individual skills and combinations of skills. A key implication is that
the trained model may show competence on k-tuples of skills even though this k-tuple of skills was
not demonstrated in the training set. (Note that individual skills were demonstrated, as were some
random k-tuples, but most k-tuples were not demonstrated.) It is important to note that the theory did
not need to specify what it means to “combine” skills.
Skill-It The goal of Skill-It (Chen et al., 2023) is to select an optimal subset of the training data
such that an LLM trained on this subset will perform well on downstream tasks. Chen et al. (2023)
utilize the notion of skill ordering to construct this subset. Skill ordering refers to the natural notion
that learning “simpler” skills first can make learning “difficult” skills later easier for the learner. Chen
et al. (2023) define an ordered skill set as “a collection of skills with a directed skills graph that is
neither complete nor empty, where an edge from a prerequisite skill to a skill exists if the amount of
training it takes to learn the skill can be reduced if the prerequisite skill is also learned.”
Skills in Reinforcement Learning Reinforcement learning also has a notion of “skills,” which is
distinct from the notion that we use (Arora & Goyal, 2023), but bears some similarities to the notion
of skill used in Chen et al. (2023). In particular, Pertsch et al. (2021) aims to learn a skill prior, i.e., a
distribution over skills, such that a model trained to develop these skills will later perform well on
downstream tasks.
Prior evaluations Prior work has emerged which evaluates LLMs on particular skills, in a different
sense than we do. Ruis et al. (2023) finds that LLMs do not do well on implicature.
Pedagogy work Another important area where skills have been previously studied is that of human
skill learning in pedagogy. Koedinger et al. (2023) develops a cognitive and statistical model of skill
acquisition with the goal of understanding why/if some students learn faster than others. Koedinger


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al. (2012) presents an algorithm to discover cognitive models, which are essentially skill models.
Li et al. (2013) uses a computational model of student learning (a simulated student) in order to
discover cognitive models (i.e., “learn the skills”).

3     D ESIGN OF SKILL - MIX
3.1    P ICKING THE SKILLS
We obtained a set of 101 language skills and a set of 100 topics for SKILL - MIX evaluation. Since
the goal of our evaluation is to test general-purpose text generation capability rather than the ability
of the particular skills and topics, we only release 10 skills and 10 topics randomly sampled from
the two sets to avoid potential “cramming” for SKILL - MIX . The randomly sampled skills and topics
appear in Appendix A (see Tables 2 and 3).
We curated the topic list by first sampling a large list of topics (e.g. using Reddit forums as inspiration),
and then narrowing the list down to 100 topics based on the unigram frequency of the topic (and all
related synonyms) on Google Ngram viewer (Google, 2012). To earn a spot on our list, a topic’s
average unigram had to be around 10−6 —low (further reducing the likelihood that the model had
seen the k skills demonstrated in the context of the topic), and yet still ensuring good coverage even
in 100B-sized corpora. The list of basic skills was designed to contain language skills which have a
Wikipedia entry or listing (and thus known to every LLM), and whose definition the average person
could understand. We started with a longer list of skills taken from textbooks on logical reasoning,
rhetoric, theory of mind, (Kelly., 2014; Cummings, 2005; Nichols & Stich, 2003; Mueller, 2014). We
tried to eliminate skills that either were too specialized —and thus difficult to apply in the context of
the fairly narrow topics already chosen— or difficult to combine with other skills. (Some examples
of discarded skills appear in the Appendix C.2.) For each skill, we created a description and an
illustrative example of its usage —these were taken from either a textbook or Wikipedia, though
occasionally, we modified them to make them clearer or more concise.

3.2 P ROCEDURE
Our evaluation is roughly broken down into two parts (see Figure 2). In the first part, we conduct
generation, where a (Student) language model is given a set of k skills and a topic, and asked
to generate some text demonstrating the k skills in the context of the provided topic. Once the
(Student) language model generates some text, it then must be graded by a (possibly different)
grading language model (i.e., Grader). A simplified version of the prompts used in the generation and
grading stages is depicted in Figure 1.
Models used for generation Our dataset is designed to test general skills, and hence many
language models may be used in the generation step. However, since the language model must be
able to respond to prompt instructions (“generate k skills”), we only pick models that have been
instruction-tuned. These models include LLaMA-2-7B-Chat, LLaMA-2-13B-Chat, LLaMA-2-70B-
Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Falcon-180B-Chat (Almazrouei
et al., 2023), Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 (Xwin-LM Team, 2023), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 (Mistral AI
Team, 2023), Qwen-14B-Chat (Bai et al., 2023), Tigerbot-70B-Chat (TigerResearch, 2023). Note
Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1, and Qwen-14B-Chat were released only a few days
before the deadline, and all of them claim to perform better on benchmarks compared to state-of-the-
art models of even larger size.
Models used for grading We find that some language models are more suitable for grading
than others. Some models have difficulty recognizing the presence of skills, even when they are
demonstrated correctly. We use LLaMA-2-70B-Chat and GPT-4 after manually spot-checking grading
samples and ensuring they aligned with human grading.
SKILL - MIX (k) consists of picking a random topic and a random subset of k skills (with their
respective definitions and illustrative examples) from the list described above, and asking the (Student)
model to produce a short piece of text which illustrates all the k skills in the context of the topic of
interest. A simplified example prompt appears in Figure 1, but our final prompt includes an additional
question that asks the (Student) model to look over and possibly improve its first answer. We find the
second answer can be much better than the first one with proper prompt engineering. In addition, we
ask the model to separate its answer and explanation with “Answer” and “Explanation.” Otherwise,
the model may not separate its generated answer from its explanation, hampering the parsing of the
answer. We provide more details about the generation prompts in Appendix C.3.1


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The authors took the test (6 questions each with k = 4) to assess the feasibility and difficulty level.
The average time taken to understand the prompt and type the answer was more than 7 minutes. This
is not an easy test for humans!

4       AUTO - GRADING M ETHOD
For each prompt sampled from SKILL - MIX (k), the (Student) model’s corresponding answer is graded
according to the following criteria: (1) the k skills are present and used properly in the output; (2) the
output is on the given topic; (3) the number of sentences in the output is within the provided limit,
which we set to be k − 1; and (4) the output is a piece of sensible text. For any of the above subtasks,
partial credit can be assigned if the answer partially satisfies the requirement.
The generations by the models were graded using GPT-4 as well as LLaMA-2-70B-Chat, and these
grades were then spot-checked by the paper authors. In the trial run, we focused on tweaking the
method for best results and consistency using a small set of around 20 generations. As usual, the
assessments generated by the grading models (especially LLaMA-2) were somewhat sensitive to
the prompt. We tweaked the grading prompt by including a summarized version of the generation
prompt, providing definitions and illustrative examples of the individual k skills, and requesting for
the graded output to follow a particular format.
While both models are creditable graders, they, like all current LLMs, were unreliable at simple
arithmetic, which is important for calculating a total score. We changed the prompt to require the
grader to output separate grades for individual components (proper use of skills, good fit to the topic,
and producing sensible text), which were subsequently aggregated (see Figure 3) using a separate but
simple Python script3 .
To require separate grades for individual components, we asked GPT-4 to provide a rubric-table style
grade, whereas for for LLaMA-2, we simply asked the model to include “Point earned: 1” if the
requirement is met, and “Point earned: 0” otherwise, for each rubric item in the evaluation. More
details, as well as the full grading prompt, appear in Appendix C.3.2.
Human Grading: Better? With a small test we conducted with five NLP researchers, we found
that human grading is noisy, and human graders might need significant training so they can agree on
a grading rubric. The standard deviation between the human grading is high, and even higher than the
difference between the average human grading and GPT-4 grading.4 This also indicates that GPT-4
and LLaMA-2 graders are reasonable graders compared to humans. More details of the test can be
found in Appendix B.

5       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we test various instruction-tuned models (including the LLaMA-2 family, GPT family,
Falcon-180B-Chat, Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1, Qwen-14B-Chat, and Tigerbot-
70B-Chat) on their performance on SKILL - MIX for various k. For convenience, we use saturation
point to denote the value of k at which a model’s score in SKILL - MIX drops off.
From the experimental results, we answer the following questions
         • What differences arise between grading by GPT-4 vs. LLaMA-2?
         • What is the effect of increasing k on SKILL - MIX performance? What is the saturation point
           for the instruction-tuned models?
         • What is the relationship between model scale and saturation point? We are particularly
           interested in answering this question for the family of LLaMA-2 models, since they share
           the same training set and methodology.
Setup We evaluate various instruction-tuned models on SKILL - MIX (k) with k = 2, 3, 4. We
continue to evaluate a model with k = 5 (potential also k = 6) if it does not saturate at k = 4. We
use both GPT-4 and LLaMA-2-70B-Chat as Grader.
    3
      We adjusted the point awarded for meeting the number of sentences requirement based on the ground truth.
While adjustments were rare, they were more common for LLaMA-2 than GPT-4.
    4
      The difference between the average human grading and LLaMA-2 grading is slightly higher than the
standard deviation between humans.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on SKILL - MIX (k)
graded by GPT-4. Ratio of Full Marks/Ratio of All Skills/Skill Fraction are reported for each student
model at k = 2, 3, 4. Evaluations on k = 5, 6 are skipped if the Ratio of Full Marks drops below 0.05
with smaller k. Details on prompts can be found in Section 3. See Table 5 for additional metrics.
   Student (generator)               k=2            k=3             k=4             k=5             k=6
   LLaMA-2-7B-Chat                 .05/.11/.37    .00/.01/.25     .00/.00/.23        -/-/-           -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-13B-Chat                .22/.35/.45    .05/.05/.37     .02/.02/.45        -/-/-           -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-70B-Chat                .28/.28/.62    .02/.05/.46     .00/.01/.44        -/-/-           -/-/-
   GPT-3.5-turbo                   .53/.60/.75    .20/.25/.59     .08/.13/.54     .04/.16/.51        -/-/-
   GPT-4                           .94/.97/.96    .68/.70/.88     .52/.55/.88     .36/.38/.86     .29/.29/.84
   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1        .05/.16/.40    .00/.05/.36     .00/.04/.25        -/-/-           -/-/-
   Qwen-14B-Chat                   .16/.19/.50    .02/.05/.39     .01/.01/.38        -/-/-           -/-/-
   Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1                .42/.58/.67    .22/.37/.63     .09/.17/.56     .08/.12/.55        -/-/-
   Falcon-180B-Chat                .27/.33/.53    .00/.03/.44     .03/.07/.38        -/-/-           -/-/-
   Tigerbot-70B-Chat               .06/.29/.26    .00/.10/.19     .01/.06/.15        -/-/-           -/-/-


For each SKILL - MIX (k), we evaluate all models on 100 (k skills, 1 topic) combinations with GPT-4
grading, and 30 combinations with LLaMA-2 grading.5 We provide each specific combination of
k skills to the (Student) model on three instances (see Figure 2). Each of the three generated texts
are also graded three times (to reduce the randomness caused by the Grader), in total creating nine
grading results for each (k skills, 1 topic) (see Figure 3).
Metrics Each generated text can receive up to k + 3 points: 1 point for each correctly illustrated
skill, 1 point for sticking to the topic, 1 point for coherence / making sense, and 1 point for having at
most k − 1 sentence. Recall that we grade each generated text three times. In each round of grading,
we parse each of the criteria individually from the Grader model’s output. For each criterion, we then
collect the majority vote among the three grading rounds. The voted points are then converted into
various metrics of interest (see Appendix C.5), some of which include
       • Ratio6 of Full Marks: 1 if all k + 3 points are earned, and 0 otherwise
       • Ratio of All Skills: 1 if k points are awarded for the k skills and at least 2 points are awarded
         for the remaining criteria, and and 0 otherwise
       • Skill Fraction: the fraction of points awarded for the k skills if all 3 points are awarded for
         the remaining criteria, and 0 otherwise
We then take the maximum value of the metrics among the 3 generations for a given (k skill, 1 topic)
combination, and average the maximum value across all the combinations.
Differences in Grader Scores From Tables 1 and 4, we clearly observe that LLaMA-2 is a
more generous grader than GPT-4. We also observe that when LLaMA-2 is used as the grader, it
prefers generations outputted by the LLaMA-2 family. For example, across different metrics, GPT-4
generally gives a higher score to Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 than to LLaMA-2-7B-Chat, but LLaMA-2
grader gives a much higher score to LLaMA-2-7B-Chat than Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 for k ≥ 3.
Overall, we found via spot-checking the output that GPT-4 is a more accurate and reliable grader
than LLaMA-2.
Increasing k degrades SKILL - MIX performance We observe that the ratio of full marks and
the ratio of all skills can decrease dramatically when k increases. With the exception of GPT-4,
GPT-3.5-turbo and Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, all models saturate on or before k = 3 with GPT-4 grading.
Amongst the small models, LLaMA-2-7B-Chat and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 saturate at k = 2. Since
LLaMA-2 is more generous, the saturation point is usually delayed by 1 for LLaMA-2 grading.
Relationship between model scale and saturation point We find that as capacity increases on
LLaMA-2, so does the saturation point. Observe that for LLaMA-2-7B-Chat, LLaMA-2-13B-Chat,
LLaMA-2-70B-Chat, the saturation points (of GPT-4 grading) are k = 2, 3, and 3, respectively.
Additionally, for any fixed k and metric type, higher model capacity corresponds to a better score

   5
     Due to computation limits, we only evaluate Falcon-180B-Chat on 30 combinations with GPT-4 grading.
   6
     This is called “ratio” because the metric is later averaged over the 30 combinations, even though this metric
is 0 and 1 for a single generation.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


amongst the LLaMA-2 model family. However, these observations do not necessarily hold true
for models from different families. For example, Falcon-180B-Chat has more model parameters
than Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, yet the saturation point of Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 is higher than that of
Falcon-180B-Chat, and Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 also outperforms Falcon-180B-Chat across all metrics
for k = 2, 3, 4.
A deviation from model rankings on popular LLM leaderboards Recent models (i.e., Falcon-
180B-Chat, Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, Qwen-14B-Chat, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1) are often introduced
with their performance evaluated on AlpacaEval or Hugging Face’s Open LLM Leaderboard (which
contains ARC (Clark et al., 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020),
and TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2021)), along with a comparison to the LLaMA-2 and GPT families. We
find that their superior performance on those evaluations (which is often misaligned with general
experience) may not extend to SKILL - MIX :

       • Falcon-180B-Chat and Tigerbot-70B-Chat rank higher than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat on Open
         LLM Leaderboard, but perform worse on SKILL - MIX for both GPT-4 and LLaMA-2 grading.
         Tigerbot-70B-Chat performs even worse than LLaMA-2-13B-Chat.
       • Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 takes on first place on AlpacaEval, beating GPT-4. However, Xwin-
         LM-70B-V0.1 is clearly worse than GPT-4 on SKILL - MIX .
       • Qwen-14B-Chat outperforms LLaMA-2-70B-Chat on MMLU, HumanEval (Chen et al.,
         2021) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), but performs worse than LLaMA-2-70B-Chat for
         k = 2, 3, 4 with both GPT-4 and LLaMA-2 grading.
       • Mistral-7B-v0.1 outperforms LLaMA-2 13B on all benchmarks that the Mistral AI team
         tested. Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 (the model after instruction tuning) outperforms LLaMA-2-
         13B-Chat on MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023). Yet, the situation is reversed on SKILL - MIX .

6    E VIDENCE FOR GOING BEYOND “ STOCHASTIC PARROTS ” BEHAVIOR
As mentioned in the introduction, there is interest in whether or not current models are capable of
going past “stochastic parrots” behavior. Using SKILL - MIX we are able to give a guarantee: for k = 5
and k = 6, GPT-4 is generating correct answers a good fraction of time, and a reasonable portion (say
more than 1/3) of these correct answers contain combinations of skills and topics that have never
jointly appeared in the training. We are unable to find similar evidence for any other model.
Our claim is verified by upperbounding the average frequency of skills ps , the average frequency of
topics pt , and the number of sentences in the training corpus L. Then in the training corpus, the  total
number of text piece that contains k of the skills and one of the topics is bounded by7 pks pt N  k T L.
If αk is the model’s “Ratio of Full Marks” in SKILL - MIX (k), then the number of text        pieces that
it successfully generates with k of the skills and one of the topics is at least αk N

                                                                                       k   T . Thus,  the
model is “beyond stochastic parrots” if αk > 23 pks pt L, meaning more than one-third of the successful
generations contain combinations not seen in the training corpus.
After filtering out skills that have a frequency of at least 5%, we estimate that with high probability,
ps ≤ 0.0144, pt ≤ 0.0022 and L ≤ 5 × 1010 on RedPajama dataset (Computer, 2023). Thus,
pks pt L ≤ 0.001 for k = 6, and pks pt L ≤ 0.07 for k = 5. Even after filtering out common skills as in
Appendix C.6, GPT-4 still has α6 ≈ 0.08 and α5 ≈ 0.12, which is still “beyond stochastic parrots.”
Please see Appendix D for more details of the calculation and estimation.

7    B EST PRACTICES FOR SKILL - MIX ECOSYSTEM
SKILL - MIX differs from most existing evaluations in two ways: (1) there is no dataset per se; instead,
by using N skills and T topics, the tasks (prompts) are generated randomly on the fly from N

                                                                                                   k T
possible combinations; and (2) for moderate k, the task is not easy for humans to solve, or even to
grade; at a minimum, high-quality human labor is needed.
However, note that a dataset of O(T log T +N log N ) random prompts and corresponding productions
already expose (with high probability) the full set of skills and topics, as well as many interesting
   7
     This calculation assumes independence among the occurrence of skills. Verifying k-wise independence
becomes computationally very expensive for large k but we verified it for k = 2.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ways to combine them. Preliminary results (in Appendix E) suggest that fine-tuning on such a dataset
of synthetic productions can improve scores on SKILL - MIX . Since the goal of our evaluation is to
test general-purpose text generation capability rather than ability on the particular skills and topics,
we propose to release only a random subset of 10% of skills and topics.
But, ultimately, one needs an evaluation ecosystem. This might consist of independent research
groups developing versions of SKILL - MIX (in other words, tests that are chosen randomly from a
high number of potential questions) with very different sets of skills and topics, including basic skills
related to science, economics, law, etc. Releasing a random subset of, say, 10% of the skills and
topics of a new evaluation gives the rest of the world an idea of what it tests –and how it is reasonably
distinct from other existing evaluations– while retaining its difficulty. If the research groups are seen
as trustworthy, this ecosystem’s continuous assessment of AI capabilities might become important
inputs into policy discussions in the future.
Difficulty of grading An open question in the above picture is how to grade harder versions of
SKILL - MIX in the future. The obvious idea is to use the current champion model for the evaluation
(provided the model retains no memory of its past interactions). But, a natural question arises:
whether to trust the champion’s grade for itself. This relates to an interesting debate in pedagogy
(Bloom et al., 1956; Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001; Forehand, 2005): Which is harder: to ace the
exam or to grade it well? While the answer may seem obvious in quantitative or scientific fields (i.e.,
acing is harder), this wasn’t obvious in other fields. Today it is more broadly accepted that grading
is indeed easier8 , which suggests that the champion can probably grade itself (assuming the model
retains no memory of past interactions), Human spot-checking seems advisable. In our experience,
GPT-4’s grading capabilities for a particular k seem to be better than its SKILL - MIX score on the
same k; we plan to further investigate this relationship in future work. On a related note, we found
that human spot-checking becomes much easier and more accurate if the grader includes reasoning
for grading decisions.

8    C ONCLUSIONS AND TAKEAWAYS
SKILL - MIX is an attempt to evaluate general-purpose language capabilities, specifically, a particular
sort of compositional generalization. It tests the model’s ability to create text on a given topic and
with a given combination of well-known skills. A key idea is that the skills and the topic are chosen
randomly from a big list, which itself can be expanded in many ways to give new evaluations. Such
evaluations may end up requiring the (Student) model to imagine and describe situations that does
not exactly match anything seen during training. Grading this evaluation is shown to be possible
with GPT-4 (and the authors spot-checked the grading). Human evaluations were sought but found to
have significant variance. We will try to reduce this variance in the next run with better rubrics and
guidance.
Section 5 showed that the performance of proprietary models on SKILL - MIX (k) generally accords
with popular perceptions of their quality. The results also show (in line with the theory of Arora
& Goyal (2023)) that when created by competent teams, larger models achieve a higher saturation
point than smaller models (e.g., the three LLaMA-2 models, which shared their training data and
methodology). The disappointing performance of Falcon-180B-Chat was an exception. Several open
models show signs of being over-trained for leaderboards at the expense of general-purpose language
capabilities (“cramming”). Furthermore, based on our calculations, GPT-4’s reasonable performance
on SKILL - MIX (k = 5) indicates that GPT-4 surpasses “stochastic parrot” behavior (Bender et al.,
2021). Of course, no single evaluation can be considered definitive. In future work, we hope to
explore whether there are “cramming” shortcuts to improve performance on SKILL - MIX .
Since current leaderboards show signs of losing their discriminative power, Section 7 sketched
a vision for an ecosystem of independent SKILL - MIX evaluations specializing in different sets of
skills and topics (most of which would be kept secret) that could provide trusted estimates of model
capabilities —both as input to public discussions of AI and as a deterrent against “cramming for
leaderboards”. SKILL - MIX scores track our colleagues’ subjective assessments of current models.
Soon, many AI models will be multi-modal, and we hope to design a multi-modal version of
SKILL - MIX for them.

   8
     But the variance we saw among human graders on our SKILL - MIX reminds us of the difficulty of grading
exams where there is no obvious best answer.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements: This work is partly supported by NSF and ONR.

R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Maitha Alhammadi, Mazzotta Daniele, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  Badreddine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. The falcon series of language models:
  Towards open frontier models. 2023.
Lorin W. Anderson and David R. Krathwohl (eds.). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and
  Assessing. A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. Allyn & Bacon, New York,
  2 edition, December 2001. ISBN 978-0801319037.
Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. A theory for emergence of complex skills in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15936, 2023.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao Liu,
   Chengqiang Lu, Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Chuanqi Tan,
   Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng Xu, Jin
   Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng
   Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang, Chang Zhou, Jingren
   Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen technical report. 2023.
Edward Beeching, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Sheon Han, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen
  Rajani, Omar Sanseviero, Lewis Tunstall, and Thomas Wolf. Open llm leaderboard. https:
  //huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard, 2023.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
 dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 610–623, 2021.
B. S. Bloom, M. B. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. R. Krathwohl. Taxonomy of educational
  objectives. The classification of educational goals. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. Longmans
  Green, New York, 1956.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Mayee F Chen, Nicholas Roberts, Kush Bhatia, Jue Wang, Ce Zhang, Frederic Sala, and Christopher
 Ré. Skill-it! a data-driven skills framework for understanding and training language models. arXiv
 e-prints, pp. arXiv–2307, 2023.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge,
  2018.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Together Computer. Redpajama: An open source recipe to reproduce llama training dataset, 2023.
  URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.
Louise Cummings. Pragmatics: a multidisciplinary perspective. In Edinburgh University Press, 2005.
Mary Forehand. Emerging perspectives on learning, teaching, and technology., chapter Bloom’s
 taxonomy: Original and revised. 2005.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Gold-
  ing, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric Tang,
  Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot language model
  evaluation, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5371628.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Google. Google ngram viewer. http://books.google.com/ngrams/datasets, 2012. URL http:
 //books.google.com/ngrams/datasets.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
G Hinton and A Ng. A conversation about ai risk. URL https://twitter.com/AndrewYNg/
  status/1667920020587020290?lang=en.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
David Kelly. The art of reasoning. an introduction to critical and logical thinking. In WW Norton &
  Company Inc, 2014.
Kenneth R Koedinger, Elizabeth A McLaughlin, and John C Stamper. Automated student model
  improvement. International Educational Data Mining Society, 2012.
Kenneth R Koedinger, Paulo F Carvalho, Ran Liu, and Elizabeth A McLaughlin. An astonishing
  regularity in student learning rate. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(13):
  e2221311120, 2023.
Nan Li, Eliane Stampfer, William Cohen, and Kenneth Koedinger. General and efficient cognitive
  model discovery using a simulated student. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
  Science Society, volume 35, 2013.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.
Yucheng Li. Estimating contamination via perplexity: Quantifying memorisation in language model
  evaluation, 2023.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
Edward Loper and Steven Bird. Nltk: The natural language toolkit. arXiv preprint cs/0205028, 2002.
Mistral AI Team. Mistral 7b,             9 2023.        URL https://mistral.ai/news/
 announcing-mistral-7b/.
Erik T Mueller. Commonsense reasoning: an event calculus based approach. Morgan Kaufmann,
  2014.
Arvind Narayan and Sayash Kapoor. Gpt-4 and professional benchmarks: the wrong
  answer to the wrong question.     URL https://www.aisnakeoil.com/p/
  gpt-4-and-professional-benchmarks.
Shaun Nichols and Stephen P Stich. Mindreading. an integrated account of pretence, self-awareness,
  and understanding other’s minds. In Oxford University Press, 2003.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 188–204. PMLR, 2021.
Laura Ruis, Akbir Khan, Stella Biderman, Sara Hooker, Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette.
  Large language models are not zero-shot communicators. NeuRIPS, 2023.
Philipp Schmid, Omar Sanseviero, Pedro Cuenca, Leandro von Werra, and Julien Launay. Spread
  your wings: Falcon 180b is here, 9 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/blog/
  falcon-180b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TigerResearch. TigerBot: A cutting-edge foundation for your very own llm. https://github.
  com/TigerResearch/TigerBot, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-30.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Xwin-LM Team. Xwin-lm, 9 2023. URL https://github.com/Xwin-LM/Xwin-LM.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine
  really finish your sentence?, 2019.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    L IST OF S KILLS AND T OPICS
Here we release a random sample of 10% of the skill list and topic list. We do not release the full
lists to avoid potential “cramming” for SKILL - MIX .

    Table 2: 10 randomly sampled skills from the 101 skills we used in SKILL - MIX evaluation.

    Category     Skill                Definition                   Example
    reasoning    self serving bias    A cognitive or perceptual    “If I do well on the exam,
                                      process that is distorted    it’s because of my academic
                                      by the need to maintain      prowess and hard work. If
                                      and enhance one’s self es-   I do poorly, it’s because the
                                      teem.                        course was poorly taught,
                                                                   and the exam was poorly
                                                                   proctored.”
    rhetorical   accident (fallacy)an informal fallacy and         Cutting people with knives is
                                   a deductively valid but         a crime. Surgeons cut peo-
                                   unsound argument oc-            ple with knives. Surgeons
                                   curring in a statistical        are criminals.
                                   syllogism (an argument
                                   based on a generaliza-
                                   tion) when an exception
                                   to a rule of thumb is ig-
                                   nored.
    rhetorical   complex question A question that is loaded “Why are you lying to me?”
                 (loaded question with an implicit assump- is a question that presup-
                 with implicit as- tion.                       poses you are lying to me.
                 sumption )                                    Any answer you give will
                                                               force you to agree you are
                                                               lying.
    rhetorical   red herring       Introducing irrelevant A member of the press asks
                                   points to detract attention the president why they voted
                                   from a question.            to expand a welfare program.
                                                               The president responds, “The
                                                               strength of America is the
                                                               strength of its communities,
                                                               and I am proud to make our
                                                               communities better places.”
    literary     metaphor          a figure of speech that, “All the world’s a stage,
                                   for rhetorical effect, di- And all the men and
                                   rectly refers to one thing women merely players” is
                                   by mentioning another.      a metaphor because it’s a
                                                               comparison without using
                                                               “like” or “as.”
    logical      spatial reasoning The capacity to reason The key fit into the box. Us-
                                   about the spatial relation- ing spatial reasoning, one
                                   ships between objects.      can deduce that the width of
                                                               the key was smaller than the
                                                               width of the box.
    logical      modus ponens      A syllogism that is of “If today is Tuesday, then
                                   the form “If P then Q. P. John will go to work. Today
                                   Hence Q.”                   is Tuesday. Therefore, John
                                                               will go to work.”


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      logical     statistical   syllo-   A syllogism that argues,      “Almost all people are taller
                  gism                   using inductive reason-       than 26 inches. Gareth is a
                                         ing, from a generaliza-       person. Therefore, Gareth is
                                         tion true for the most part   taller than 26 inches.”
                                         to a particular case.
      theory of   emotional self reg-    a complex process that in-    Examples of emotional self
      the mind    ulation                volves initiating, inhibit-   regulation include meditat-
                                         ing, or modulating one’s      ing, pausing to collect one-
                                         state or behavior in a        self before speaking, and
                                         given situation.              practicing stress manage-
                                                                       ment.
      physical    folk physics (com-     The untrained human per-      “If I roll the pen off of the
      knowl-      mon knowledge          ception of basic physical     table, it will fall to the floor.”
      edge        physics)               phenomena.



         Table 3: 10 random sampled topics from 100 topics used in SKILL - MIX evaluation.

                                                Topic
                                               Sewing
                                               Dueling
                                         The Ottoman Empire
                                              Triathlons
                                             Beekeeping
                                             Survivalism
                                           Guerilla warfare
                                              Gardening
                                                Knots
                                              Urbanism


B     H UMAN G RADING T EST

We will now describe a test we conducted to measure the grading quality of human graders. Our five
volunteers were Ph.D. students and Postdocs working in the field of natural language processing and
large language models. They were given 5 outputs generated by GPT-4 on SKILL - MIX (4). The same
grading prompt for machine grading was given to human graders, asking them to give each individual
point for the criteria. In this case (k = 4), each output could receive at most 7 points.
For each point, we computed the mean and standard deviation among the human graders and then
averaged over all the points (35 in total). The average standard deviation is 0.261. On the other hand,
we compare the average of human grading with GPT-4 and LLaMA-2 grading. For each point, we
computed the absolute difference between the mean among the humans and machine grading. Then,
we took the average over 35 points. We found that the average difference is 0.257 for GPT-4 grading
and 0.268 for LLaMA-2 grading. This means if we assume the average of human grading is the
ground truth, then human graders and machine graders have similar errors.
We also observe that human graders in general give lower scores for text making sense, probably
because the output is usually a shortened version of the model’s first attempt. In contrast, the machine
graders usually award the point for “making sense” for more than 90% of the generated answers.


C     E XPERIMENTS

C.1     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Our evaluation is roughly broken down into two parts. In the first part, we conduct generation, where
a language model is given a set of k skills and a topic and asked to generate some text demonstrating


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the k skills. Once some text has been generated, it then must be graded by a (possibly different)
language model.

                                                      PART 1: GENERATION         PART 2: GRADING

                              Generate M
                    (k skill, 1 topic) combinations   Generated Text (Round 1)    Get Aggregated Grade

                                 1                    Generated Text (Round 2)    Get Aggregated Grade   Take maximum score
                                 2

  Select a                       3                    Generated Text (Round 3)    Get Aggregated Grade
  Student Model
  for Part 1

                                …
                                                                                                                              Report average
  Select a                                     …                                                                              over M scores
  Grader Model
  for Part 2                                          Generated Text (Round 1)    Get Aggregated Grade

                                 M
                                                      Generated Text (Round 2)    Get Aggregated Grade   Take maximum score


                                                      Generated Text (Round 3)    Get Aggregated Grade


Figure 2: Illustration of SKILL - MIX (k) pipeline. In our experiments, we use M = 30. For a more
detailed illustration of grading a single piece of generated text, see Figure 3.
Models used for generation. Our dataset is designed to test general skills, and hence many
language models may be used in the generation step. However, since the language model must
be able to respond to prompt instructions (”generate k skills”), we pick only models that have been
instruction-tuned. These models include LLaMA-2-7B-Chat, LLaMA-2-13B-Chat, LLaMA-2-70B-
Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Falcon-180B-Chat (Almazrouei
et al., 2023), Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 (Xwin-LM Team, 2023), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 (Mistral AI
Team, 2023), and Qwen-14B-Chat (Bai et al., 2023).
Models used for grading. We find that some language models are more suitable for grading
than others. Some models have difficulty recognizing the presence of skills, even when they are
demonstrated correctly. We use LLaMA-2-70B-Chat and GPT-4 after manually spot-checking grading
samples and ensuring they align with human grading.
Details of model configurations We do not use quantization on any of the models. For the GPT family,
we use OpenAI API with default generation configuration and the minimal system prompt “You
are a helpful assistant.” For the LLaMA-2 family, we use 2 A100 GPU and run with no
system prompt, 0.7 temperature, 1.0 repetition penalty, and 512 max new tokens. For Falcon-180B-
Chat, we use the prompt format mentioned in the official Huggingface blog of Falcon-180B-Chat
(Schmid et al., 2023) and the same parameters as LLaMA-2 family. For Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1, we
use the official prompt format (Xwin-LM Team, 2023) and the same hyperparameters as those
used for the LLaMA-2 family. For Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1, we access the prompt format with
tokenizer.apply chat template function and again the same parameters as the LLaMA-2
family. For Qwen-14B-Chat, we directly use the model.chat function as mentioned in their
official Github repository.

C.2      S KILL CHOOSING PROCESS

The list of ≈ 100 skills used to draw tuples of k skills was manually curated, and designed to include
skills the average person could understand which were common enough that they would appear on
Wikipedia (and hence in the model’s pre-training data). We pick skills from standard textbooks on
logic (Kelly., 2014), pragmatics (Cummings, 2005) and theory of mind (Nichols & Stich, 2003).
We also pick literary skills from Wikipedia. Not all skills were considered suitable for our dataset.
Because we want to evaluate the ability of models to compose skills, we eliminate skills that are
trivially present in almost any piece of text. Below is an example of a skill that was eliminated
from our dataset because it is so common in the English language that the model may “accidentally”
generate it, thereby falsely appearing as though it is able to combine this skill with other skills.

  Skill:          Pied Piping

  Definition: A syntax phenomenon whereby a given expression brings along an accompanying
  phrase when it is moved.



                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   GRADING ROUND 1                                                                                       AGGREGATE ALL POINTS

                   RUBRIC ITEMS                                                                                          Aggregation Options
                   Each item is worth 1 point
                                                                                                                         Ratio of Full Marks(A, B)
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 1
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 2                                                                    1   if (A + B) == (k + 3)
                                                                                                                         =    0   otherwise
                                        …
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill k
                                                                                                                         Ratio of All Skills
                      ●      On Topic                                                                                         1   if (A == k) and (B ≥ 2)
                      ●      Makes sense                                                                                 =    0   otherwise
                      ●      At most k-1 sentences
                                                              AGGREGATE INDIVIDUAL POINTS
                                                                                                                         Skills Fraction
                                                              RUBRIC ITEMS
                                                              Each item is worth 1 point                                      A/k if (B == 3)
                   GRADING ROUND 2                                                                                       =    0    otherwise
                   RUBRIC ITEMS                                    ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 1
                                                                                                          Take sum
                   Each item is worth 1 point                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 2
                                                                                     …                               A       A
                                                                                                                         Total Score
                                                                                                                         =    A+B
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 1         ●      Correctly illustrates Skill k
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 2
  Generated Text                        …                          ●      On Topic                        Take sum           B
                                                                                                                         Total Skill Score
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill k         ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                          Makes sense
                                                                          At most k-1 sentences
                                                                                                                     B   =    A

                      ●      On Topic
                      ●      Makes sense                                                                                 Rescaled Score
                                                                  Aggregating Options
                      ●      At most k-1 sentences                                                                           A+B k+3
                                                                  (for a single rubric item)                             =   k+3
                                                                       ●     Average
                                                                       ●     Max
                   GRADING ROUND 3

                   RUBRIC ITEMS
                   Each item is worth 1 point

                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 1
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill 2
                                        …
                      ●      Correctly illustrates Skill k

                      ●      On Topic
                      ●      Makes sense
                      ●      At most k-1 sentences


Figure 3: Illustration of obtaining aggregated grade This illustration depicts the process used to
grade a single generated piece of text.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Ex: She bought ‘‘that house’’. ‘‘Which house’’ did she buy? The preceding is an
  example of pied piping because the word ‘‘Which’’ brings along the word ‘‘house’’ in
  the ‘‘Wh...’’ clause.


For similar reasons, we also eliminate skills that inherently compose poorly with other skills. An
example is given below:

  Skill:   situational irony
  Ex: A firehouse burning down is situational irony, as one would not expect a place that
  puts out fires to burn.


Finally, some skills were not included due to being hard, even for a human grader, to grade whether
the skill was present.
Definitions for skills vary between different sources and textbooks. Since the model was pre-trained
on Wikipedia, we prefer the Wikipedia definition over other sources when available.
Skill examples were scraped from the internet, but chosen by human evaluators to be short and
unambiguous.

C.3     P ROMPT DESIGN

We experiment with different prompts for both generation and grading. We find that prompts can
perform quite differently. We list some examples of prompts we considered below.

C.3.1    G ENERATION PROMPTS
We try several different prompts when asking the models to generate tuples of k skills, and find that
prompt selection does influence the quality of the generation. In general, our prompts contain two
questions, giving the model the chance to look over its first answer and improve it. Without giving
specific instructions about the format, we found it hard to parse the model output for grading because
the model may not separate the generated answer from its explanation. Hence, we asked the model to
separate its answer and explanation with ”Answer:” and ”Explanation:”. Here is our first prompt with
the formatting instructions:

  Greetings! I am interested in natural language processing and I was wondering if you
  could help me generate an example of text that illustrates multiple skills in semantics
  or syntax. The example should be a single piece of text with {num sentences str} in the
  context of {topic} that illustrates all of the following skills: {skills str}.
  {skills defs and examples}

  Please keep the text short so it can fit in {num sentences str}, and please make sure the
  concepts can be found fully from the text. Please start the text with ’Answer:’ and
  start the explanation with ’Explanation:’. Thanks very much!


  Thanks very much. Now could you look it over and shorten your example but make sure it
  still illustrates all the skills?


Using this prompt, we observe that the models do not always follow the instructions, especially
for the second answer. We also observed that the second answer is sometimes worse than the first
generation, partially because some of the skills are also removed when shortening the answer.
To overcome the shortages, we present our 8th attempt at the generation prompt below.

  Greetings! I am interested in natural language processing and I was wondering if you
  could help me generate an example of text that illustrates multiple skills in semantics
  or syntax. The example should be a minimal natural piece of text with up to a few lines
  in the context of {topic} that illustrates all of the following skills: {skills str}.
  Please keep the text as short as possible, and make sure the concepts can be found fully
  from the text.

  For reference, here are the definitions and examples for the concepts:

  {skills defs and examples simple}



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Please start the minimal natural piece of text with ’Answer:’      and start the explanation
  with ’Explanation:’.

  Thanks very much!


  Thanks very much. Could you please look over the minimal natural piece of text and
  possibly improve and shorten it (up to {num sentences str})? If you make changes, please
  make sure that the text still illustrates all skills and remains on topic.
  Again, please start the improved minimal natural piece of text with ’Answer:’       and start
  the explanation with ’Explanation:’.
  Thanks very much!


Although there still exists rare failure cases for some models (demonstrated in Appendix C.4.1), the
instructions are mostly followed by all models with this version of the prompt. The quality of the
second answer is also significantly better when we remove the length constraints on the first answer,
and give the model the option of shortening the text (rather than the requirement) for the second
answer.
In the later tuning of the prompt, we further emphasize the improvement of the second answer, and
find the performance of GPT-4 continues to improve. The same prompt also improves Xwin-LM-
70B-V0.1, but makes LLaMA-2 family perform slightly worse on k > 2 (in those cases, we use the
previous prompt). Our final prompt is recorded below.

  Greetings! I am interested in natural language processing and I was wondering if you
  could help me generate an example of text that illustrates multiple skills in semantics
  or syntax. The example should be a minimal natural piece of text with up to a few lines
  in the context of {topic} that illustrates all of the following skills: {skills str}.
  Please keep the text as short as possible, and make sure the concepts can be found fully
  from the text.

  For reference, here are the definitions and examples for the concepts:

  {skills defs and examples simple}

  Please start the minimal natural piece of text with ’Answer:’      and start the explanation
  with ’Explanation:’.
  Thanks very much!


  Thanks very much. Could you please look over your answer and improve it? Please make
  sure that the new answer better illustrates all skills and remains on topic. On top of
  that, please also make sure the new answer only contains up to {num sentences str}.

  Again, please start the improved minimal natural piece of text with ’Answer:’       and start
  the explanation with ’Explanation:’.

  Thanks very much!


Example of LLaMA-2-70B-Chat generation response

  Sure, here’s an example of a minimal natural piece of text that illustrates both
  emotional self regulation and folk physics in the context of sewing:

  Answer: "I’m so frustrated with this sewing project. I’ve been working on it for hours
  and it’s still not turning out right. I just want to throw my sewing machine out the
  window!"

  Explanation: This text illustrates emotional self regulation because it shows the
  speaker’s ability to recognize and manage their emotions. The speaker is feeling
  frustrated and angry, but instead of acting on those emotions and doing something
  impulsive (like throwing the sewing machine out the window), they pause and express their
  feelings in a more controlled way. This shows that they are regulating their emotions in
  order to avoid doing something they might regret.
  The text also illustrates folk physics because it implies a basic understanding of
  cause-and-effect and the behavior of objects in the physical world. The speaker’s
  statement about throwing the sewing machine out the window implies that they understand
  that objects will fall to the ground if dropped, and that breaking the machine would be a
  consequence of their actions.
  This demonstrates an untrained human perception of basic physical phenomena, which is a
  key aspect of folk physics.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Sure, here’s an improved example that better illustrates both emotional self-regulation
  and folk physics in the context of sewing, and is only one sentence long:

  Answer: "I’m taking a deep breath and pausing before ripping out this seam for the fifth
  time, because I know I’ll just get frustrated and make more mistakes if I don’t calm
  down."

  Explanation: This text illustrates emotional self-regulation because it shows the
  speaker actively regulating their emotions by taking a deep breath and pausing before
  proceeding with a potentially frustrating task. It also illustrates folk physics because
  it implies an understanding of the cause-and-effect relationship between the speaker’s
  emotions and their ability to perform the task accurately. The speaker recognizes
  that if they don’t calm down, they are more likely to make mistakes, demonstrating an
  understanding of the impact of their emotions on their physical actions.



C.3.2    G RADING PROMPTS
We also try several different prompts when asking the model to grade a response. Unsurprisingly,
we find that prompt selection once again does influence grading. In general, our prompts ask the
(Grader) model to score the student’s response according to the rubric criteria.
Below is the final prompt we provided to GPT-4 for grading.

  Greetings!    I was wondering if you could help me grade the following answer given by a
  student.

  I’ll first describe the question that was given to the student, and then give you the
  student’s answer, and the grading rubric.

  The question given to the student was as follows: ‘‘Give a single piece of text with
  up to {num sentences str} in the context of topic. This single piece of text should
  illustrate all of the following skills: {skills str}.’’

  The student’s answer was:    ‘‘{student answer}’’

  For reference, here are the definitions for the skills:
  {skills defs and examples simple}

  Using a rubric table format, please grade the student’s answer with positive scoring.
  Each criterion is worth 1 point. The criteria are: {rubric items}. The table should
  only have the following columns: ‘Criteria’, ‘Points Earned’. In the ‘Points Earned’
  column, please provide only numerical values with no additional formatting. Please
  introduce the table with ‘Here’s the grading table:’ and please include a row for ‘Total
  Points Earned’ at the end of the table. Finally, please start your grading explanation
  with ‘Explanation’:


Below is the final prompt we provided to LLaMA-2-70B-Chat for grading.

  Greetings!    I was wondering if you could help me grade the following answer given by a
  student.
  I’ll first describe the question that was given to the student, and then give you the
  student’s answer, and the grading rubric.

  The question given to the student was as follows: ‘‘Give a single piece of text with
  up to {num sentences str} in the context of {topic}. This single piece of text should
  illustrate all of the following skills: {skills str}.’’

  The student’s answer was:    ‘‘{student answer}’’

  For reference, here are the definitions for the skills:      {skills defs}
  Please grade the student’s answer using the following criteria: {rubric items}. For
  each item in the rubric, please include in your evaluation ‘Point earned: 1’ if the
  requirement is met and ‘Point earned: 0’ otherwise. Please finish your grading with
  ‘Grade:’ followed by a number indicating the total points earned by the student. Thanks
  so much.


The following failure cases guided up towards our final grading prompt and manual-point-extraction
scheme.

        • The model would assign points for individual rubric criteria, but then total them up incor-
          rectly


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • We say we are grading a student’s answer. There is some amount of LLM sycophancy if we
          say it is a professor’s answer.
        • Without definition in prompt, the model mistakes certain skills for the common English
          meanings.

We will now provide examples of these failure cases based on real outputs.

C.3.3    U NABLE TO OUTPUT CORRECT TOTAL SCORE
The following example is based on a real grading response by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. Observe that the
grader model assigns points for each of the rubric criteria, but does not correctly total them up (the
correct total is 4, not 3). Because scenarios like these were common, we used a simple Python script
to extract the individual points associated with each rubric item to calculate the final score.

  Sure, I’d be happy to help you grade the student’s answer.       Here’s my evaluation using
  the given rubric:
  1. Contains red herring: The student’s answer demonstrates red herring in the sentence,
  where Mrs. Thompson diverts attention from the main issue at hand, so Point earned:
  1. 2. Contains modus ponens: The student’s answer does not contain any explicit
  illustration or use of modus ponens. Therefore, Point earned: 0. 3. Pertains to
  Gardening: The student’s answer clearly relates to Gardens, as it mentions the garden’s
  sprinkling system. Point earned: 1. 4. Text makes sense: The student’s answer is
  a coherent sentence that makes sense in the context of gardening. Point earned: 1.
  5. At most one sentence: The student’s answer is a single sentence, which meets the
  requirement. Point earned: 1.

  Grade:    3 out of 5.

  The student’s answer demonstrates the use of red herring and pertains to gardening,
  but it does not contain modus ponens. The text makes sense and is limited to a single
  sentence, which meets the given criteria.



C.3.4    M ISTAKES WITH SKILL MEANING ( USE OF COMMON E NGLISH MEANING )
The following example is based on a real grading response by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. Observe that
the grader model interprets “complex question” by its meaning in colloquial English, rather than the
meaning associated with logical fallacy.

  Sure, I’d be happy to help you grade the student’s answer.       Here’s my evaluation using
  the given rubric:

  1. Contains red herring: The student’s answer demonstrates red herring in the sentence,
  where Mrs. Thompson diverts attention from the main issue at hand, so Point earned:
  1. 2. Contains complex question: The student’s answer contains the complex question
  asked by Mrs. Thompson, ‘‘How do you reconcile your current career with what you dreamed
  of doing as a child?’’ Therefore, Point earned: 1. 3. Pertains to Gardening: The
  student’s answer clearly relates to Gardens, as it mentions the garden’s sprinkling
  system. Point earned: 1. 4. Text makes sense: The student’s answer is a coherent
  sentence that makes sense in the context of gardening. Point earned: 1. 5. At most
  one sentence: The student’s answer is a single sentence, which meets the requirement.
  Point earned: 1.
  Grade:    5 out of 5.

  The student’s answer demonstrates the use of red herring and complex question. The text
  makes sense and is limited to a single sentence, which meets the given criteria.



C.4     FAILURE CASES WITH FINAL PROMPT

With our final prompt, most of the generation and grading work well. However, there are still failure
cases, especially for relatively weaker models and larger k. Descriptions of some failure cases are
below:

        • Model is unable to follow the instructions, e.g., unable to output “Answer:” before the text
          for generation, and unable to output the table for grading.
        • Model would directly use the word (name of skill) in the generation instead of demonstrating
          the skill


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • Some of the k skills are simply left out of the generation
        • Partially correct skills, e.g. logic skills where a premise was not explicitly stated, or the
          implication was partially wrong.

We will now provide examples of these failure cases. Note that these examples are not real; instead,
they are modeled off of real outputs from particular models and values of k. We do this to respect the
release of 10 skills and 10 topics randomly sampled from out master list of skills and topics, to avoid
potential “cramming” for SKILL - MIX .

C.4.1    U NABLE TO FOLLOW THE INSTRUCTIONS

Falcon-180B-Chat sometimes does not follow the instructions for generation. This example below is
inspired by a real response provided by Falcon-180B-Chat for k = 3:

  **Answer:**
  Explanation: The **red herring** is shown in the first and second sentence, where Mrs.
  Thompson diverts attention from the main issue at hand. The **spatial reasoning** is
  present in the second sentence with the discussion of "how better plumbing routes could
  save water". The **self-serving bias** is displayed in the second sentence where Mrs.
  Thompson "tried to deflect blame from personal high water usage".
  At the town meeting about the water shortage, Mrs. Thompson, who had recently installed
  a lavish traditional gardening system in her yard sprinkler system to water her garden,
  blamed the town’s poor plumbing for the crisis. While many were drawn into her spatial
  reasoning about how better plumbing routes could save water, some recognized that her
  self-serving bias was evident, as she tried to deflect blame from personal high water
  usage and onto the town’s infrastructure.



Here is another failure case inspired by a real response by LLaMA-2-7B-Chat for k = 4:

  Answer: Sure, I’d be happy to help you with that! Here’s an example of a minimal
  natural piece of text that illustrates multiple skills in semantics or syntax:

  Explanation:

  "At the town meeting about the water shortage, Mrs. Thompson, who had recently
  implemented a lavish traditional gardening system in her yard, asked, "Given that our
  town’s plumbing is outdated and we all want green spaces, shouldn’t we first consider
  overhauling our water distribution system?" While many were drawn into her spatial
  reasoning about how better plumbing routes could save water, some recognized that her
  self-serving bias was evident, as she tried to deflect blame from personal high water
  usage and onto the town’s infrastructure."

  This text demonstrates the following skills in semantics or syntax:

  1. Red Herring: In the second sentence, during a discussion about a water shortage,
  Mrs. Thompson introduces an irrelevant point to detract attention from her new gardening
  system.

  2. Spatial Reasoning: In the second sentence, Mrs.         Thompson uses spatial reasoning to
  discuss how better plumbing routes could save water.

  3. Self Serving Bias: In the second sentence, some towns members recognize that Mrs.
  Thompson discusses plumbing routes in the first place stems from her need to maintain her
  self-esteem.
  4. Complex Question: In the first sentence, Mrs. Thompson asks a question that
  indicates the implicit assumption that everyone in the town wants green space.
  Overall, this text shows how these skills in semantics or syntax can be applied in a
  natural and coherent way in a short piece of text.



In these situations, models for grading may receive “**” or an empty string as the student’s answer.
So they sometimes fail to output the table of points. The following is a typical failure case output by
GPT-4:

  As the student’s answer was missing, I will unfortunately be unable to grade it or
  provide the necessary feedback. Could you please provide me with the student’s answer?


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on SKILL - MIX (k)
graded by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. Ratio of Full Marks/Ratio of All Skills/Skill Fraction are reported
for each student model at k = 2, 3, 4. Evaluations on k = 5, 6 are skipped if the Ratio of Full Marks
drops below 0.3 with smaller k. Details on prompts can be found in Section 3. See Table 6 for
additional metrics.
   Student (generator)            k=2            k=3            k=4            k=5            k=6
   LLaMA-2-7B-Chat              .53/.63/.72    .33/.50/.70    .13/.13/.66       -/-/-          -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-13B-Chat             .63/.87/.73    .33/.63/.54    .33/.43/.74    .13/.17/.47       -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-70B-Chat             .90/.97/.93    .47/.50/.81    .40/.47/.75    .13/.23/.55       -/-/-
   GPT-3.5-turbo                .77/.80/.83    .53/.53/.77    .33/.33/.71    .20/.40/.62       -/-/-
   GPT-4                        .90/.93/.92    .87/.87/.94    .57/.60/.87    .63/.67/.90    .27/.33/.77
   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1     .53/.80/.67    .17/.33/.44    .03/.23/.31       -/-/-          -/-/-
   Qwen-14B-Chat                .60/.70/.68    .37/.47/.59    .30/.33/.60    .17/.20/.53       -/-/-
   Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1             .83/.90/.88    .67/.80/.81    .43/.57/.75    .27/.43/.69       -/-/-
   Falcon-180B-Chat             .53/.63/.65    .30/.33/.61    .03/.17/.49       -/-/-          -/-/-
   Tigerbot-70B-Chat            .20/.45/.30    .00/.17/.15    .00/.00/.12       -/-/-          -/-/-


C.4.2    U SING THE NAME OF THE SKILL DIRECTLY IN THE TEXT
Here is an example inspired by real text generated by GPT-4. The requested skills are red herring,
spatial reasoning, self serving bias, and complex question.

  Answer: "At the town meeting about the water shortage, Mrs. Thompson, who had recently
  implemented a lavish traditional gardening system in her yard, asked, "Given that our
  town’s plumbing is outdated and we all want green spaces, shouldn’t we first consider
  overhauling our water distribution system?" While many were drawn into her spatial
  reasoning about how better plumbing routes could save water, a few discerned it as a red
  herring and recognized that her self-serving bias was evident, as she tried to deflect
  blame from personal high water usage and onto the town’s infrastructure."



C.4.3    S OME OF THE k SKILLS LEFT OUT OF THE GENERATION
The example below is inspired by real text generated by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat for k = 3. The
requested skills are metaphor, statistical syllogism, and red herring. The topic of interest is “Dueling.”
Out of all the requested skills, only metaphor is present.

  Answer: "I’m not sure if I’ll duel tomorrow. My opponent’s six-shooter is a wild card,
  but my queasy stomach and off-target aim may be liabilities.



C.4.4    PARTIALLY CORRECT SKILLS
Here is an example inspired by real text generated by GPT-4. The requested skills are modus ponens,
red herring, and metaphor.

  Answer: "If needles were the keys to crafting melodies, then every perfect stitch would
  be a note in a harmonious symphony; but speaking of symphonies, have you ever noticed how
  the early bird’s song sounds just like Mozart?"



C.4.5    U NCLEAR IF SENTENCE GRAMMATICAL
Here is an example inspired by real text generated by GPT-4 with requested skill metaphor.

  Answer:   "Gardening, the mind’s soil yields a bouquet of confusion."



C.5     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

All metrics Recall that each generated text can receive up to k + 3 points: 1 point for each correctly
illustrated skill, 1 point for sticking to the topic, 1 point for coherence / making sense, and 1 point for


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


having at most k − 1 sentence. Given the individual points scored by a generated text, we define the
following metric

       • Ratio of Full Marks: 1 if all k + 3 points are earned, and 0 otherwise
       • Ratio of All Skills: 1 if k points are awarded for the k skills and at least 2 points are awarded
         for the remaining criteria (which allows “cheating” by exceeding sentence limit, not using
         topic, or not making sense), and 0 otherwise
       • Skill Fraction: the fraction of points awarded for the k skills if all 3 points are awarded for
         the remaining criteria, and 0 otherwise.
       • Total Score: sum of the individual points awarded
       • Total Skill Score: sum of the points awarded for the k skills
                                 k+3
                              c
       • Rescaled Score: k+3          where c is the total score

For each metric, the maximum value among the 3 generations is computed, and then averaged across
the M combinations.

Table 5: (Additional metrics) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating)
models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. Total Score/Total Skill Score/Rescaled Score are
reported for each student model at k = 2, 3, 4.

 Student (generator)           k=2             k=3             k=4             k=5             k=6
 LLaMA-2-7B-Chat            3.65/.92/.28    3.71/.88/.09    3.93/1.08/.04       -/-/-           -/-/-
 LLaMA-2-13B-Chat           3.80/1.24/.40   4.14/1.43/.18   4.84/1.91/.13       -/-/-           -/-/-
 LLaMA-2-70B-Chat           4.24/1.28/.51   4.41/1.54/.20   4.80/1.96/.12       -/-/-           -/-/-
 GPT-3.5-turbo              4.51/1.58/.68   4.80/1.90/.37   5.27/2.40/.23   5.95/3.23/.17       -/-/-
 GPT-4                      4.94/1.97/.96   5.67/2.69/.78   6.51/3.54/.68   7.30/4.32/.57   8.06/5.06/.48
 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1   3.83/1.11/.31   4.16/1.36/.14   4.24/1.48/.06       -/-/-           -/-/-
 Qwen-14B-Chat              4.01/1.12/.40   4.20/1.31/.16   4.52/1.60/.08       -/-/-           -/-/-
 Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1           4.39/1.56/.60   5.02/2.26/.43   5.42/2.66/.26   6.04/3.32/.22       -/-/-
 Falcon-180B-Chat           4.10/1.27/.47   4.37/1.47/.18   4.57/1.73/.10       -/-/-           -/-/-
 Tigerbot-70B-Chat          3.58/1.30/.26   3.74/1.42/.11   3.92/1.68/.06       -/-/-           -/-/-


Table 6: (Additional metrics) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating)
models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. Total Score/Total Skill Score/Rescaled
Score are reported for each student model at k = 2, 3, 4.

 Student (generator)           k=2             k=3             k=4             k=5             k=6
 LLaMA-2-7B-Chat            4.33/1.57/.66   5.10/2.40/.51   5.67/2.77/.32       -/-/-           -/-/-
 LLaMA-2-13B-Chat           4.57/1.90/.74   5.03/2.50/.51   6.17/3.30/.52   5.67/3.10/.21       -/-/-
 LLaMA-2-70B-Chat           4.90/1.97/.93   5.43/2.47/.64   6.03/3.20/.53   5.97/3.37/.26       -/-/-
 GPT-3.5-turbo              4.63/1.73/.82   5.27/2.37/.64   5.77/2.87/.46   6.73/4.03/.38       -/-/-
 GPT-4                      4.80/1.90/.92   5.83/2.83/.90   6.50/3.53/.70   7.50/4.53/.73   7.73/5.00/.42
 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1   4.47/1.80/.67   4.30/1.83/.32   4.87/2.47/.18       -/-/-           -/-/-
 Qwen-14B-Chat              4.33/1.60/.69   4.60/2.10/.48   5.40/2.70/.41   5.77/3.00/.25       -/-/-
 Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1           4.83/1.90/.89   5.63/2.80/.77   6.07/3.33/.57   6.83/4.10/.44       -/-/-
 Falcon-180B-Chat           4.07/1.47/.63   4.87/2.00/.44   4.90/2.23/.20       -/-/-           -/-/-
 Tigerbot-70B-Chat          3.70/1.45/.37   3.44/1.33/.13   3.56/1.56/.04       -/-/-           -/-/-


Tables 5 and 6 show the last three metrics of various models graded by GPT-4 or LLaMA-2-70B-Chat.
We also plot the curves of metrics across different k in Figures 4 to 9.
We also report evaluation metrics based on the 10 released topics and skills in Tables 7 and 8. This
serves as a sanity check that the released topics and skills are enough for measuring the capability of
chatbots to combine skills. We select LLaMA-2 and GPT-4 as Students, and GPT-4 as the Grader.
Compared with Tables 1 and 5, all metrics are very close to the full evaluation.


                                                   23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                ratio_of_full_marks                                                      ratio_of_all_skills                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        skill_fraction
                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                        0.8                                                                             0.8                                                              0.8
                  ratio_of_full_marks
GRADED BY GPT-4


                                                                                                  ratio_of_all_skills
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7
                                        0.6


                                                                                                                                                                        skill_fraction
                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6

                                        0.4                                                                             0.4                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                        0.2                                                                             0.2                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                        0.0                                                                             0.0
                                                  2             3            4        5       6                               2      3            4            5   6                           2   3          4          5        6
                                                                             k                                                                   k                                                            k

                                                      llama2-7b-chat              llama2-70b-chat                                 gpt-4                                 qwen-14b-chat                         falcon-180b-chat
                                                      llama2-13b-chat             gpt-3.5-turbo                                   mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1              xwin-lm-70b-v0.1                      tigerbot-70b-chat

  Figure 4: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on
  SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. For the accompanying table, see Table 1.


                                                                    total_score                                                          total_skill_score                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       rescaled_score
                                        8                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                        7                                                                               4
GRADED BY GPT-4


                                                                                                    total_skill_score


                                                                                                                                                                       rescaled_score
                  total_score


                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                        6
                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                        5
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                        4
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                              2             3            4        5       6                                   2     3            4           5     6                           2   3          4          5        6
                                                                        k                                                                        k                                                            k

                                                      llama2-7b-chat              llama2-70b-chat                                 gpt-4                                 qwen-14b-chat                         falcon-180b-chat
                                                      llama2-13b-chat             gpt-3.5-turbo                                   mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1              xwin-lm-70b-v0.1                      tigerbot-70b-chat

  Figure 5: (Additional metrics) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating)
  models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. For the accompanying table, see Table 5.



   C.6                                      A BLATION : I MPROVING QUALITY OF SKILL - MIX

  We mention two ablation experiments that allowed us to improve the quality of SKILL - MIX . We
  think that this second version gives a more accurate idea of model capabilities.
  Deducting points for explicitly mentioning the skill name. We observe that (Student) models
  sometimes explicitly mention the name of the requested skill(s) in their answers (see Appendix F).
  This rarely occurs in natural text exhibiting these skills. We created a harsher version of grading
  (Table 9) where no points are given in such cases. Compared to Table 1 (with loose grading), the
  decrease in metrics in Table 9 (with harsh grading) varies by model and k. For example, metrics for
  LLaMA-2-13B-Chat suffer a greater decline than LLaMA-2-7B-Chat and LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. Skill
  Fraction for Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1 and GPT-3.5-turbo with k ≥ 3 drops significantly compared to
  GPT-4. This observed decrease in performance indicates that LLaMA-2-13B-Chat, Xwin-LM-70B-
  V0.1, and GPT-3.5-turbo tended to explicitly mention skill names more frequently, which gave them
  some advantage in Table 1.
  Removing more common skills. The theory of Arora & Goyal (2023) implies that as models
  scale up, their proficiency improves fastest on skills that occur more frequently in the training dataset.
  This suggests that removing frequent skills from the evaluation would make the evaluation harder for
  models. Using RedPajama dataset (Computer, 2023) we identified skills that have a frequency of at
  least 5% and removed all 17 of such skills. (See Appendix D for details.)


                                                                                                                                          24
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            ratio_of_full_marks                                               ratio_of_all_skills                                                 skill_fraction
                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.9

GRADED BY LLAMA2-70B-CHAT
                                                  0.8
                                                                                                               0.8                                                            0.8
                            ratio_of_full_marks


                                                                                         ratio_of_all_skills
                                                  0.6


                                                                                                                                                             skill_fraction
                                                                                                                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                                  0.4
                                                                                                               0.4                                                            0.5
                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                               0.2
                                                  0.0                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                        2   3        4        5      6                               2    3            4            5    6                          2        3          4          5   6
                                                                    k                                                                 k                                                                 k

                                                                   llama2-7b-chat                         gpt-3.5-turbo               mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1                          xwin-lm-70b-v0.1
                                                                   llama2-13b-chat                        gpt-4                       qwen-14b-chat                                     falcon-180b-chat
                                                                   llama2-70b-chat

    Figure 6: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on
    SKILL - MIX (k) graded by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. For the accompanying table, see Table 4.

                                                                total_score                                                   total_skill_score                                                  rescaled_score
                                                                                                               5.0
                                                  7.5                                                                                                                         0.9
GRADED BY LLAMA2-70B-CHAT


                                                                                                               4.5
                                                  7.0                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                               4.0                                                            0.7
                                                                                         total_skill_score


                                                                                                                                                             rescaled_score
                                                  6.5
                            total_score


                                                                                                               3.5                                                            0.6
                                                  6.0
                                                                                                               3.0                                                            0.5
                                                  5.5
                                                                                                               2.5                                                            0.4
                                                  5.0
                                                                                                               2.0                                                            0.3
                                                  4.5
                                                                                                               1.5                                                            0.2
                                                  4.0
                                                        2   3        4        5      6                               2    3            4            5    6                          2        3          4          5   6
                                                                    k                                                                 k                                                                 k

                                                                   llama2-7b-chat                         gpt-3.5-turbo               mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1                          xwin-lm-70b-v0.1
                                                                   llama2-13b-chat                        gpt-4                       qwen-14b-chat                                     falcon-180b-chat
                                                                   llama2-70b-chat

    Figure 7: (Additional metrics) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating)
    models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by LLaMA-2-70B-Chat. For the accompanying table, see Table
    6.


    In Table 10, we show results of our harshest version of SKILL - MIX incorporating both the changes
    mentioned above. We observe that now all models except GPT-4 saturate by k = 3.
   This ablation highlights the flexibility allowed by adjusting the set of skills, allowing SKILL - MIX to
   retain discriminative ability for future (stronger) models.


     D                                            C ALCULATION AND ESTIMATION FOR BEYOND “ STOCHASTIC PARROTS ”
                                                  CLAIMS

     D.1                                            E STIMATION OF ps , pt AND L

    Here we present our method for estimating the average frequency of skills ps , the average frequency
    of topics pt , and the total number of sentences L in RedPajama dataset.
   We first use the sentence tokenizer of the NLTK package (Loper & Bird, 2002) to split all samples in
   the official 1 billion token sample of RedPajama into sentences. The total number of sentences in the
   sampled version of RedPajama is almost 39 million. Given the total number of tokens of RedPajama
   is 1.2 trillion (1200 times more than the sampled version), we can safely say the number of sentences
   in the RedPajama is less than 50 billion.


                                                                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on SKILL - MIX (k)
graded by GPT-4 on 10 released skills and topics Ratio of Full Marks/Ratio of All Skills/Skill
Fraction are reported for each student model at k = 2, 3, 4, 5. Details on prompts can be found in
Section 3. See Table 8 for additional metrics.
            Student (generator)       k=2             k=3           k=4             k=5
            LLaMA-2-7B-Chat         .09/.09/.41     .05/.05/.25   .00/.00/.26     .00/.00/.15
            LLaMA-2-13B-Chat        .22/.22/.48     .05/.05/.35   .00/.00/.36     .00/.00/.36
            LLaMA-2-70B-Chat        .39/.43/.65     .00/.00/.47   .00/.00/.46     .00/.00/.33
            GPT-4                   .87/.87/.93     .70/.70/.90   .35/.35/.82     .13/.13/.80

Table 8: (Additional Metrics) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating)
models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4 on 10 released skills and topics Total Score/Total
Skill Score/Rescaled Score are reported for each student model at k = 2, 3, 4, 5. Details on prompts
can be found in Section 3.
      Student (generator)          k=2               k=3             k=4                k=5
      LLaMA-2-7B-Chat           3.78/.83/.32      3.80/1.05/.13   4.10/1.25/.04      3.73/.87/.01
      LLaMA-2-13B-Chat         3.78/1.04/.40      4.10/1.45/.18   4.55/1.65/.08     4.80/1.93/.03
      LLaMA-2-70B-Chat         4.30/1.43/.57      4.40/1.45/.19   4.85/1.90/.12     4.73/2.00/.03
      GPT-4                    4.87/1.87/.91      5.70/2.70/.80   6.30/3.30/.56     7.00/4.00/.40


Then we randomly sample text pieces, each containing three sentences, and randomly pick a skill or
a topic and ask GPT-4 Grader whether the skill or the topic is in the text. The prompts are roughly
the same as the grading prompts, and they are listed below.

  Greetings!   I was wondering if you could help me grade the following answer given by a
  student.

  I’ll first describe the question that was given to the student, and then give you the
  student’s answer, and the grading rubric.

  The question given to the student was as follows:       "Give a piece of text that illustrate
  the following skill: {skills str}"
  The student’s answer was:    {student answer}

  For reference, here is the definition for the skill:        {skills defs and examples simple}

  Does the student correctly illustrate the skill?       Yes or No.



  Greetings!   I was wondering if you could help me grade the following answer given by a
  student.

  I’ll first describe the question that was given to the student, and then give you the
  student’s answer, and the grading rubric.

  The question given to the student was as follows:       "Give a piece of text on the following
  topic: {topic}."

  The student’s answer was:    {student answer}
  Is the text on topic?    Yes or No.


For accurate estimation, each text/skill sample (or text/topic sample) is graded by GPT-4 25 times,
and we take the majority vote of the grading. With these prompts, GPT-4 can output short answers of
one word “Yes” or “No”, which significantly reduces the cost of experiments. With more than 2000
samples for ps , and more than 8000 samples for pt . We conclude ps ≤ 0.0144 and pt ≤ 0.0022 each
with at least 95% confidence. 9

D.2   C ALCULATION

We define
   9
     Note this is after removing common skills whose occurrence rate is more than 5%. The estimation of
occurrence rate is by the same method.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: (Deducting points for explicitly mentioning skill name) Performance of various
instruction-tuned student (generating) models on SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. Table 1 but
deduct points for skills whose name is mentioned in the text.
   Student (generator)                 k=2                   k=3                k=4           k=5           k=6
   LLaMA-2-7B-Chat                   .05/.09/.35           .00/.00/.23        .00/.00/.21      -/-/-         -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-13B-Chat                  .13/.21/.38           .01/.01/.33        .00/.00/.37      -/-/-         -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-70B-Chat                  .25/.25/.61           .01/.04/.43        .00/.00/.40      -/-/-         -/-/-
   GPT-3.5-turbo                     .43/.50/.69           .10/.10/.52        .01/.03/.44   .00/.00/.39      -/-/-
   GPT-4                             .91/.95/.95           .63/.65/.86        .45/.47/.85   .24/.26/.82   .19/.19/.80
   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1          .04/.08/.38           .00/.01/.32        .00/.00/.24      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Qwen-14B-Chat                     .11/.14/.47           .01/.03/.36        .00/.00/.34      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1                  .36/.46/.62           .11/.16/.53        .02/.03/.49   .01/.01/.40      -/-/-
   Falcon-180B-Chat                  .20/.27/.50           .00/.00/.43        .00/.00/.32      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Tigerbot-70B-Chat                 .03/.14/.19           .00/.01/.15        .00/.00/.11      -/-/-         -/-/-

Table 10: (Filtering out common skills and deducting points for explicitly mentioning skill
name) Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on SKILL - MIX (k)
graded by GPT-4. Table 1 but only consider combinations with uncommon skills whose occurrence
rate in RedPajama is less than 5%, and deduct points for skills whose name is mentioned in the text.
   Student (generator)                 k=2                   k=3                k=4           k=5           k=6
   LLaMA-2-7B-Chat                   .03/.09/.32           .00/.00/.22        .00/.00/.20      -/-/-         -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-13B-Chat                  .06/.14/.33           .00/.00/.30        .00/.00/.35      -/-/-         -/-/-
   LLaMA-2-70B-Chat                  .22/.22/.58           .00/.02/.43        .00/.00/.40      -/-/-         -/-/-
   GPT-3.5-turbo                     .40/.49/.68           .04/.04/.48        .00/.00/.39   .00/.00/.36      -/-/-
   GPT-4                             .95/.95/.98           .66/.66/.88        .48/.50/.85   .12/.12/.79   .08/.08/.76
   Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1          .02/.03/.35           .00/.00/.31        .00/.00/.20      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Qwen-14B-Chat                     .09/.14/.45           .00/.02/.34        .00/.00/.30      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1                  .38/.51/.62           .06/.08/.52        .00/.00/.44   .00/.00/.39      -/-/-
   Falcon-180B-Chat                  .20/.25/.45           .00/.00/.46        .00/.00/.30      -/-/-         -/-/-
   Tigerbot-70B-Chat                 .03/.12/.19           .00/.00/.11        .00/.00/.08      -/-/-         -/-/-


       • T : the number of topics
       • N : the number of skills
       • ps : the average frequency of skills
       • pt : the average frequency of topics
       • L: the number of sentences in the training corpus
       • M1 : the total number of text pieces in the training corpus that contain k of the skills and
         one of the topics
       • M2 : the number of text pieces that a (Student) model successfully generates with k skills
         and relevance to a provided topic

Assuming the independence among the occurrence of skills and topics, M1 (the total number of text
pieces in the training corpus that contain k of the skills and one of the topics) is upper bounded by
                                                X
                           max                             ps,i1 ps,i2 · · · ps,ik pt,j L
                   ps,1 ,...,ps,N ,pt,1 ,...,pt,T
                                                    i1 ,...,ik ∈[N ],j∈[T ]
                                                         N                              T
                                                    1 X                              1X
                                     s.t.                 ps,i = ps           and          pt,j = pt .
                                                    N i=1                            T j=1

This is maximized only if ps,1 = ps,2 = · · · = ps,N , meaning the maximum value is pks pt N

                                                                                           k T L.
We will now lower bound M2 (the number of text pieces that a Student model successfully generates
with k skills and relevance to a provided topic). Recall that in our grading scheme, each generated
text can receive up to k + 3 points: 1 point for each correctly illustrated skill, 1 point for sticking to


                                                                27
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         ratio_of_full_marks                                                  ratio_of_all_skills                                          skill_fraction

                                        0.8
                                                                                                             0.8                                                             0.8

                  ratio_of_full_marks
GRADED BY GPT-4


                                                                                       ratio_of_all_skills
                                        0.6


                                                                                                                                                            skill_fraction
                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                             0.6

                                        0.4                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                             0.4

                                        0.2                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                        0.0                                                                  0.0
                                              2          3          4      5       6                               2      3            4            5   6                          2   3         4          5        6
                                                                    k                                                                 k                                                          k

                                                  llama2-7b-chat           llama2-70b-chat                             gpt-4                                qwen-14b-chat                        falcon-180b-chat
                                                  llama2-13b-chat          gpt-3.5-turbo                               mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1             xwin-lm-70b-v0.1                     tigerbot-70b-chat

  Figure 8: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on
  SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. Unlike in Table 1, no point is awarded if a skill is explic-
  itly mentioned in the text. For the accompanying table, see Table 9


                                                         ratio_of_full_marks                                                  ratio_of_all_skills                                          skill_fraction
                                                                                                                                                                             1.0

                                        0.8                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                             0.8
                  ratio_of_full_marks
GRADED BY GPT-4


                                                                                       ratio_of_all_skills


                                                                                                                                                            skill_fraction
                                        0.6                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                             0.6

                                        0.4                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                             0.4

                                        0.2                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.2

                                        0.0                                                                  0.0
                                              2          3          4      5       6                               2      3            4            5   6                          2   3         4          5        6
                                                                    k                                                                 k                                                          k

                                                  llama2-7b-chat           llama2-70b-chat                             gpt-4                                qwen-14b-chat                        falcon-180b-chat
                                                  llama2-13b-chat          gpt-3.5-turbo                               mistral-7b-instruct-v0.1             xwin-lm-70b-v0.1                     tigerbot-70b-chat

  Figure 9: Performance of various instruction-tuned student (generating) models on
  SKILL - MIX (k) graded by GPT-4. Unlike in Tables 1 and 9, only skill combinations for uncommon
  skills (with occurrence rate in RedPajama < 5% are considered). For the accompanying table, see
  Table 10



  the topic, 1 point for coherence / making sense, and 1 point for having at most k − 1 sentence. For a
  given piece of text, the Ratio of Full Marks is 1 if all k + 3 points are earned, and is 0 otherwise.
  Let αk be the Ratio of Full Marks of a model in SKILL - MIX (k). Since we have N

                                                                                           k   T generated
                                N

  answers, M2 is at least αk k T (assuming the Student’s answers for different combinations are
  different).
  The model surpasses “stochastic parrot” behavior when the following inequality holds:


                                                         3                             1       2    N              N
                                                     αk > pks pt L =⇒               1−     M2 ≥ αk           k
                                                                                                       T > p s pt     T L ≥ M1 .
                                                         2                             3       3    k              k


  In other words, when the inequality above holds, more than one-third of the correct answers that the
  model generated contain combinations of skills and topics that have never jointly appeared in the
  training corpus.


                                                                                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    F INE - TUNING ON S KILL -M IX
In this section, we demonstrate the possibility of future “cramming” for SKILL - MIX , which leads to
our decision to release only 10% of the skill set. We conduct experiments of SKILL - MIX (k = 2) on
LLaMA-2-7B-Chat and found that it can outperform LLaMA-2-70B-Chat with fine-tuning on 878
good outputs generated by GPT-4.

Construct fine-tuning dataset. We first randomly sample 50 skills and 50 topics from the original
sets. We then run SKILL - MIX (k = 2) evaluation on the training set of skills and topics with GPT-4
generator and GPT-4 grader. We only pick the GPT-4 generations with full marks. The total number
of final samples we collected is 878.

Training details. Recall the generation contains two rounds of conversations, we feed both rounds
to LLaMA-2-7B-Chat and fine-tune only on tokens of GPT-4 output. We use LoRA (Hu et al., 2021),
exponential decaying learning rate starting at 1 × 10−4 and fine-tune for 3 epochs.

Evaluation results. After fine-tuning, the Ratio of Full Marks/Ratio of All Skills/Skill Fraction of
k = 2 raise to 0.31/0.52/0.58. Compared with metrics reported in Table 1, the fine-tuned LLaMA-2-
7B-Chat performs on par with LLaMA-2-70B-Chat on Ratio of Full Marks, much better on Ratio of
All Skills, and a little worse on Skill Fraction. However, when playing with the fine-tuned model, we
found some decrease in its chat ability.

F    M ORE FAILURE C ASES
In Tables 11, 12 and 14, we list the typical failure cases output by the models.

G    H UMAN - GENERATED ANSWERS FOR SKILL - MIX (k = 4)
In Table 15, we list some answers generated by humans compared with answers generated by GPT-4
for SKILL - MIX (k = 4).


                                                 29
     Table 11: Examples of Failure Cases (LLaMA-2 Family) ▲ (exceeds the sentence limit); ■ (≥ 1 skill is not illustrated correctly); • (explicitly mentions name of
     skill); 8 (use of colloquial English definition of skill); # (not on-topic)


      Student (generator)    k=2                              k=3                              k=4                               k=5
      LLaMA-2-7B-Chat        ”I’m thinking of competing       Gareth is a skilled duelist,     The storm will likely occur       The city is a living organism, adapting to
                             in a triathlon next year. What   known for quick reflexes and     due to the high probability       the needs of its inhabitants. Explanation:
                             do you think? Have you ever      strategic thinking. ■ (statis-                                     This statement leverages the metaphor of
                             done one before?” ▲              tical syllogism)                 (Survivalism)                     the city as a living being to convey the idea
                                                                                               predicted by the forecast. #

                                                                                                                                 that it is dynamic and responsive to the
                                                                                                                                 needs of its inhabitants, much like a living
                                                                                                                                 organism grows and changes over time. By
                                                                                                                                 using this metaphor, we can reason about
                                                                                                                                 the city’s spatial relationships and physical
                                                                                                                                 properties in a more intuitive and organic
                                                                                                                                 way. • (metaphor)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      LLaMA-2-13B-Chat       Like a will-o’-the-wisp, our     ”I’m not sure if I’ll be able to ””Surviving in the wilder-        ”I finished second in the triathlon, but the
                             guerrilla forces will lead the   make it to the party tonight. ness requires emotional self-        course design and water conditions made


30
                             enemy on a wild goose chase      I’ve been studying for my regulation, like a tree that             it tough. I struggled to keep my balance
                             through the jungle, their        exam and don’t want to risk bends in the wind. We must             during the swim and almost fell off my bike
                             elusive presence a ghostly       not being prepared. But if discern red herrings from               during the transition. If I had more time
                             shadow that haunts the en-       I do go, I’m sure I’ll have the true path, and rely on             to train, I could have improved my perfor-
                             emy’s every move. ■ (red         a great time and meet some folk physics to guide us.”” •           mance.” 8 (accident (fallacy))
                             herring)                                                          (emotional self-regulation)
      LLaMA-2-70B-Chat       ”I’ve been secretly stockpil-    ”I’m the best duelist around, ”I’ve been feeling down,             I’m struggling to grow my plants. It’s like
                                                              new people.” # (Dueling)

                             ing food and weapons in my       and my stats prove it. My like a flower in the shade.              trying to build a house on quicksand - every-
                             underground bunker, and I’m      opponents always fall short But I know I can cultivate             thing I do just seems to make things worse.
                             ready to take on any chal-       against my strategy and a brighter mind by taking                  I’ve tried watering them every day, but it’s
                             lenges that come my way.”        skill.” ■ (red herring)          a walk outside and getting        like pouring water into a black hole. I’m
                              ■ (red herring)                                                  some fresh air. It’s like prun-   starting to feel like I’m wasting my time and
                                                                                               ing dead branches to make         energy. I need to find a way to make this
                                                                                               room for new growth.” ■           work, or else I’ll be left with a garden full
                                                                                               (folk physics (common knowl-      of dead plants. ■ (statistical syllogism)
                                                                                               edge physics))
     Table 12: Examples of Failure Cases (GPT Family) ▲ (exceeds the sentence limit); ■ (≥ 1 skill is not illustrated correctly); • (explicitly mentions name of skill);
     8 (use of colloquial English definition of skill); # (not on-topic)


      Student (generator)   k=2                              k=3                            k=4                                       k=5
      GPT-3.5-turbo         ”Bob: ”Hey Sue, what do          ”When did the Ottoman Em-      ”As the two dueling opponents pre-        ”In the context of guerilla warfare,
                            you think is the most im-        pire conquer Constantino-      pared to face each other, a self serv-    can we afford to prioritize the safety
                            portant survival skill?” Sue:    ple, thereby cementing their   ing bias consumed their thoughts,         of innocent civilians over achieving
                            ”Well Bob, the ability to        supremacy in the Byzantine     with each attributing their potential     our military objectives?” ■ ( statis-
                            navigate and find reliable       region?” ■ (spatial reason-    victory to their own skills and train-    tical syllogism )
                            sources of water is essential,   ing)                           ing. In an attempt to distract from
                            as it ensures our hydration                                     their opponent’s superior technique,
                            and prevents dehydration-                                       they introduced a red herring, em-
                            induced health risks.”” ▲                                       phasizing the importance of strategy
                                                                                            over strength. Despite the intense
                                                                                            emotions and adrenaline, both fight-
                                                                                            ers were able to practice emotional
                                                                                                                                                                                Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            self regulation, taking deep breaths
                                                                                            to calm their nerves and maintain


31
                                                                                            focus. Ultimately, the statistical syl-
                                                                                            logism prevailed, with one fighter’s
                                                                                            consistent winning streak suggest-
                                                                                            ing they were more likely to emerge
                                                                                            triumphant in this particular duel.”
                                                                                            • (self serving bias)
      GPT-4                 In most duels, opponents,        ”Why, with your advanced       Usually, duelists who move towards        ”If we Ottomans conquer lands, it is
                            like John and Fred this time,    dueling techniques, do you     the left win more, so being a left-       due to our bold strategy, but if we
                            begin back-to-back then step     clutch the second sword like   handed, expect defeat; yet, isn’t the     lose, isn’t it true that the weather is
                            away, creating distance. ■       a red herring in a debate,     design of our duel arena beautiful?       always unfavorable? But aren’t all
                            (statistical syllogism)          as though fencing with two      ■ (spatial reasoning)                    men who wield knives essentially
                                                             blades isn’t akin to a dance                                             criminals? We should not forget the
                                                             with two left feet?” ■ (red                                              Byzantines’ contribution, but regard-
                                                             herring)                                                                 less, if it weren’t for Mehmed the
                                                                                                                                      Conqueror’s rule, wouldn’t Istanbul
                                                                                                                                      lack its Ottoman charm?” ■ (modus
                                                                                                                                      ponens)
     Table 13: Examples of Failure Cases (Other) ▲ (exceeds the sentence limit); ■ (≥ 1 skill is not illustrated correctly); • (explicitly mentions name of skill); 8
     (use of colloquial English definition of skill); # (not on-topic)


       Student (generator)        k=2                      k=3                      k=4                       k=5
       Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1   John: Why did you        How many Ottoman         ”What do you think        A merchant from Constantinople wanted to buy a rug
                                  attack me during the     soldiers did you see     was the main rea-         from a local weaver. The weaver showed the merchant a
                                  duel? AI: Because        in the city square?      son for the Ottoman       rug with a different pattern, size, and color than what the
                                  you attacked me first.   Why? ▲                   Empire’s decline and      merchant had in mind. The merchant asked the weaver
                                  ▲                                                 fall?” ■ (red her-        why the rug was different, and the weaver responded,”If
                                                                                    ring)                     you want this rug, you should be happy with it.” The
                                                                                                              merchant knew that the weaver was giving him a red
                                                                                                              herring, and he also realized that the weaver was giving
                                                                                                              him an accident (fallacy) by ignoring the merchantś true
                                                                                                              desire for a different rug. He used statistical syllogism to
                                                                                                              understand that the merchant should be able to buy the
                                                                                                                                                                             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                              rug he wants, which was a generalization true for the most
                                                                                                              part. Finally, the merchant used folk physics to realize


32
                                                                                                              that he should be able to buy the rug he wanted, which
                                                                                                              is based on common knowledge physics. He also used
                                                                                                              spatial reasoning to deduce that the rug he wanted was
                                                                                                              different from the one the weaver showed him. • (folk
                                                                                                              physics)
       Qwen-14B-Chat              If you find a plant      Many survivalists be-    The Ottoman Turks         Yesterday, I noticed a tiny tomato plant sprouting from
                                  with white flowers       lieve owning a gun       captured Constantino-     a crack in the pavement near my house. Excited by the
                                  in the wild, it might    is necessary for pro-    ple, leading to the end   possibility of a free harvest, I carefully dug it out and
                                  be safe to eat if most   tection, while ignor-    of the Byzantine Em-      transplanted it to my garden. However, after a few days,
                                  plants with white        ing the potential dan-   pire. ■ (statistical      the plant appeared to be wilting. Upon further inspection,
                                  flowers are edible. ■    gers of improper use     syllogism)                I realized that it had been planted too deeply and needed
                                  (modus ponens)           and alternative meth-                              to be raised. With my newly acquired knowledge of root
                                                           ods like self-defense                              development, I carefully adjusted the soil level and pro-
                                                           training. ■ (statisti-                             vided the necessary care to ensure the survival of my little
                                                           cal syllogism)                                     green friend. ▲
     Table 14: Examples of Failure Cases (Other) ▲ (exceeds the sentence limit); ■ (≥ 1 skill is not illustrated correctly); • (explicitly mentions name of skill); 8
     (use of colloquial English definition of skill); # (not on-topic)


            Student (generator)     k=2                      k=3                                              k=4                               k=5
            Xwin-LM-70B-V0.1        Why do you believe       Gareth, a skilled duelist with exceptional       The Ottoman Empire’s mili-        In a duel, a swords-
                                    using a red herring      spatial reasoning, faced his opponent,           tary strength relied on its in-   man with a shorter
                                    is an effective strat-   Philip, in the arena. Observing that his         novative use of folk physics,     sword can still tri-
                                    egy in avoiding ques-    sword’s width was slightly shorter than          such as the physics of            umph,      employing
                                    tions about dueling?     Philip’s, Gareth realized he could use this      archery, and spatial reason-      folk physics and
                                    • (red herring)          small difference to his advantage. During        ing in battle tactics, but a      metaphorical        wit,
                                                             the duel, Gareth skillfully maneuvered his       red herring argument might        dodging and weaving
                                                             sword, creating an illusion of vulnerability     claim that its power stemmed      with spatial reason-
                                                             on one side while subtly shifting his stance     from the accidental discov-       ing, and overcoming
                                                             to protect his true weakness. Philip, believ-    ery of gunpowder, ignoring        the fallacy of a longer
                                                             ing Gareth was leaving himself open, fell        the true reasons for its suc-     sword’s invincibility.
                                                             for the red herring and focused his attacks      cess. • (folk physics)            • (metaphor)
                                                             on the feigned vulnerability. • (spatial rea-
                                                                                                                                                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             soning)
            Falcon-180B-Chat        How did the Ottoman      Survivalists know that starting a fire with      The Ottoman Empire, which


33
                                    Empire expand? •         wet wood is difficult, but using dry kindling    lasted from 1299 to 1922,
                                    (spatial reasoning)      can make it easier.” ■ (statistical syllo-       was a vast empire that ruled
                                                             gism)                                            over a significant portion of
                                                                                                              the world. ■ (accident (fal-
                                                                                                              lacy)
            Tigerbot-70B-Chat       Isn’t it obvious? ■      In the dense forest, the rebel soldiers led by   John is a virtuous man, not “The wilderness is a
                                    (red herring)            John are discussing their next move. They        only is he honest, but he also metaphor for the chal-
                                                             have been using the same tactics to stage        works hard in his job. He is lenges of life. In or-
                                                             ambushes on government convoys, but John         always willing to help his col- der to survive, one
                                                             argues that it is time for a change. He sug-     leagues, even when they are must balance emo-
                                                             gests that they need to come up with a new       in a difficult situation. Last tional regulation with
                                                             plan, but the other soldiers are skeptical. ▲    night, he saw a thief stealing red herring distrac-
                                                                                                              from the local store. He put tions, while harness-
                                                                                                              on his coat and followed the ing the power of
                                                                                                              thief. After a while, he real- folk physics and self-
                                                                                                              ized that the thief was a per- serving bias to over-
                                                                                                              son in need. He called the po- come obstacles.” •
                                                                                                              lice, and the thief was caught. (metaphor)
                                                                                                              ▲
                                  Table 15: Example of answers generated by humans vs. GPT-4 for SKILL - MIX (k = 4)


     Topic       Skills                              Human Generated Answer                                   GPT-4 Generated Answer
     Gardening   emotional self regulation, self     Since water is good for most plants, Tom thought         “Despite feeling overwhelmed by the task, Mary
                 serving bias, statistical syllo-    it would be a good idea to water the cacti in his        took a deep breath before planting her roses, re-
                 gism, accident (fallacy)            garden daily; however, when the cacti began to           minding herself that most gardeners have bountiful
                                                     rot, Tom was quick to blame external factors rather      roses in their gardens, so she could too. However,
                                                     than considering any errors he might have made.          if her roses didn’t thrive, she might blame the bad
                                                     On the other hand, his neighbor Jane had noticed         weather, rather than her own gardening skills. She
                                                     that different plants require different amounts of       always admired her neighbor’s garden, but rea-
                                                                                                                                                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     water, and her plants flourished after she installed     soned their roses must be a pampered variety; she
                                                     an automatic watering system that took plant type        wouldn’t let hers be an exception.”


34
                                                     into consideration.
     Sewing      accident (fallacy), spatial reason- After observing her sister use her sewing machine        Seamstress Rachel stitched exquisite patterns, her
                 ing, metaphor, self serving bias    to alter a silk dress, Sally concluded that all sewing   dedication a dancing needle in life’s thick fabric.
                                                     machines must be perfect for delicate fabrics, and       She argued,”If one incorrectly places a stitch, all
                                                     decided to test it out for herself. After Sally at-      seamstresses are inept,” while aligning patterns
                                                     tempted to patch a small hole in her delicate dress,     with edges that must be a finger’s width from the
                                                     her dress immediately tore, and Sally consequently       seam. Still, her errors were blamed on bad lighting,
                                                     blamed the old machine. Her sister commented,            not lack of precision.
                                                     “You have to think about how to position the patch
                                                     to cover the hole properly and the material’s stretch;
                                                     stitches in time save nine.”
