Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTEXTUAL B IASING WITH THE K NUTH -M ORRIS -
P RATT M ATCHING A LGORITHM
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Contextual biasing refers to the problem of biasing the automatic speech recog-
         nition (ASR) systems towards rare entities that are relevant to the specific user
         or application scenarios. We propose algorithms for contextual biasing based on
         the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm for pattern matching. During beam search, we
         boost the score of a token extension if it extends matching into a set of biasing
         phrases. Our method simulates the classical approaches often implemented in
         the weighted finite state transducer (WFST) framework, but avoids the FST lan-
         guage altogether, with careful considerations on memory footprint and efficiency
         on tensor processing units (TPUs) by vectorization. Without introducing addi-
         tional model parameters, our method achieves significant word error rate (WER)
         reductions on biasing test sets by itself, and yields further performance gain when
         combined with a model-based biasing method.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have seen a tremendous explosion in voice user interfaces (VUIs), like voice search,
assistant, and control applications. The success of VUI-based applications depends on the ability of
the underlying Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) system to properly transcribe phrases that are
contextually relevant to the speaker, the listener, or both. Examples of contextually-relevant phrases
include names of the speaker’s contacts and geographically-close points of interest. Contextually-
relevant phrases are inherently hard to recognize because they represent instances of domain shift.
For example, generally, it is much more likely for a single user to speak the name of one of their
contacts than for any given contact name to occur in a given training data set; indeed, a given name
or phrase may not appear at all in an ASR system’s training set in the case of unorthodox spellings
(Ke$ha) or novel words (COVID-19). Further, contextually-relevant phrases may not be known until
inference time, e.g., as the user of a voice assistant can add contact names any time before speaking.
ASR contextual biasing is a set of techniques which enables ASR systems to recognize contextually-
relevant words without retraining. Contextual biasing can generally be grouped into model-based
and inference-based approaches. Model-based methods typically incorporate a biasing compo-
nent into an end-to-end (E2E) ASR system (Graves, 2012; Chorowski et al., 2015; Chan et al.,
2016a), which takes in biasing contexts as additional input to the E2E model. An attention mech-
anism (Vaswani et al., 2017) is typically used to condition the model outputs on biasing con-
texts (Munkhdalai et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2021; Han et al., 2022) (see Sec 3 for more discussions).
The more classical inference-based approach, dating back to the pre-E2E era, injects biasing contexts
to boost decoding scores for the words or phrases in the biasing contexts to increase the probability
of recognizing those words (Aleksic et al., 2015; Hall et al., 2015). A compact search graph, based
on Weighted Finite State Transducers (WFSTs, Mohri et al., 2002), is built to encompass the set
of biasing phrases, and incorporated into the normal search graph which then transduces acoustic
model outputs to word-level hypotheses. Weights are distributed along edges of the biasing search
graph, so that when the acoustic model output extends the matching of the phrases, a bonus score is
added to the hypothesis to help it survive beam search and increase its likelihood of becoming the
top hypothesis. The approach was later extended to E2E models (Zhao et al., 2019) where bonuses
are incorporated at subword level. While E2E ASR systems have greatly simplified modeling and
deployment, and that most components are readily implemented on GPU or TPU to enjoy parallel
processing, FST-based biasing poses significant challenges for an efficient TPU-based implementa-
tion, due to their inherent sparse nature (adjacency matrices for FSTs are typically very sparse).


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our contributions In this work, we propose a TPU-friendly implementation of search-based bi-
asing, leveraging the equivalence between the biasing FST and the efficient matching algorithm
by Knuth et al. (1977), with careful considerations on memory complexity and efficiency through
vectorization. Our algorithms can be incorporated into the beam search of any ASR system, in both
the on-the-fly rescoring and shallow fusion manner. On large voice search datasets, our method
achieves significant word error rate (WER) reductions on biasing test sets by itself, without intro-
ducing additional model parameters. And when plugged into a model-based biasing method, namely
neural associative memory (NAM, Munkhdalai et al., 2021), our method leads to further improved
biasing accuracy. Our method enables learning with the discrete structure of ASR biasing, and can
be potentially useful for other sequence transduction tasks.

2     O UR M ETHOD
An intuitive and classical idea for biasing is to check iteratively, at each beam search step, if the
suffixes of partial hypotheses are partially or fully matching any of the biasing phrases, and give
score bonuses to those with matches. This helps a partial hypotheses to survive beam search pruning,
if it has the potential to develop into a full match of a biasing phrase. In this section, we develop
the algorithms for efficiently performing pattern matching for multiple biasing phrases, and properly
assigning biasing bonus for each beam search expansion, based on the classical KMP algorithm for
string/pattern matching. We review the classical algorithm in Sec 2.1, describe its usage for biasing
in Sec 2.2, discuss the two variants for beam search in Sec 2.3, and an extension in Sec 2.4.
Notations Below we use P to denote the pattern sequence to be searched/matched, and T to
denote the sequence to be searched from; both are strings in the context of the classical match-
ing algorithm or token sequences in the context of speech recognition. The length of P is de-
noted len(P). We use P[i] to denote the element at (0-based) index i, and use P[s, . . . , t] :=
[P[s], P[s + 1], . . . , P[t]] to denote the sub-sequence of P with start index s and end index t. Two
sequences are equal if they have the same length and corresponding elements match for all indices.

2.1   T HE K NUTH -M ORRIS -P RATT MATCHING ALGORITHM
For searching the occurrences of a string P of length m within another string T of length n, the
most naive solution is perhaps to loop over the set of indices j = 0, 1, . . . , n − m, and check if
the sub-string T [j, . . . , j + m − 1] = P, which requires another loop over the elements of P.
Clearly, this algorithm has a worse-case time complexity of O(mn). There exists, however, a much
more efficient linear-time Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) matching algorithm (Knuth et al., 1977) for
this problem, with a worse case complexity of O(m + n). We extract two major components out of
KMP below, which are used for efficiently maintaining status of matching, as needed by biasing.

2.1.1 T HE FAILURE FUNCTION
The key insight behind the KMP algorithm is to not waste comparisons: if during matching we have
a partial matching of length i and T [j] 6= P[i], then instead of moving back to index j − i + 1 for
T and moving back to index 0 for P, and restarting the matching (by checking whether T [j − i +
1, . . . , j − i + m] = P), we may continue by comparing T [j] against P[π(i)] with some π(i) < i,
without backtracking in T . Here π(i) specifies the index of the potential next match in P when we
have a mismatch for P[i], and is called the failure function.
The failure function is originally defined as follows (Cormen et al., 2001): set π(0) = −1, and for
i = 1, . . . , m − 1,
                    π(i) = max {k < i : P[0, . . . , k − 1] = P[i − k, . . . , i − 1]} .
That is, for i > 0, π(i) is the length of the longest proper prefix that matches a proper suffix of the
sequence P[0, . . . , i − 1]; the value is 0 if no such prefix exists. The special value −1 indicates that
there is no possible match starting at the current index of T and we must move to the next index to
restart matching: if T [j] 6= P[0], we must move to index j + 1 in T to compare again with P[0].
To see why this definition helps save unnecessary comparisons, consider the scenario where we have
a partial match of length i > 0, but then the mismatch T [j] 6= P[i] occurs. Since T [j − i, . . . , j −
1] = P[0, . . . , i − 1], we must have
                 T [j − π(i), . . . , j − 1] = P[i − π(i), . . . , i − 1] = P[0, . . . , π(i) − 1].


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Forward a search pattern with an input token.
Input: P with length m and failure function Π, current partial matching length i, new token x.
Output: Updated partial matching length q, and if we obtain a full match, after consuming x.
  procedure F ORWARD(P, i, x)
     f ull match ← F alse
     if P[i] = x then
         q ←i+1
         if q = m then                                                               . Full match
              f ull match ← T rue, q ← 0
         end if
     else
         k ← Π[i]
         while k >= 0 and P[k] 6= x do                                     . Determinization loop
              k ← Π[k]
         end while
         q ←k+1                                                      . Either k = −1 or P[k] = x
     end if
     return (q, f ull match)
  end procedure


Therefore, without backtracking in T , we already have a partial match of length π(i) < i, and we
then check if T [j] = P[π(i)] to determine whether we can extend the partial match; in case of
further mismatch, we repeat the process and backtrack to π(π(i)), π 3 (i),. . . , etc, until we reach −1.
The failure function we use in this work, denoted as π̄(·), is based on the above definition, and has
an additional “shortcut” logic (Aho & Corasick, 1975): for i = 1, . . . , m − 1,

                                π̄(π(i))    if P[π(i)] = P[i],       (shortcut)
                     π̄(i) =
                                  π(i)      otherwise.
The rationale behind the shortcut is that, as we are backtracking due to T [j] 6= P[i], in the case of
P[π(i)] = P[i] we deduce T [j] 6= P[π(i)], and thus π(i) cannot be the next possible match and we
shall keep backtracking. We provide the algorithm for computing π̄(·) in Algorithm 4 (Append A).
The time complexity for building the failure function of a pattern with length m is O(m).
An example of search pattern and its failure function is as follows.
                           i      0    1     2    3     4   5     6    7    8
                          P[i]    A    B    A     C    A    B    A     B   A                         (1)
                          Π[i]    -1   0    -1    1    -1   0    -1    3   -1

2.1.2 T HE FORWARD FUNCTION
With the failure function defined above, we can define a forward function. Given the matching state,
defined as the current partial matching length i (i.e., we have matched P[0, . . . , i − 1] so far, and i
is the next index to match in P), and a new token x from the string T to be searched, the forward
returns the updated partial matching length (the new position in P to match), after consuming x.
Here by “consuming” we mean either we have a match for x and we move to i + 1 in P, or we
determine that it is impossible to match x and restart the matching; in both cases we move beyond
x in T . The logic is sketched in Algorithm 1.
The complexity of this algorithm mainly lies in the “determinization loop”, where we keep back-
tracking until we find a match of x in P; when no such match is possible, we end up with k = −1
out of the loop, and restart matching at the next token in T . Additionally, we check whether we
obtain a full match of P after matching token x, in which case we also restart matching at the next
token in T (we are not interested in overlapping matches of patterns in this work).
If we add another loop on top of Algorithm 1 over the tokens in T , we recover the KMP search
algorithm, which has a time complexity of O(n) after the failure function is computed (with O(m)
complexity). Note how similar is the determinization loop of Algorithm 1 to the inner loop of
Algorithm 4; in fact the latter can be seen as searching P over itself.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Compute bonus score of a token extension.
Input: Biasing phrases {P b }B                                                   1        B
                                 b=1 , current partial matching lengths I = (i , . . . , i ), new token x.
Output: Updated partial matching lengths, and biasing bonus.
  procedure C OMPUTE B ONUS({P b }B        b=1 , I, x)
     any match ← F alse                                                  . Track if there is any full match
     for b = 1, . . . , B do
         ub , matchb ← FORWARD(P b , ib , x)
         if matchb then
              any match ← T rue
              v b ← len(P b )                . For full match, use pattern length for computing potential
         else
              v b ← ub
         end if
     end for
     bonus ← µ(v 1 , . . . , v B ) − µ(i1 , . . . , iB )
     if any match then
         ub ← 0 for b = 1, . . . , B          . In case of any full match, restart matching for all phrases
     end if
     return ((u1 , . . . , uB ), bonus)
  end procedure


We can design a finite state automaton (FSA) A(P) with m states, where state i = 0, . . . , m −
1 denotes the state for partially matching i tokens of P, and the forward function provides the
transition function for this automaton, i.e., for an arc that starts at state i with input x, it ends at
the state specified by FORWARD(P, i, x). With the determinization loop, each transition consumes
a non-epsilon token on its edge, ensuring that A(P) is deterministic and epsilon-free. See Cormen
et al. (2001, Chapter 32.4) for more detailed discussions on the equivalence between KMP and FSA.
One could run Algorithm 1 for all x in the vocabulary (all characters in the alphabet in the case of
string matching) for i = 0, . . . , m − 1; this yields a table of size m × |V | where |V | is the vocabulary
size. While we could in principle use this table for biasing, the memory cost may be too high when
we have on the level of thousands or more patterns to search, each with some number of tokens (up
to 16 in our experiments), while V is also in the thousands (4096 for our ASR system). It is therefore
much more memory efficient to store the failure function which only takes O(m) memory, and we
pay the cost of determinization loop. For any x, the number of times we have to backtrack in the
determinization loop is bounded by
                 γ(P) = max ei ,        where ei is the integer satisfying π ei (i) = −1.               (2)
                             i

As an example, for the pattern in (1), we have γ(P) = 3 with maximum achieved at i = 7.

2.2   CONTEXTUAL BIASING WITH KMP

For biasing in ASR, each utterance is associated with B biasing phrases, denoted as (P 1 , . . . , P B ),
and we attempt to match all of them at each beam search step. Another task is to assign a bonus,
either positive or negative, to each new token expansion proposed by beam search. We achieve this
goal by defining a potential function based on the state of matching.
For each phrase P b , b = 1, . . . , B, we first define a scoring function for partial matching of length
i (i.e., we have matched P b [0, . . . , i − 1] so far). In this work, we simply parameterize the function
to be linear in i:
                            f (P b , i) = i · δ,    for   i = 0, . . . , len(P b ),
where δ ≥ 0 is the per-token bonus and is a hyper-parameter to be tuned. It is future work to explore
more sophisticated scoring functions for biasing phrases.
Let the partial matching lengths for the B biasing phrases be I = (i1 , . . . , iB ). We define the
potential function as the maximum scoring function over phrases:
                                   µ(i1 , . . . , iB ) = max f (P b , ib ).
                                                     b=1,...,B



                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Beam search with KMP biasing.
Input: ASR model. Biasing phrases {P b }B  b=1 . Beam size K. Number of biasing expansion F .
Output: Top K hypotheses.
  procedure B EAM S EARCH W ITH B IASING({P b }B    b=1 , K, F )
     H ← {(h, s, I)} where h is empty with score s = 0, I contains biasing states of all zeros.
     for step = 1, 2, . . . , do
         G ← {}                                    . G is buffer for storing intermediate hypotheses
         for (h, s, I) ∈ H do
             Conditioned on h, compute top F expansions {(x1 , s1 ), . . . , (xF , sF )} with ASR
  model, where xk is token id and sk is its model score
             for k = 1, . . . F do
                 h0 ← Append(h, xk ), s0 ← s + sk          . Extend previous hypothesis by a token
                 Option I (Shallow Fusion):
                 I 0 , bonus ← ComputeBonus({P b }B
                                                  b=1 , I, xk ),      s0 ← s0 + bonus

                 G ← G ∪ {(h0 , s0 , I 0 )}
             end for
             H ← Prune(G, K)                                           . Prune to top K hypotheses
          end for
         Option II (On-the-fly Rescoring):
           G ← {}
           for (h, s, I) ∈ H do                   . There are exactly K hypotheses in H
               x ← h[−1]                                         . Retrieve the last token
               I 0 , bonus ← ComputeBonus({P b }B
                                                b=1 , I, x), s0
                                                                ←  s + bonus
               G ← G ∪ {(h, s0 , I 0 )}
           end for
           H←G
      end for
      return H


After consuming a new token x for each biasing phrase with the forward function, the partial match-
ing lengths are updated, based on which we compute the new potential function; the difference
between the potentials is the bonus for x. We sketch this algorithm in Algorithm 2. We addition-
ally track if we finish matching any phrase fully, in which case we restart matching for all phrases
as we do not want overlapping matches. Note it is possible that x extends matching for multiple
phrases, especially if these phrases share prefix. If the hypothesis was partially matching a phrase
and then becomes non-matching after consuming a new token, the previously added biasing bonus
is canceled (Zhao et al., 2019).
To summarize, we maintain a total of B integers as states for tracking the progress on each phrase.
Consuming a new token and computing its bonus boils down to running the forward function.
We vectorize the for-loop in Algorithm 2, and compute the forward functions for all B phrases
in parallel, which further reduces to looking up the failure function table and running the deter-
minization loop in parallel. Therefore, the time complexity for Algorithm 2 is O(γ̄B), where
γ̄ = maxb=1,...,B γ(P b ) with the γ function defined in (2). Note γ is a worse-case bound for
the number of iterations in the determinization loop.

2.3   I NTEGRATING BIASING INTO BEAM SEARCH
We propose two ways to incorporate biasing bonus computation into beam search, with trade offs
between accuracy and efficiency. We collectively refer to them as KMP biasing.

      • Shallow fusion. In this approach, we perform biasing before pruning: for each hypothesis,
        we consider a number of top expansions according to the ASR model scores, and compute
        biasing bonus for each of them, which are combined with ASR scores used for pruning;
        this is similar to the shallow fusion approach for applying language models to ASR infer-
        ence (Gulcehre et al., 2015; Chorowski & Jaitly, 2017; Zhao et al., 2019).


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • On-the-fly (OTF) rescoring. In this approach, after expansions and pruning, we com-
         pute biasing bonuses for the expansion tokens of surviving hypotheses, and incorporate the
         bonus into the total score of each hypothesis, to influence future steps. Note this is different
         from offline rescoring, which only modifies total scores for re-ranking final hypotheses.
The two approaches are sketched in Algorithm 3. Let the beam size be K, which is the number
of hypotheses maintained at the end of each beam search step. If we consider F expansions for
biasing, the complexity of shallow fusion is O(γ̄KF B) per beam search step. Typically the biasing
accuracy improves with F , at the cost of heavier computation. On the other hand, since we consider
a total of K expansions in on-the-fly biasing, its time complexity is O(γ̄KB), cheaper than shallow
fusion biasing by a factor of F . As we have multiple hypotheses, each of which considers multiple
extensions, our implementation of ComputeBonus is parallelized in the (hyp, extension, phrase)
combination dimension. The failure functions are computed for all phrases once before beam search
starts. One can implement the loops using the while statement, and table lookups using gather
or einsum functions provided by tensor-based learning platforms.

2.4   B OOSTING BIASING STRENGTH WITH PREFIXES
In many applications, the biasing phrase frequently follows a set of prefixes (also known as carrier
phrases). For example, when using smart devices to initiate communication, the user typically
speakers “call”, “text”, or “send a message to” before the contact name. It is natural to bias the ASR
system more heavily towards the user’s contact list, conditioned on recognizing such prefixes (Zhao
et al., 2019). A naive way to extend our method to leverage prefixes is to augment the original
biasing phrases (contact names in the above use case) with all combinations of prefix and biasing
phrase (“call John”, “text Joe”, etc). If we have C prefixes and B biasing phrases, this approach
leads to B + CB phrases, significantly increasing the cost of KMP biasing.
We propose an alternative and more time efficient approach, with minimal cost increase in state
maintenance. For each new token, we perform matching for both prefixes and biasing phrases
simultaneously (although the hypothesis receives no bonus from matching prefixes), with a time
complexity of O(C + B). If a new token is not extending the partial matching of any biasing phrase,
but leads to a full matching of some prefix, we restart matching of biasing phrases for the extended
hypothesis, which is marked as prefix-matching for all biasing phrases. And if a hypothesis is prefix-
matching for some biasing phrase, we boost the scoring function of partial matches of that biasing
phrase by a factor λ > 1. A hypothesis stays prefix-matching if it was prefix-matching, and the
new token extends the partial matching of the same biasing phrase. Compared with the case without
prefixes, we pay an additional cost of maintaining the states of partial matching lengths for prefixes,
with a memory cost of O(C), and whether each hypothesis is prefix-matching for each biasing
phrase, with a memory cost of O(B). We sketch the implementation in Algorithm 5 (Appendix B).
Our approach can be interpreted in the WFST framework, as having one FST for the set of prefixes
and another for the set of biasing phrases, and we transit from the prefix FST to biasing FST when
detecting full match of some prefix, so that the two FSTs are concatenated.

3     R ELATED WORKS
WFST-based biasing Initial WFST (Mohri et al., 2002) approaches to contextual ASR (Aleksic
et al., 2015; Hall et al., 2015) performed on-the-fly rescoring (Hori et al., 2007) during beam-search,
for classical ASR systems that use a CLG decoder graph (Mohri et al., 2008). The contextual phrases
are encoded separately from the CLG in a word-level deterministic WFST with failure transitions.
Arbitrary word-level rescoring functions can be used, including CLG score replacement and various
forms of interpolation. In Vasserman et al. (2016), the approach was extended to efficiently handle
dynamic classes, by encoding non-terminal labels in the contextual models. Classes are dynamically
inserted in the CLG graph, instead of being inserted in the contextual WFST, avoiding its exponential
growth during determinization. Search errors caused by the late integration of contextual models at
word labels were reduced by Williams & Aleksic (2017).
Later End-to-End (E2E) ASR systems most often do not have an external LM and require an alter-
native WFST approach that uses shallow fusion (Zhao et al., 2019) instead of on-the-fly rescoring.
In this approach, the contextual information is encoded as a subword-level deterministic WFST with
failure transitions, which is used to directly modify the acoustic scores, before pruning is done by


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


beam-search. The search space of E2E ASR systems tends to be sparser than the search space of
classic ASR systems, so earlier integration is necessary to reduce search errors.
WFST contextual modeling can also be approached as a lattice-augmentation problem (Serrino et al.,
2019; Huang et al., 2020). These techniques identify spans in the word lattice where rare entities are
likely to occur and search for acoustically confusable alternatives that are contextually relevant. The
span identification and fuzzy matching are done using flexible and efficient WFST-based techniques.
We note that FSTs are good at encoding domain knowledge and complex matching rules compactly.
While they can be represented as graph with sparse adjacency matrices, in general FSTs are not
efficient to use on TPUs which are optimized for dense operations. Our work is one step towards
incorporating FST functionalities into a TPU-friendly implementation.

Model-based biasing Context can be utilized by adding trainable parameters to the ASR model
and performing model-based biasing (Fu et al., 2023; Harding et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023). Learning
such parameters in an end-to-end fashion was first considered in the CLAS model (Pundak et al.,
2018), that augmented the LAS (Chan et al., 2016b) decoder with a suitable attention mechanism.
CLAS is trained by sampling random n-grams (playing to role of bias phrases) from the reference
transcripts. CLAS sampling was later improved in Alon et al. (2019) by emphasizing proper nouns,
and considering hard phonetically-similar distractors (anti-bias terms). A notable drawback from
CLAS is that the full-context nature of the decoder limits it to non-streaming applications.
The above limitation was addressed in Neural Associative Memory (NAM, Munkhdalai et al.,
2021), a streaming model-based biasing method that utilizes an external associative memory mod-
ule (Munkhdalai et al., 2019; Ramsauer et al., 2020) as an intermediate representation of biasing
contexts, and is augmenting the RNN-T architecture. Given a trained ASR model, let x be au-
dio feature sequence extracted by the encoder, and y be the label sequence. NAM learns a mod-
ified conditional probability p(y|x + ∆) by incorporating into ASR model an additional feature
sequence ∆. To compute ∆, NAM utilizes an additional text encoder to extract embeddings of bias-
ing phrases {P b }B
                  b=1 , which are used to construct the associative memory, and another Multi-Head
Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) module that uses x as query and the associative memory as keys and
values, whose output context vector becomes ∆. Essentially, the attention module is used to detect
the presence of biasing phrases in the audio. NAM is trained as part of the E2E model (typically
with the base ASR model frozen), so that the likelihood of ground truth, including the biasing phrase
present in the audio, is maximized. At inference time, NAM introduces a biasing strength parameter
s ≥ 0 to control the effect of external biasing phrases (Wu et al., 2023), and uses p(y|x + s · ∆) for
decoding. Given that NAM injects biasing information at the encoder output, while KMP biasing
works at beam search, they can be complimentary to each other, as is observed in our experiments.

4   E XPERIMENTS
We use a large RNN-Transducer (RNN-T, Graves, 2012) as our base ASR model. Our training set
contains 520M utterances of English voice search queries; the total amount of audio is 490K hours.
A small percentage of the training data is human transcribed while the rest is pseudo-labeled by a
teacher (Hwang et al., 2022). We tokenize training transcripts, as well as biasing phrases, using a
word-piece model (Schuster & Nakajima, 2012) with an inventory of 4096 tokens. All acoustic and
text training data is anonymized and adheres to Google AI Principles (Google, 2023).
We use 128-dimensional log Mel-filterbank energies, extracted from 32ms window and 10ms shift,
as frontend features. After two 2D-convolution layers, both with strides 2, the resulting feature se-
quence has a frame rate of 40ms and becomes the input to a conformer encoder (Gulati et al., 2020).
The encoder consists of 16 Conformer layers of attention dimension 1536, where each attention
module has 8 heads, and each feedforward network has a hidden dimension of 6144. The RNN-T
decoder uses a |V |2 embedding prediction network (Botros et al., 2021), which computes text fea-
tures based on two previous non-blank tokens. The ASR model has a total of 870M parameters. For
decoding, we perform label synchronous beam search with beam size K = 8. RNN-T has a special
blank token which indicates non-emission and does not alter decoder and biasing states. The word
error rate (WER) of our RNN-T system on an in-house test set of voice search queries is 3.8%.

Evaluation We use both voice-assistant based real-audio data and TTS synthetic data as described
in Munkhdalai et al. (2023) for evaluation. The real-audio test-set Contact-Tag contains 7.6K ut-


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 1: WER (%) results obtained by KMP biasing.
                                                KMP Biasing
      Dataset       OTF Rescoring Fusion F = 10 Fusion F = 50 Fusion F = 4096
                      δ = 2.4            δ = 2.2           δ = 2.3      δ = 2.3
                            Anti-Biasing, without-biasing WER: 1.7
      B = 150            1.7               1.7               1.7          1.7
      B = 600            1.8               1.8               1.8          1.8
      B = 3000           2.1               2.2               2.3          2.3
                             With-Prefix, without-biasing WER: 9.6
      B = 150            4.1               3.7               2.6          2.4
      B = 600            4.5               4.0               2.9          2.7
      B = 3000           5.1               4.6               3.8          3.6
                          Without-Prefix, without-biasing WER: 20.9
      B = 150            7.9               7.7               5.5          4.8
      B = 600            8.4               8.0               5.8          5.3
      B = 3000          10.1               9.6               7.9          7.4
                            Contact-Tag, without-biasing WER: 14.7
      B = 265            8.7               8.3               7.8          7.7


terances focusing on contact recognition (i.e., call $CONTACTS), each utterance is associated with
265 biasing entities and one of which is the true contact. The TTS data contains three categories:
1. Anti-Biasing: Utterances simulating general voice-assistant traffic (e.g., what’s the weather), we
use a super-set of that used in Munkhdalai et al. (2023) containing 10K utterances; 2. With-Prefix:
2.6K utterances with patterns such as: open $APPS, call $CONTACT, play $SONG; 3. Without-
Prefix: 1.3K Utterances with prefix-less patterns such as $APPS, $CONTACTS, or $SONGS. The
real-audio test set is anonymized and adheres to Google AI Principles (Google, 2023).
The utterances are associated with up to 3K biasing entities in total, and the maximum number of
tokens in a biasing phrase is 16. With-Prefix and Without-Prefix evaluate in-domain performance
(one of the biasing entities appears in the transcript truth), while Anti-Biasing evaluates out-of-
domain performance (biasing entities are irrelevant to the transcript truth). In general, a larger set
of biasing entities leads to more confusion in the ASR model and worse WER. We tune the hyper-
parameters of methods based on averaged WERs on Anti-Biasing and With-Prefix; Without-Prefix
and Contact-Tag are treated as test sets.

4.1   R ESULTS BY KMP BIASING
We first present the results of KMP biasing by itself, without combining with NAM or score boosting
by prefixes. In both the OTF rescoring and shallow fusion modes, we tune the hyper-parameter δ
which is the biasing bonus per token along phrases. We observe that, as we increase δ, WERs on
biasing sets first decrease, then stay low for a range of values, and eventually increase. We provide
WER curves of varying δ in Figure 1 (Appendix C) for both modes.
We provide WERs together with the optimal δ in Table 1, for OTF-rescoring and three settings of
F for shallow fusion. Our method achieves significant WER reduction over the base ASR model
on all biasing sets, e.g., by 50% to over 70% relative on the With-Prefix set with B = 150 phrases,
while not degrading the Anti-Biasing set by much. We observe that shallow fusion consistently
outperforms OTF rescoring as expected, and in general large F leads to better WER. From F = 50
to the full vocabulary size 4096, improvements start to saturate and we find F = 50 to offer a good
balance between accuracy and efficiency and use it in the experiments below.

4.2   C OMBINING KMP BIASING WITH MODEL - BASED BIASING
Given that KMP biasing is applied during beam search and is agnostic to the base ASR model, one
may wonder if its performance gain is additive to that of a strong model-based biasing method. We
train a state of the art NAM model on top of our base model, and its performance with normal beam
search is provided in Table 2 (left column). We observe that model-based biasing does achieve
superior results by itself, especially on Without-Prefix and Contact-Tag.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: WER (%) results obtained by NAM + KMP biasing. s denotes NAM biasing strength, λ
denotes score boosting factor with prefixes.
                           NAM (s = 0.5) + KMP biasing          NAM (s = 0.5) + KMP w. boost
 Dataset        NAM       OTF Rescoring Fusion F = 50          OTF Rescoring    Fusion F = 50
               s = 0.6        δ = 0.6           δ = 0.8       δ = 0.6, λ = 2.0 δ = 0.9, λ = 1.5
                              Anti-Biasing, without-biasing WER: 1.7
 B = 150         1.9             1.9              2.0               1.9              2.1
 B = 600         2.1             2.1              2.3               2.1              2.3
 B = 3000        2.2             2.2              2.4               2.2              2.5
                               With-Prefix, without-biasing WER: 9.6
 B = 150         1.5             1.0              0.9               0.9              0.8
 B = 600         1.8             1.3              1.2               1.0              0.9
 B = 3000        2.8             2.2              2.1               1.9              1.7
                            Without-Prefix, without-biasing WER: 20.9
 B = 150         1.8             0.9              0.8               1.0              0.8
 B = 600         2.1             1.2              1.0               1.3              1.0
 B = 3000        4.0             3.1              2.5               3.1              2.3
                              Contact-Tag, without-biasing WER: 14.7
 B = 265         3.8             3.5              3.4               3.1              3.0


We then perform KMP biasing on top of NAM, and the results are given in Table 2 (mid columns).
We find it better to slightly tune down the biasing strength of NAM when combing it with KMP
biasing, and now the optimal δ is much smaller than those used in Section 4.1, as the output of
NAM already contains strong biasing information. Nonetheless, KMP provides additional 20%–
40% relative WER improvements over NAM across With-Prefix and Without-Prefix, and 8%–10%
relative improvements on Contact-Tag, with small degradation on Anti-Biasing.

4.3   B OOSTING KMP WITH PREFIXES
Finally, we verify the effectiveness of prefixes and Algorithm 5 on top of NAM + KMP biasing. We
provide three prefixes {call, open, play} as additional inputs to KMP biasing while NAM
only uses biasing phrases as before. For With-Prefix and Contact-Tag, each test utterance comes
from one of App, Contact, and Song domains, and so it contains one of the prefix while the other
two act as distractors; Without-Prefix does not contain prefixes before biasing phrases by design.
We fix NAM biasing strength to s = 0.5, tune the score boosting factor λ over {1.5, 2.0, 2.5}, and
search δ locally around the optimal values found in Section 4.2. Final results are shown in Table 2
(right columns). We obtain further gains on With-Prefix and Contact-Tag, while not degrading
much on other sets. In particular, we achieve a final 21% relative WER reduction on Contact-Tag
with shallow fusion over NAM itself. We also observe that OTF rescoring prefers a larger λ than
shallow fusion, as it has less chance to be confused by mis-recognized prefixes and wrongly boosted
bonuses. It is future work to conduct full-fledged experiments with more complex prefixes.

5 C ONCLUSIONS
We have proposed a TPU-friendly implementation of pattern-matching based biasing, and demon-
strated the effectiveness of its variants on large-scale voice search queries. Our method achieves
significant WER reduction on biasing sets without introducing additional learning parameters, and
is complementary to a strong model-based biasing method. There are several directions for future
research. To scale up our method to more than thousands of biasing phrases, we may study deep in-
tegration with NAM+ (Munkhdalai et al., 2023), which performs a quick filtering of a large amount
of unlikely biasing phrases before conducting more careful search over the remaining ones. Our
current implementation has used a fixed per-token score, and it is straightforward to incorporate an
external neural language model for improved bonus computation (Le et al., 2021). Finally, our on-
TPU implementation enables training with matching-based biasing, and it is an interesting research
question to design a suitable learning objective for further performance gain.



                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alfred V. Aho and Margaret J. Corasick. Efficient string matching: An aid to bibliographic search.
  Communications of the ACM, 1975.
Petar Aleksic, Mohammadreza Ghodsi, Assaf Michaely, Cyril Allauzen, Keith Hall, Brian Roark,
  David Rybach, and Pedro Moreno. Bringing contextual information to google speech recognition.
  In Interspeech, 2015.
Uri Alon, Golan Pundak, and Tara N Sainath. Contextual speech recognition with difficult negative
  training examples. In ICASSP, pp. 6440–6444. IEEE, 2019.
R. Botros, T.N. Sainath, Robert David, Emmanuel Guzman, Wei Li, and Yanzhang He. Tied &
  reduced RNN-T decoder. In Interspeech, 2021.
W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, and O. Vinyals. Listen, attend and spell: A neural network for large
  vocabulary conversational speech recognition. In ICASSP, 2016a.
William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc Le, and Oriol Vinyals. Listen, attend and spell: A neural
 network for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition. In ICASSP, 2016b.
Feng-Ju Chang, Jing Liu, Martin Radfar, Athanasios Mouchtaris, Maurizio Omologo, Ariya Ras-
  trow, and Siegfried Kunzmann. Context-aware transformer transducer for speech recognition. In
  Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 2021.
Jan Chorowski and Navdeep Jaitly. Towards better decoding and language model integration in
  sequence to sequence models. In Interspeech, 2017.
Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Attention-based models for speech recognition. CoRR, 2015.
Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
  Algorithms. 2nd edition, 2001.
Xuandi Fu, Kanthashree Mysore Sathyendra, Ankur Gandhe, Jing Liu, Grant P Strimel, Ross Mc-
  Gowan, and Athanasios Mouchtaris. Robust acoustic and semantic contextual biasing in neural
  transducers for speech recognition. In ICASSP, 2023.
Google. Artificial Intelligence at Google: Our Principles, 2023. URL https://ai.google/
  principles/.
A. Graves. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks. In ICML Workshop on Represen-
  tation Learning, 2012.
A. Gulati, J. Qin, C.-C. Chiu, et al. Conformer: Convolution-augmented Transformer for Speech
  Recognition. In Interspeech, 2020.
Caglar Gulcehre, Orhan Firat, Kelvin Xu, Kyunghyun Cho, Loic Barrault, Huei-Chi Lin, Fethi
  Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. On using monolingual corpora in neural ma-
  chine translation. arXiv:1503.03535, 2015.
Keith Hall, Eunjoon Cho, Cyril Allauzen, Françoise Beaufays, Noah Coccaro, Kaisuke Nakajima,
  Michael Riley, Brian Roark, David Rybach, and Linda Zhang. Composition-based on-the-fly
  rescoring for salient n-gram biasing. In Interspeech, 2015.
Minglun Han, Linhao Dong, Zhenlin Liang, Meng Cai, Shiyu Zhou, Zejun Ma, and Bo Xu. Improv-
 ing end-to-end contextual speech recognition with fine-grained contextual knowledge selection.
 In ICASSP, 2022.
Philip Harding, Sibo Tong, and Simon Wiesler. Selective biasing with trie-based contextual adapters
  for personalised speech recognition using neural transducers. 2023.
Takaaki Hori, Chiori Hori, Yasuhiro Minami, and Atsushi Nakamura. Efficient WFST-based one-
  pass decoding with on-the-fly hypothesis rescoring in extremely large vocabulary continuous
  speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 15(4):1352–
  1365, 2007.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rongqing Huang, Ossama Abdel-hamid, Xinwei Li, and Gunnar Evermann. Class LM and word
  mapping for contextual biasing in end-to-end asr. In Interspeech, 2020.
Dongseong Hwang, Khe Chai Sim, Zhouyuan Huo, and Trevor Strohman. Pseudo label is better
  than human label. In Interspeech, 2022.
Donald E. Knuth, James H. Morris, Jr., and Vaughan R. Pratt. Fast pattern matching in strings. SIAM
  Journal on Computing, 6(2), 1977.
Duc Le, Mahaveer Jain, Gil Keren, Suyoun Kim, Yangyang Shi, Jay Mahadeokar, Julian Chan, Yuan
  Shangguan, Christian Fuegen, Ozlem Kalinli, Yatharth Saraf, and Michael L. Seltzer. Contextu-
  alized streaming end-to-end speech recognition with trie-based deep biasing and shallow fusion.
  In Interspeech, 2021.
Mehryar Mohri, Fernando Pereira, and Michael Riley. Weighted finite-state transducers in speech
 recognition. Computer Speech and Language, 2002.
Mehryar Mohri, Fernando Pereira, and Michael Riley. Speech Recognition with Weighted Finite-
 State Transducers, pp. 559–584. 2008.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Alessandro Sordoni, Tong Wang, and Adam Trischler. Metalearned neural
  memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Khe Chai Sim, Angad Chandorkar, Fan Gao, Mason Chua, Trevor
  Strohman, and Françoise Beaufays. Fast contextual adaptation with neural associative memory
  for on-device personalized speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02220, 2021.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Zelin Wu, Golan Pundak, Khe Chai Sim, Jiayang Li, Pat Rondon, and
  Tara N. Sainath. Nam+: Towards scalable end-to-end contextual biasing for adaptive asr. In IEEE
  Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2023.
Golan Pundak, Tara N Sainath, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Anjuli Kannan, and Ding Zhao. Deep context:
  end-to-end contextual speech recognition. In IEEE spoken language technology workshop (SLT),
  2018.
Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schäfl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Thomas
  Adler, Lukas Gruber, Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlović, Geir Kjetil Sandve, et al. Hopfield
  networks is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217, 2020.
Mike Schuster and Kaisuke Nakajima. Japanese and korean voice search. In ICASSP, 2012.
Jack Serrino, Leonid Velikovich, Petar Aleksic, and Cyril Allauzen. Contextual recovery of out-of-
  lattice named entities in automatic speech recognition. In ICASSP, 2019.
L. Vasserman, B. Haynor, and P. Aleksic. Contextual Language Model Adaptation using Dynamic
  Classes. SLT, 2016.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2017.
Ian Williams and Petar Aleksic. Rescoring-aware beam search for reduced search errors in contex-
  tual automatic speech recognition. In Interspeech, 2017.
Zelin Wu, Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Pat Rondon, Golan Pundak, Khe Chai Sim, and Christopher Li.
  Dual-Mode NAM: Effective Top-K Context Injection for End-to-End ASR. In Interspeech, 2023.
Tianyi Xu, Zhanheng Yang, Kaixun Huang, Pengcheng Guo, Ao Zhang, Biao Li, Changru Chen,
  Chao Li, and Lei Xie. Adaptive contextual biasing for transducer based streaming speech recog-
  nition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00804, 2023.
Ding Zhao, Tara N. Sainath, David Rybach, Pat Rondon, Deepti Bhatia, Bo Li, and Ruoming Pang.
  Shallow-Fusion End-to-End Contextual Biasing. In Interspeech, 2019.



                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    B UILDING THE FAILURE FUNCTION
We provide the pseudo code for building the failure function in Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 4 Building failure function π̄ for a single pattern.
Input: Search pattern P of length m
Output: Failure function π̄ stored in array Π
  Π[0] ← −1
  k←0                                                              . Index of next possible match
  for i = 1, . . . , m − 1 do
      if P[i] = P[k] then
          Π[i] ← Π[k]                                                                   . Shortcut
      else
          Π[i] ← k                                                                  . Π[i] ← π(i)
          while k ≥ 0 and P[i] 6= P[k] do
               k ← Π[k]
          end while
      end if
      k ←k+1                               . Loop invariance: k = π(i + 1) at end of each for-loop
  end for=0


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    KMP BIASING WITH PREFIXES

In Algorithm 5 we provide the implementation of bonus computation with a set of prefixes. The new
scoring function is defined as
                                                                          i
                      µλ ((i1 , m1 ), . . . , (iB , mB )) = max λint(m ) · f (P b , ib ),
                                                           b=1,...,B


where λ > 1 is the score multiplier that is effective immediately after matching a prefix, and int(m)
converts the boolean variable m into integer, i.e., int(m) = 1 if m = T rue and 0 otherwise.

Algorithm 5 Compute bonus score of a token extension with prefixes.
Input: Prefixes {Rc }C                                                                       1      C
                          c=1 , current partial matching lengths for prefixes J = (j , . . . , j ). Biasing
  phrases {P }b=1 , current partial matching lengths for biasing phrases. I = (i , . . . , iB ). Current
               b B                                                                           1

  prefix matching mask M = (m1 , . . . , mB ), biasing bonus multiplier λ, new token x.
Output: Updated partial matching lengths, updated prefix matching mask, and biasing bonus.
  procedure C OMPUTE B ONUS({P b }B                         c C
                                                b=1 , I, {R }c=1 , M, x)
                                1    1            B      B
      prev score ← µλ ((i , m ), . . . , (i , m ))
      match any bias ← F alse
      for b = 1, . . . , B do
          ub , matchb ← FORWARD(P b , ib , x)
          if matchb then
               match any bias ← T rue
               v b ← len(P b )                   . For full match, use pattern length for computing potential
               extb ← T rue                                           . ext tracks if x extends matching for P b
          else
               v b ← ub
               if ub > ib then
                   extb ← T rue
               else
                   extb ← F alse
               end if
          end if
          mb ← (mb & extb )                                                     . Update prefix-matching status
      end for
      updated score ← µλ ((v 1 , m1 ), . . . , (v B , mB ))
      bonus ← updated score − prev score
      match any pref ix ← F alse
      for c = 1, . . . , C do                                                  . Try to consume x with prefixes
          nc , matchc ← FORWARD(Rc , j c , x)
          if matchc then
               match any pref x ← T rue
          end if
      end for
      for b = 1, . . . , B do
          restartb ← match any pref ix & (not extb )
          if restartb then                                . Restart matching of P b after fully matching prefix
                 b           b
               u ← 0, m ← T rue                                         . Cancel current partial matching of P b
          end if
      end for
      if match any bias then
          nc ← 0 for c = 1, . . . , C
          ub ← 0, mb ← F alse for b = 1, . . . , B
      end if
      return ((n1 , . . . , nC ), (u1 , . . . , uB ), (m1 , . . . , mB ), bonus)
  end procedure



                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    WER OF KMP BIASING FOR VARYING δ
We provide WER curves of varying δ in Figure 1 for both OTF rescoring and shallow fusion options.


Figure 1: WER versus δ for KMP biasing in both OTF rescoring and shallow fusion (F = 50)
modes, on the With-Prefix set.


                                               14
