Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROVABLY E FFICIENT UCB- TYPE A LGORITHMS F OR
L EARNING P REDICTIVE S TATE R EPRESENTATIONS
 Ruiquan Huang∗                         Yingbin Liang†                    Jing Yang∗



                                             A BSTRACT

            The general sequential decision-making problem, which includes Markov de-
            cision processes (MDPs) and partially observable MDPs (POMDPs) as special
            cases, aims at maximizing a cumulative reward by making a sequence of deci-
            sions based on a history of observations and actions over time. Recent studies
            have shown that the sequential decision-making problem is statistically learn-
            able if it admits a low-rank structure modeled by predictive state representations
            (PSRs). Despite these advancements, existing approaches typically involve ora-
            cles or steps that are computationally intractable. On the other hand, the upper
            confidence bound (UCB) based approaches, which have served successfully as
            computationally efficient methods in bandits and MDPs, have not been investi-
            gated for more general PSRs, due to the difficulty of optimistic bonus design in
            these more challenging settings. This paper proposes the first known UCB-type
            approach for PSRs, featuring a novel bonus term that upper bounds the total vari-
            ation distance between the estimated and true models. We further characterize the
            sample complexity bounds for our designed UCB-type algorithms for both on-
            line and offline PSRs. In contrast to existing approaches for PSRs, our UCB-type
            algorithms enjoy computational tractability, last-iterate guaranteed near-optimal
            policy, and guaranteed model accuracy.


1       I NTRODUCTION

As a general framework of reinforcement learning (RL), the sequential decision-making problem
aims at maximizing a cumulative reward by making a sequence of decisions based on a history of
observations and actions over time. This framework is powerful to include and generalize Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) and Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), and
captures a wide range of real-world applications such as recommender systems (Li et al., 2010; Wu
et al., 2021), business management (De Brito & Van Der Laan, 2009), economic simulation (Zheng
et al., 2020), robotics (Akkaya et al., 2019), strategic games (Brown & Sandholm, 2018; Vinyals
et al., 2019), and medical diagnostic systems (Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000).
However, tackling POMDPs alone presents significant challenges, not to mention general sequential
decision-making problems. Many hardness results have been developed (Mossel & Roch, 2005;
Mundhenk et al., 2000; Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Vlassis et al., 2012; Krishnamurthy et al.,
2016), showing that learning POMDPs is already computationally and statistically intractable in
the worst case. The reason is that the non-Markovian property of these problems implies that the
sufficient statistics or belief about the current environmental state encompasses all observations and
actions from past interactions with the environment. This dramatically increases the computational
burden and statistical complexity, since even for a finite observation-action space, the possibilities
of the beliefs are exponentially large in terms of the number of observation-action pairs.
In order to tackle these challenges, recent research has introduced various structural conditions for
POMDPs and general sequential decision-making problems, such as reactiveness (Jiang et al., 2017),
decodability (Du et al., 2019), revealing conditions (Liu et al., 2022a), hindsight observability (Lee
et al., 2023), and low-rank representations with regularization conditions (Zhan et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2022). These conditions have opened up new possibilities for achieving
    ∗
        Penn State University, State College, PA 16801, USA. {rzh514,yangjing}@psu.edu
    †
        Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. liang.889@osu.edu


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


polynomial sample complexities in general sequential decision-making problems. Among them,
predictive state representations (PSRs) (Littman & Sutton, 2001) has been proved to capture and
generalize a rich subclass of sequential decision-making problems such as MDPs and observable
POMDPs. Yet, most existing solutions for PSRs involve oracles that might not be computationally
tractable. For instance, Optimistic MLE (OMLE) (Liu et al., 2022b) involves a step that maximizes
the optimal value function over a confidence set of models. Typically, such a confidence set does
not exhibit advantageous structures, resulting in a potentially combinatorial search within the set.
Another popular posterior sampling based approach (Agarwal & Zhang, 2022; Zhong et al., 2022)
requires to maintain a distribution over the entire set of models, which is highly memory inefficient.
In addition, most existing results lack a last-iterate guarantee and produce only mixture policies,
which often exhibit a very large variance in practical applications. On the other hand, the upper
confidence bound (UCB) based approach has been proved to be computationally efficient and pro-
vide last-iterate guarantee in many decision-making problems such as bandits (Auer et al., 2002)
and MDPs (Ménard et al., 2021). However, due to the non-Markovian property of POMDPs and
general sequential decision-making problems, designing an explicit UCB is extremely challenging.
To the best of our knowledge, such a design has been seldomly explored in POMDPs and beyond.
Thus, we are motivated to address the following important open question:
Q1: Can we design a UCB-type algorithm for learning PSRs that (a) is both computationally
tractable and statistically efficient, and (b) enjoys the last-iterate guarantee?
Another important research direction in RL is offline learning (Lange et al., 2012), where the learn-
ing agent has access to a pre-collected dataset and aims to design a favorable policy without any
interaction with the environment. While offline MDPs have been extensively studied (Jin et al.,
2021b; Xiong et al., 2022a; Xie et al., 2021), there exist very limited studies of offline POMDPs
from the theoretical perspective (Guo et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022). To our best knowledge, offline
learning for a more general model of PSRs has never been explored. Thus, we will further address
the following research question:
Q2: Can we design a UCB-type algorithm for offline learning of PSRs with guaranteed policy
performance and sample efficiency?
Main Contributions: We provide affirmative answers to both aforementioned questions by making
the following contributions.
• We introduce the first known UCB-type approach to learning PSRs with only a regularization
  assumption, characterized by a novel bonus term that upper bounds the total variation distance
  between the estimated and true models. The bonus term is designed based on a new confidence
  bound induced by a new model estimation guarantee for PSRs, and is computationally tractable.
• We theoretically characterize the performance of our UCB-type algorithm for learning PSRs
  online, called PSR-UCB. In contrast to existing approaches, PSR-UCB is computationally
  tractable with only supervised learning oracles, guarantees a near-optimal policy in the last iter-
  ation, and ensures model accuracy. When the rank of the PSR is small, our sample complexity
  matches the best known upper bound in terms of the rank and the accuracy level.
• We further extend our UCB-type approach to the offline setting, and propose the PSR-LCB
  algorithm. We then develop an upper bound on the performance difference between the output
  policy of PSR-LCB  √ and any policy covered by the behavior policy. The performance difference
  scales in O(C∞ / K), where C∞ is the coverage coefficient and K is the size of the offline
  dataset. This is the first known sample complexity result on offline PSRs.
• Technically, we develop two key properties for PSRs to establish the sample complexity guar-
  antees: (a) a new estimation guarantee on the distribution of future observations conditioned
  on empirical samples, enabled by the stable model estimation step, and (b) a new relationship
  between the empirical UCB and the ground-truth UCB. We believe these insights advance the
  current understanding of PSRs, and will benefit future studies on this topic.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Learning MDPs and POMDPs. The MDP is a basic model in RL that assumes Markovian prop-
erty in the model dynamics, i.e. the distribution of the future states only depends on the current
system state. Researchers show that learning tabular MDPs (with finite state and action spaces) is


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


both computationally and statistically efficient in both online setting (Auer et al., 2008; Azar et al.,
2017; Dann et al., 2017; Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021) and offline setting
(Jin et al., 2021b; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2021). Learning MDPs
with function approximations is also well-studied by establishing favorable statistical complexity
and computation efficiency (Jin et al., 2020; Wagenmaker & Jamieson, 2022; Zanette et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2020; Uehara et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2021; Jin
et al., 2021a; Jiang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021b; Xiong et al., 2022a; Xie et al.,
2021). Notably, several algorithms designed for learning MDPs with general function approxima-
tions can be extended to solve a subclass of POMDPs. In particular, OLIVE (Jiang et al., 2017)
and GOLF (Jin et al., 2021a), which are originally designed for MDPs with low Bellman rank and
low Bellman-Eluder dimension, respectively, can efficiently learn reactive POMDPs, where the op-
timal policy only depends on the current observation. Besides, Du et al. (2019); Efroni et al. (2022)
study decodable RL where the observations determine the underlying states, and Kwon et al. (2021)
investigate latent MDPs where there are multiple MDPs determined by some latent variables.
To directly address the partial observability in POMDPs, some works assume exploratory data or
reachability property and provide polynomial sample complexity for learning these POMDPs (Guo
et al., 2016; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2022b). Others tackle the challenge of explo-
ration and exploitation tradeoff in POMDPs by considering various sub-classes of POMDPs such as
low-rank POMDPs (Wang et al., 2022), observable POMDPs (Golowich et al., 2022a;b), hindsight
observability (Lee et al., 2023), and weakly-revealing POMDPs (Liu et al., 2022c;a). Furthermore,
Liu et al. (2022c); Uehara et al. (2022a) propose computationally efficient algorithms for POMDPs
with deterministic latent transitions. Notably, Golowich et al. (2022a) propose a provably efficient
algorithm for learning observable tabular POMDPs without computationally intractable oracles. Fi-
nally, Lu et al. (2022) study the offline POMDPs in the presence of confounders, and Guo et al.
(2022) provide provably efficient algorithm for offline linear POMDPs. After the initial submission
of this work, we notice that a UCB-type algorithm has been studied by Guo et al. (2023) under
low-rank L-step decodable POMDPs, which is a subclass of the PSRs considered here.
Learning PSRs and general sequential decision-making problems. The PSR is first introduced
by Littman & Sutton (2001); Singh et al. (2012) and considered as a general representation to model
dynamic systems. A line of research (Boots et al., 2011; Hefny et al., 2015; Jiang et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2022) obtain polynomial sample complexity with observability assumption and spectral
techniques. Later, Zhan et al. (2022) demonstrate that learning regular PSRs is sample efficient
and can avoid poly(|O|m ) in the sample complexity. Uehara et al. (2022b) propose a PO-bilinear
class that captures a rich class of tractable RL problems with partial observations, including weakly
revealing POMDPs and PSRs and design an actor-critic style algorithm. For the works most closely
related to ours, Liu et al. (2022b) propose a universal algorithm known as OMLE, which is capable
of learning PSRs and its generalizations under certain conditions; Chen et al. (2022) enhance the
sample complexity upper bounds for three distinct algorithms, including OMLE, the model-based
posterior sampling, and the estimation-to-decision type algorithm (Foster et al., 2021); Zhong et al.
(2022) address the general sequential decision-making problem by posterior sampling under a newly
proposed low generalized Eluder coefficient. However, as elaborated in Section 1, those approaches
are not efficient in terms of computational complexity or memory.


3    P RELIMINARIES

Problem Setting. We consider a finite horizon episodic sequential decision-making problem, de-
fined by a tuple P = (O, A, H, P, R), where O represents the observation space, A is a finite action
space, H is the number of time steps within an episode, P = {Ph } determines the model dynamics,
i.e., Ph (oh |o1 , . . . , oh−1 , a1 , . . . , ah−1 ), where ot ∈ O is the observation at time step t, and at ∈ A
is the action taken by the agent at time step t for all t ∈ {1, . . . , h}, and R : (O×A)H → [0, 1] is the
reward function defined on trajectories of one episode. We denote a historical trajectory at time step
h as τh := (o1 , a1 , . . . , oh , ah ), and denote a future trajectory as ωh := (oh+1 , ah+1 , . . . , oH , aH ).
The set of all τh is denoted by Hh = (O × A)h and the set of all future trajectories is denoted
by Ωh = (O × A)H−h . In addition, let ωho = (oh+1 , . . . , oH ) and ωha = (ah+1 , . . . , aH ) be the
observation sequence and the action sequence contained in ωh , respectively. Similarly, for a his-
tory τh , we denote τho and τha as the observation and action sequences in τh , respectively. Notably,
the general framework of sequential decision-making problem subsume not only fully observable


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MDPs but also POMDPs as special cases, because in MDPs, Ph (oP     h |τh−1 ) = Ph (oh |oh−1 , ah−1 )
and in POMDPs, Ph (oh |τh−1 ) can be factorized as Ph (oh |τh−1 ) = s Ph (oh |s)Ph (s|τh−1 ), where
s represents unobserved states.
The interaction between an agent and P proceeds as follows. At the beginning of each episode,
the environment initializes a fixed observation o1 at time step 1. After observing o1 , the agent
takes action a1 , and the environment transits to o2 , which is sampled according to the distribution
P1 (o2 |o1 , a1 ). Then, at any time step h ≥ 2, due to the non-Markovian nature of the problem, the
agent takes action ah based on all past information (τh−1 , oh ), and the environment transits to oh+1 ,
sampled from Ph (oh+1 |τh ). The interaction terminates after time step H.
The policy π = {πh } of the agent is a collection of H distributions where πh (ah |τh−1 , oh ) is the
probability of choosing action ah at time step h given the history τh−1 and the current observation
oh . For simplicity, we use π(τh ) = π(ah |oh , τh−1 ) · · · π(a1 |o1 ) to denote the probability of the
sequence of actions τha given the observations τho . We denote Pπ as the distribution of trajectories
induced by policy π under dynamics P. The value of a policy π under P and the reward R is denoted
     π
by VP,R  = EτH ∼Pπ [R(τH )].
                                                                              π      π̂
The goal of the agent is to find an ϵ-optimal policy π̂ that satisfies maxπ VP,R − VP,R  ≤ ϵ. Since
finding a near-optimal policy for a general decision-making problem incurs exponentially large sam-
ple complexity in the worst case, in this paper we follow the line of research in Zhan et al. (2022);
Chen et al. (2022); Zhong et al. (2022) and focus on the low-rank class of problems. To define a
low-rank problem, we introduce the dynamic matrix Dh ∈ R|Hh |×|Ωh | for each h, where the entry
at the τh -th row and ωh -th column of Dh is P(ωho , τho |τha , ωha ).

Definition 1 (Rank-r sequential decision-making problem) A sequential decision-making prob-
lem is rank r if for any h, the model dynamic matrix Dh has rank r.

Predictive State Representation (PSR). To exploit the low-rank structure, we assume that for
each h, there exists a set of future trajectories, namely, core tests (known to the agent) Qh =
{q1h , . . . , qdhh } ⊂ Ωh , such that the submatrix restricted to these tests Dh [Qh ] has rank r, where
dh ≥ r is a positive integer. This special set Qh allows the system dynamics to be factorized as
P(ωho , τho |τha , ωha ) = m(ωh )⊤ ψ(τh ), where m(ωh ), ψ(τh ) ∈ Rdh and the ℓ-th coordinate of ψ(τh ) is
the joint probability of τh and the ℓ-th core test qℓh . Mathematically, if we use oℓh and aℓh to denote the
observation sequence and the action sequence of qℓh , respectively, then P(oℓh , τho |τha , aℓh ) = [ψ(τh )]ℓ .
By Theorem C.1 in Liu et al. (2022b), any low-rank decision-making problem admits a (self-
                                                                                             H−1
consistent) predictive state representation θ = {ϕh , Mh }H    h=1 given core tests {Qh }h=0 , such that
for any τh ∈ Hh , ωh ∈ Ωh ,
 ψ(τh ) = Mh (oh , ah ) · · · M1 (o1 , a1 )ψ0 , m(ωh )⊤ = ϕ⊤          H MH (oH , aH ) · · · Mh+1 (oh+1 , ah+1 )
 X
      ϕ⊤h+1 Mh+1 (oh+1 , ah+1 ) = ϕh ,
                                        ⊤
                                               P(oh , . . . , o1 |a1 , . . . , ah ) = ϕ⊤
                                                                                       h ψ(τh ),
  oh+1

where Mh : O × A → Rdh ×dh−1 , ϕh ∈ Rdh , and ψ0 ∈ Rd0 . For ease of presentation, we assume
ψ0 is known to the agent1 . Notably, the normalized version of ψ(τh ) with respect to ϕ⊤         h ψ(τh ),
denoted as ψ̄(τh ) = ψ(τh )/ϕ⊤  h ψ(τh ), is known as the prediction vector (Littman & Sutton, 2001)
or prediction feature of τh , since [ψ̄(τh )]ℓ = P(oℓh |τh , aℓh ). As illustrated in Appendices C and D,
the prediction feature plays an important role in our algorithm design.
In the following context, we use Pθ to indicate the model determined by the representation θ =
                                                                                   ℓ dh
{ϕh , Mh }H                                    π        π                   A
           h=1 . For simplicity, we denote VPθ ,R = Vθ,R . Moreover, let Qh = {ah }ℓ=1 be the set of
action sequences that are part of core tests, constructed by eliminating any repeated action sequence.
QAh , known as the set of core action sequences, plays a crucial role during the exploration process.
Selecting from these sequences is sufficient to sample core tests, leading to accurate estimate of θ.
We further assume that the PSRs studied in this paper are well-conditioned, as specified in Assump-
tion 1. Such an assumption and its variants are commonly adopted in the study of PSRs (Liu et al.,
2022b; Chen et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2022).
   1
     The sample complexity of learning ψ0 if it is unknown is relatively small compared with learning other
parameters.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 1 (γ-well-conditioned PSR) A PSR θ is said to be γ-well-conditioned if
                                                     X                              1
                    ∀h,        max         max max        π(ωh |τh )|m(ωh )⊤ x| ≤     .               (1)
                          x∈Rdh :∥x∥1 ≤1    π   τh
                                                     ωh
                                                                                    γ

Assumption 1 requires that the error of estimating θ does not significantly blow up when the estima-
tion error x of estimating the probability of core tests is small.
Notations. We denote the complete√set of model parameters as Θ and the true model parameter as
θ∗ . For a vector x, ∥x∥A stands for x⊤ Ax, and the i-th coordinate of x is represented as [x]i . For
functions P and Q (not necessarily probability
                                        P          measures) over a set X , the total variation distance
between them is DTV (P(x), Q(x)) p   = x |P(x) p  − Q(x)|, while the hellinger-squared distance is de-
fined as D2H (P(x), Q(x)) = 21 x ( P(x) − Q(x))2 . Note that our definition of the total variation
                               P
distance is slightly different from convention by a constant factor. We define d = maxh dh and
                                      ′
QA = maxh |QA     h |. We use νh (π, π ) to denote the policy that takes π at the initial h − 1 steps and
               ′
switches to π from the h-th step. Lastly, uX represents the uniform distribution over the set X .


4     O NLINE L EARNING FOR P REDIVTIVE S TATE R EPRESENTATIONS

In this section, we propose a model-based algorithm PSR-UCB, which features three main novel
designs: (a) a stable model estimation step controlling the quality of the estimated model such that
its prediction features of the empirical data are useful in the design of UCB, (b) an upper confidence
bound that captures the uncertainty of the estimated model, and (c) a termination condition that guar-
antees the last-iterate model is near-accurate and the corresponding greedy policy is near-optimal.

4.1   A LGORITHM

The pseudo-code for the PSR-UCB algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. We highlight the key
idea of PSR-UCB: in contrast to the design of UCB-type algorithms in MDPs that leverage low-rank
structures, we exploit the physical meaning of the prediction feature ψ̄(τh ) to design bonus terms
that enable efficient exploration. In particular, “physical meaning” refers to that each coordinate of
a prediction feature of τh represents the probability of visiting a core test conditioned on τh and
taking the corresponding core action sequence. Therefore, it suffices to explore a set of τh whose
prediction features can span the entire feature space, and use core action sequences to learn those
“base” features. We next elaborate the main steps of the algorithm in greater detail as follows.
Exploration. At each iteration k, PSR-UCB constructs a greedy policy π k−1 based on a previous
dataset Dk−1 = {Dhk−1 }H−1
                         h=0 , together with an estimated model θ̂
                                                                   k−1
                                                                       . Intuitively, to enable efficient
               k−1
exploration, π     is expected to sample τh that “differs” the most from previous collected samples
τh ∈ Dhk−1 . How to quantify such differences forms the foundation of our algorithm design and will
be elaborated later.
                                                                     k,h
Then, for each h ∈ [H], PSR-UCB first uses π k−1 to get a sample τh−1     , then follows the policy
                k,h           exp            A       A
uQexp
   h−1
       to get ωh−1 , where Qh−1 = (A × Qh ) ∪ Qh−1 . Here, superscripts k, h represent the
index of episodes. In other words, PSR-UCB adopts the policy νh (π k−1 , uQexp
                                                                            h−1
                                                                                ) to collect a sample
             k,h    k,h                          k−1                      k
trajectory (τh−1 , ωh−1 ), which, together with Dh−1 , forms the dataset Dh−1 .
The importance of uniformly selecting actions from Qexp  h−1 can be explained as follows. First, the
                                                                   k,h
actions in Qh−1 assist us to learn the prediction feature ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1
              A
                                                                       ) as its ℓ-th coordiate equals to
             k,h
Pθ∗ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ). Second, the action sequence (ah , aℓh ) ∈ A × QA     h helps us to estimate
   ∗           ∗ k,h                                                           k,h
Mh (oh , ah )ψ̄ (τh−1 ) because its ℓ-th coordinate represents Pθ∗ (oh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ). Therefore,
                                                                        ℓ

by uniform exploration on Qexp                  k,h                                      k−1
                                h−1 given that τh−1 differs from previous dataset Dh−1 , PSR-UCB
collects the most informative samples for estimating the true model θ∗ .
Stable model estimation. With the updated dataset Dk = {Dhk }, we estimate the model by maxi-
mizing the log-likelihood functions with constraints. Specifically, PSR-UCB extracts any model θ̂k


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from B k defined as:
        Θkmin = θ : ∀h, (τh , π) ∈ Dhk , Pπθ (τh ) ≥ pmin ,

                                                                                                     
                              X                                       X                              
        B k = θ ∈ Θkmin :              log Pπθ (τH ) ≥ max                       log Pπθ′ (τH ) − β       ,   (2)
                                   k
                                                      θ ′ ∈Θk
                                                            min
                                                                                                      
                               (τH ,π)∈D                           (τH ,π)∈D k

where the estimation margin β is a pre-defined constant. Here the threshold probability pmin is
sufficiently small to guarantee that, with high probability, θ∗ ∈ Θkmin . Note that compared to existing
vanilla maximum likelihood estimators (Liu et al., 2022b;a; Chen et al., 2022), PSR-UCB has an
additional constraint Θkmin . This is a crucial condition, as τhk,h+1 is sampled to infer the conditional
probability Pθ∗ (ωho |τhk,h+1 , ωha ) or the prediction feature ψ̄ ∗ (τhk,h+1 ), and learning this feature is
                                k−1
useless or even harmful if Pθ̂πk (τhk,h+1 ) is too small, as it is proved that θ∗ ∈ Θkmin (Proposition 7).
Design of UCB with prediction features. From the discussion of the previous two steps, we see
that the prediction features are vital since (a) actions in Qexp
                                                             h   can efficiently explore the coordi-
                                              k
nates of these features, and (b) constraint Θmin ensures the significance of the learned features of
the collected samples. Therefore, in the next round of exploration, our objective is to sample τh
whose prediction feature exhibits the greatest dissimilarity compared with those of the previously
collected samples τh ∈ Dhk . Towards that, PSR-UCB constructs an upper confidence bound Vθ̂πk ,b̂k
for DTV (Pπθ̂k (τH ), Pπθ (τH )), where the bonus b̂k is defined as:
                                                                        v                       
                        X ¯               ¯                              uH−1
                                                                        u X ¯          2        
      Ûhk = λI +             ψ̂ k (τh′ )ψ̂ k (τh′ )⊤ , b̂k (τH ) = min αt    ψ̂ k (τh ) k −1 , 1 ,           (3)
                                                                                       (Ûh )   
                        ′
                    τh ∈Dh  k                                              h=0

with pre-specified regularizer λ and UCB coefficient α. Note that large b̂k (τH ) indicates that τH
                                                                             ¯
is “perceived” to be under explored since the estimated prediction feature ψ̂ k (τh ) is significantly
                 ¯
different from {ψ̂ k (τh )}τh ∈Dhk .

Algorithm 1 Learning Predictive State Representation with Upper Confidence Bound (PSR-UCB)
 1: Input: threshold probability pmin , estimation margin β, regularizer λ, UCB coefficient α.
 2: for k = 1, . . . , K do
 3:     for h = 1, ..., H do
                                                   k,h     k,h    k,h
 4:         Use ν(π k−1 , uQexp ) to collect data τH   = (ωh−1 , τh−1 ).
                             h−1
             k      k−1      k,h
 5:         Dh−1 ← Dh−1 ∪ {(τH   , νh (π k−1 , uQexp ))}.
                                                    h−1
 6:     end for
 7:     Dk = {Dhk }H−1                    k   k
                    h=0 . Extract any θ̂ ∈ B according to Equation (2).
 8:     Define bonus function b̂k (τH ) according to Equation (3).
 9:     Solve π k = arg maxπ Vθ̂πk ,b̂k .
              k
10:     if Vθ̂πk ,b̂k ≤ ϵ/2 then
11:        θϵ = θ̂k , break.
12:    end if
13: end for
14: Output: π̄ = arg maxπ Vθπϵ ,R .

Design of the greedy policy and last-iterate guaranteed termination. The construction of UCB
implies that θ̂k is highly uncertain on the trajectories τH with large bonuses. Thus, PSR-UCB finds
a greedy policy π k = arg maxπ Vθ̂πk ,b̂k and terminates if Vθ̂πk ,b̂k is sufficiently small, indicating that
the estimated model θ̂k is sufficiently accurate on any trajectory. Otherwise, π k serves for the next
                                                            ¯
iteration k + 1, as it tries to sample the most dissimilar ψ̂ k (τh ) compared with the previous samples
 ¯k k,h+1
ψ̂ (τh      ) for efficient exploration. We remark that the termination condition favors the last-iterate
guarantee, where a single model and a greedy policy are identified. Compared with algorithms that
output a mixture policy (e.g. uniform selection in a large policy set), this guarantee may present
lower variance in practical applications.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1 (Computation) Our algorithm only calls the MLE oracle H times in each episode to
construct the confidence model class in Equation (2). Similar to Guo et al. (2023), our UCB based
planning avoids searching for an optimistic policy that maximizes the optimal value over a large
model class, thus is more amendable to practical implementation.

Remark 2 (Reward-free PSRs) Our algorithm naturally handles reward-free PSRs since during
the exploration, no reward information is needed. In the reward-free setting, Algorithm 1 exhibits
greater advantage compared with existing reward-free algorithms (Liu et al., 2022b; Chen et al.,
2022) for PSRs, which require a potentially combinatorial optimization oracle over a pair of models
in the (non-convex) confidence set and examination of the total variance distance2 , and are compu-
tationally intractable in general (Golowich et al., 2022a).

4.2    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present the theoretical results for PSR-UCB. To make a general statement, we
first introduce the notion of the optimistic net of the parameter space.

Definition 2 (Optimistic net) Consider two bounded functions P and P̄ over a set X . Then, P̄ is
ε-optimistic over P if (a) P̄(x) ≥ P(x), ∀x ∈ X , and (b) DTV (P, P̄) ≤ ε. The ε-optimistic net of Θ is
a smallest finite space Θ̄ε so that for all θ ∈ Θ, there exists θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ε when Pθ̄ is ε-optimistic over Pθ .

Note that if Θ is the parameter space for tabular PSRs (including finite observation and action spaces)
with rank r, we have |Θ̄ε | ≤ r2 |O||A|H 2 log H|O||A|
                                                   ε    (see Proposition 3 or Theorem 4.7 in Liu et al.
(2022b)). Now, we are ready to present the main theorem for PSR-UCB.

Theorem 1 Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Let pmin = O( KH|O|δH |A|H )3 , β = O(log |Θ̄ε |), where
                         2         √     √                   √ √                 √
                                                                           |A|QA β
ε = O( pKH
         min
             ), λ = γ|A| QA β max{
                                √
                                  dH
                                     r,QA H/γ}
                                               , and α = O  QA Hd
                                                              γ 2     λ +      γ     . Then, with
                                                       ϵ
probability at least 1 − δ, PSR-UCB outputs a model θ and a policy π̄ that satisfy
                          ∗
                       Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R ≤ ϵ, and ∀π, DTV (Pπθϵ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )) ≤ ϵ.                          (4)
In addition, PSR-UCB terminates with a sample complexity of
                                       Q2 H rdH 3 |A|2 Q4A β

                            Õ    r + A2                       .
                                         γ          γ 4 ϵ2

The following remarks highlight a few insights conveyed by Theorem 1. First, Theorem 1 explic-
itly states that PSR-UCB features last-iterate guarantee, i.e., the guaranteed performance is on the
last output of the algorithm. This is in contrast to the previous studies (Liu et al., 2022a;b; Chen
et al., 2022) on POMDP and/or PSRs, where the performance guarantee is on a mixture of policies
obtained over the entire execution of algorithms. Such policies often have a large variance. Second,
                                                    Q2 H
in the regime with a low PSR rank such that r < γA2 , our result matches the best known sample
complexity (Chen et al., 2022) in terms of rank r and ϵ. Third, thanks to the explicitly constructed
bonus function b̂, whose computation complexity is polynomial in terms of the iteration number and
the dimension d, PSR-UCB is computationally tractable, provided that there exist oracles for plan-
ning in POMDPs (e.g. Line 9 in PSR-UCB) (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Guo et al., 2023)
and maximum likelihood estimation.
Proof Sketch of Theorem 1. The proof relies on three main steps corresponding to three new tech-
nical developments, respectively. (a) A new MLE guarantee. Due to the novel stable model esti-
mation design, we establish a new MLE guarantee (which has not been developed in the previous
studies) that the total variation distance between the conditional distributions of future trajectories
conditioned on (τh , π) ∈ Dhk is small. Mathematically, (τh ,π)∈Dk DTV (Pπθ̂k (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ))
                                                          P
                                                                                h

   2
      Computation complexity of calculating total variation distance is still an open question (Bhattacharyya
et al., 2022) and only some specific forms can be approximated in polynomial time.
    3
      |O| can be the cardinality of O if it is finite, or the measure of O if it is a measurable set with positive and
bounded measure.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is upper bounded by a constant. (b) A new confidence bound. Based on (a) and the obser-
                                                                   ¯
vation that the estimation error of the prediction feature ψ̂ k (τh ) is upper bounded by the total
                           π             π
variation distance DTV (Pθ̂k (ωh |τh ), Pθ∗ (ωh |τh )), the estimation error of other prediction features
                                  ¯
is captured by the function ∥ψ̂ k (τh )∥(Û k )−1 up to some constant, leading to the valid UCB de-
                                             h
sign. (c) A new relationship between the empirical bonus and the ground-truth bonus. To
                                                                      k
characterize the sample complexity, we need to show that Vθ̂πk ,b̂k can be small for some k. One
                                      k
approach is to prove that k Vθ̂πk ,b̂k is sub-linear. We validate this sub-linearity by establishing
                             P
           P
                    ∗                                                     ∗       ∗     ⊤
b̂k ≤ O                                          k
                                                              P
               h ∥ψ̄ (τh )∥(Uhk )−1 , where Uh = λI +                 k ψ̄ (τh )ψ̄ (τh ) . This inequality
                                                                 τh ∈Dh
bridges the empirical and the ground-truth bonuses, and yields the final result when combined with
the elliptical potential lemma (Carpentier et al., 2020). The complete proof can be found in Ap-
pendix C.
When PSR is specialized to m-step decodable POMDPs (Liu et al., 2022b), as elaborated in Ap-
pendix C.5, the sample complexity of PSR-UCB does not depend on d with slight modification of
the algorithm.

Corollary 1 When PSR is specialized to m-step decodable POMDPs, for each k, there exists a set
                                                        ¯                        ¯
of matrices {Ĝkh }H
                   h=1 ⊂ R
                           d×r
                               such that if we replace ψ̂ k (τh ) by (Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂ k (τh ) in Equation (3)
for any τh , then PSR-UCB terminates with a sample complexity of poly(r, 1/γ, QA , H, |A|, β)/ϵ2 .


5     O FFLINE L EARNING FOR P REDICTIVE S TATE R EPRESENTATIONS

In this section, we develop a computationally tractable algorithm PSR-LCB to learn PSRs in the
offline setting. In offline PSRs, a dataset D contains K pre-collected trajectories that are indepen-
dently sampled from a behavior policy π b . We slightly generalize the learning goal to be finding a
policy that can compete with any target policy whose coverage coefficient is finite. We highlight that
PSR-LCB is the first offline algorithm for learning PSRs. When specialized to POMDPs, our pro-
posed algorithm enjoys better computational complexity than confidence region based algorithms
(Guo et al., 2022).


5.1   A LGORITHM

We design a PSR-LCB algorithm for offline PSRs, whose pseudo-code is presented in Algorithm 2.
In the offline setting, we also leverage the prediction feature ψ̄(τh ) to design lower confidence
bound (LCB) of the true value function Vθπ∗ ,r . We explain the main steps of the algorithm in detail
as follows.
stable model estimation. Inspired by PSR-UCB, where the prediction features ψ̄(τh ) at each step h
are learned through separate datasets, PSR-LCB first randomly and evenly divides D into H datasets
D0 , . . . , DH−1 . The goal of this division is to separately learn ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) for each h ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H −
1}. Then, PSR-LCB extracts a model θ̂ from BD defined as:
                   n                     b
                                                      o
             Θmin = θ : ∀h, τh ∈ Dh , Pπθ (τh ) ≥ pmin ,
                  (                                                                                 )
                               X           b                          X              b
             BD = θ ∈ Θmin :        log Pπθ (τH ) ≥ ′max                      log Pπθ′ (τH ) − β̂       ,   (5)
                                                            θ ∈Θmin
                                   τH ∈D                              τH ∈D


where the estimation margin β̂ is a pre-specified constant, and pmin guarantees that, with high prob-
ability, θ∗ ∈ Θmin .
Following similar reasons of the design of PSR-UCB, the constraint Θmin controls the quality of
the estimated model such that the prediction features of the behavior samples are non-negligible and
useful for learning.

                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Design of LCB with prediction  features. Given  the estimated model θ̂, PSR-LCB constructs an
upper confidence bound of DTV Pπθ̂ (τH ), Pπθ (τH ) in the form of Vθ̂,πb̂ , where b̂(τH ) is defined as:
                                                             ( s                              )
                     X ¯                                                            2
                                  ¯     ⊤
                                                                  X ¯
        Ûh = λ̂I +       ψ̂(τh )ψ̂(τh ) , b̂(τH ) = min α̂                 ψ̂(τh )     −1
                                                                                           ,1 ,         (6)
                                                                                     (Ûh )
                        τh ∈Dh                                          h

with pre-defined regularizer λ̂ and LCB coefficient α̂. Note that we refer to α̂ as the LCB coefficient,
as we adopt the pessimism principle in offline learning. Differently from PSR-UCB, we aim to select
a policy where the estimated model exhibits the least uncertainty. Therefore, the output policy should
allocate a high probability to τH if b̂(τH ) is small.
Output policy design. Building on the discussion above, PSR-LCB outputs a policy π̄ =
           π
arg maxπ Vθ̂,R − Vθ̂,πb̂ , which maximizes a lower confidence bound of Vθπ∗ ,R .

Algorithm 2 Offline Predictive State Representations with Lower Confidence Bound (PSR-LCB)
 1: Input: Offline dataset D, threshold probability pmin , estimation margin β̂, regularizer λ̂, LCB
      coefficient α̂.
 2: Estimate model θ̂ ∈ B according to Equation (5).
 3: Construct b̂ according to Equation (6).
 4: Output π̂ = arg maxπ V π − V π .
                                 θ̂,R   θ̂,b̂



5.2     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

In this section, we develop the theoretical guarantee for PSR-LCB. To capture the distribution shift
in offline PSRs, we require that the ℓ∞ norm of the ratio between the probabilities over the entire
trajectory under the target policy and under the behavior policy is finite. Mathematically, if π is
                                                 Pπ (τ )
the target policy, then, Cππb ,∞ := maxh maxτh πθ∗b h < ∞. We note that, for general sequential
                                                     Pθ∗ (τh )
decision-making problems, no Markovian property or hidden state is assumed. Therefore, defining
the coverage assumption on a single observation-action pair as in Xie et al. (2021) for offline MDP,
or on hidden states as in Guo et al. (2022) for offline POMDP, is not suitable for PSRs.
                                                                                                  δ
Theorem 2 Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Let ι = minah ∈Qexp             π b (ah ), pmin = O( KH(|O||A|)  H ),
                                                         √    √ h
       pmin
                                          π
                                        γCπb ,∞ β̂ max{ r,QA H/γ}

                                                                                       Q
                                                                                          √
                                                                                            dH
                                                                                               √     √
                                                                                                      β
ε = O( KH ), β̂ = O(log |Θ̄ε |), λ̂ =                    √
                                                   ι2 QA dH
                                                                     , and α̂ = O       A
                                                                                         γ2      λ + ιγ .
Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the output π̄ of Algorithm 2 satisfies that
                                                         √ ! π                 2
                                                                                  √ s 
                                            √          QA   H  Cπ b ,∞ QA H        d rβ̂
            ∀π, Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R ≤ Õ       r+                           2
                                                                                           .          (7)
                                                          γ              ιγ             K

Theorem 2 states that for any target policy with finite coverage coefficient Cππb ,∞ , the performance
                                                                                           π
                                                                                         Cπ b ,∞

degradation of the output policy π̄ with respect to the target policy π is at most Õ √      K
                                                                                                   , which is
negligible if the size of the offline dataset K is sufficiently large. Thee full proof is in Appendix D.

6     C ONCLUSION
We studied learning predictive state representations (PSRs) for low-rank sequential decision-making
problems. We developed a novel upper confidence bound for the total variation distance of the
estimated model and the true model that enables both computationally tractable with MLE oracles
and statistically efficient learning for PSRs with only supervised learning oracles. Specifically, we
proposed PSR-UCB for online learning for PSRs with last-iterate guarantee, i.e. producing not only
a near-optimal policy, but also a near-accurate model. The statistical efficiency was validated by
a polynomial sample complexity in terms of the model parameters. In addition, we extended this
UCB-type approach to the offline setting and proposed PSR-LCB. Our theoretical result offers an
initial perspective on offline PSRs by demonstrating that PSR-LCB outputs a policy that can compete
with any policy with finite coverage coefficient.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of R. Huang and J. Yang was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Founda-
tion under the grants CNS-1956276, CNS-2003131 and CNS-2030026. The work of Y. Liang was
supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under the grants RINGS-2148253, CCF-
1900145, and CNS-2112471.

I MPACT S TATEMENT

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted
here.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.

Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based rl with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07659, 2022.

Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural com-
  plexity and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20095–20107, 2020.

Shipra Agrawal and Randy Jia. Optimistic posterior sampling for reinforcement learning: worst-
  case regret bounds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.

Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine learning, 47:235–256, 2002.

Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Alessandro Lazaric, and Animashree Anandkumar. Reinforcement learn-
  ing of pomdps using spectral methods. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 193–256. PMLR,
  2016.

Arnab Bhattacharyya, Sutanu Gayen, Kuldeep S Meel, Dimitrios Myrisiotis, A Pavan, and NV Vin-
  odchandran. On approximating total variation distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07209, 2022.

Byron Boots, Sajid M Siddiqi, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Closing the learning-planning loop with
  predictive state representations. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 30(7):954–966,
  2011.

Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats
  top professionals. Science, 359(6374):418–424, 2018.

Alexandra Carpentier, Claire Vernade, and Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori. The elliptical potential lemma
  revisited. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10182, 2020.

Jonathan Chang, Masatoshi Uehara, Dhruv Sreenivas, Rahul Kidambi, and Wen Sun. Mitigating
  covariate shift in imitation learning via offline data with partial coverage. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:965–979, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14990, 2022.

Varsha Dani, Thomas P Hayes, and Sham M Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. 2008.

Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.

Marisa P De Brito and Erwin A Van Der Laan. Inventory control with product returns: The impact
 of imperfect information. European journal of operational research, 194(1):85–101, 2009.

Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665–1674. PMLR, 2019.

Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826–2836. PMLR, 2021.

Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5832–
  5850. PMLR, 2022.

Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.

Sara A Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press, 2000.

Noah Golowich, Ankur Moitra, and Dhruv Rohatgi. Learning in observable pomdps, without com-
  putationally intractable oracles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03446, 2022a.

Noah Golowich, Ankur Moitra, and Dhruv Rohatgi. Planning in observable pomdps in quasipoly-
  nomial time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04735, 2022b.

Hongyi Guo, Qi Cai, Yufeng Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient of-
  fline reinforcement learning for partially observable markov decision processes. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8016–8038. PMLR, 2022.

Jiacheng Guo, Zihao Li, Huazheng Wang, Mengdi Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Xuezhou Zhang. Prov-
   ably efficient representation learning with tractable planning in low-rank pomdp. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2306.12356, 2023.

Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Shayan Doroudi, and Emma Brunskill. A pac rl algorithm for episodic
  pomdps. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 510–518. PMLR, 2016.

Milos Hauskrecht and Hamish Fraser. Planning treatment of ischemic heart disease with partially
 observable markov decision processes. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 18(3):221–244, 2000.

Ahmed Hefny, Carlton Downey, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Supervised learning for dynamical system
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.

Nan Jiang, Alex Kulesza, and Satinder Singh. Completing state representations using spectral learn-
  ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably effi-
  cient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406–13418, 2021a.

Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021b.

Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Pac reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Jeongyeol Kwon, Yonathan Efroni, Constantine Caramanis, and Shie Mannor. Rl for latent mdps:
  Regret guarantees and a lower bound. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  24523–24534, 2021.

Sascha Lange, Thomas Gabel, and Martin Riedmiller. Batch reinforcement learning. Reinforcement
  learning: State-of-the-art, pp. 45–73, 2012.

Jonathan N Lee, Alekh Agarwal, Christoph Dann, and Tong Zhang. Learning in pomdps is sample-
  efficient with hindsight observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13857, 2023.

Gen Li, Laixi Shi, Yuxin Chen, Yuantao Gu, and Yuejie Chi. Breaking the sample complexity barrier
  to regret-optimal model-free reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17762–17776, 2021.

Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.

Michael Littman and Richard S Sutton. Predictive representations of state. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 14, 2001.

Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5175–5220. PMLR, 2022a.

Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle–a generic
  model-based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14997, 2022b.

Qinghua Liu, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning of partially
  observable markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01315, 2022c.

Miao Lu, Yifei Min, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Pessimism in the face of confounders: Prov-
 ably efficient offline reinforcement learning in partially observable markov decision processes.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13589, 2022.

Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7608. PMLR, 2021.

Elchanan Mossel and Sébastien Roch. Learning nonsingular phylogenies and hidden markov mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the thirty-seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp.
  366–375, 2005.

Martin Mundhenk, Judy Goldsmith, Christopher Lusena, and Eric Allender. Complexity of finite-
 horizon markov decision process problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 47(4):681–720, 2000.

Christos H Papadimitriou and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of markov decision processes.
  Mathematics of operations research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline rein-
  forcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:11702–11716, 2021.
Satinder Singh, Michael James, and Matthew Rudary. Predictive state representations: A new theory
  for modeling dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.4167, 2012.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline rl
 in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Computationally
 efficient pac rl in pomdps with latent determinism and conditional embeddings. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.12081, 2022a.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Provably
 efficient reinforcement learning in partially observable dynamical systems. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.12020, 2022b.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Nikos Vlassis, Michael L Littman, and David Barber. On the computational complexity of stochastic
  controller optimization in pomdps. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 4(4):1–8,
  2012.
Andrew Wagenmaker and Kevin G Jamieson. Instance-dependent near-optimal policy identification
  in linear mdps via online experiment design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:5968–5981, 2022.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Embed to control partially observed sys-
  tems: Representation learning with provable sample efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13476,
  2022.
Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123–6135, 2020.
Yaxiong Wu, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. Partially observable reinforcement learning for
  dialog-based interactive recommendation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Rec-
  ommender Systems, pp. 241–251, 2021.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:6683–6694, 2021.
Wei Xiong, Han Zhong, Chengshuai Shi, Cong Shen, Liwei Wang, and Tong Zhang. Nearly mini-
 max optimal offline reinforcement learning with linear function approximation: Single-agent mdp
 and markov game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15512, 2022a.
Yi Xiong, Ningyuan Chen, Xuefeng Gao, and Xiang Zhou. Sublinear regret for learning pomdps.
  Production and Operations Management, 31(9):3491–3504, 2022b.
Ming Yin, Yu Bai, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Near-optimal offline reinforcement learning via double
 variance reduction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:7677–7688, 2021.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020.
Andrea Zanette, Ching-An Cheng, and Alekh Agarwal. Cautiously optimistic policy optimization
  and exploration with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4473–
  4525. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022.
Zhi Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Pratap Tokekar, and Furong Huang. Reinforcement learning
  under a multi-agent predictive state representation model: Method and theory. In The Tenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2022), 2022.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, David C Parkes,
  and Richard Socher. The ai economist: Improving equality and productivity with ai-driven tax
  policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13332, 2020.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong
  Zhang. A posterior sampling framework for interactive decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01962, 2022.
Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvari. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learn-
  ing for linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4532–
  4576. PMLR, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Provably Efficient UCB-type Algorithms For Learning PSRs:
                      Supplementary Materials
A    P ROPERTIES OF PSR S
In this section, we present a few important properties of PSRs, which will be intensively used in the
algorithm analysis.
First, for any model θ = {ϕh , Mh (oh , ah )}, we have the following identity
                           Mh (oh , ah )ψ̄(τh−1 ) = Pθ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̄(τh ).                              (8)
The following proposition is directly adapted from Lemma C.3 in Liu et al. (2022b). Note that ψ0
is known to the agent.

Proposition 1 (TV-distance ≤ Estimation error) Consider two γ-well-conditioned PSRs θ, θ̂ ∈
Θ. We have
                         XH X
         DTV Pπθ̂ , Pπθ ≤       m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂(oh , ah ) − M(oh , ah ) ψ(τh−1 ) π(τH ),
                             h=1 τH
                             H X
                             X
         DTV Pπθ̂ , Pπθ ≤                 m(ωh )⊤ M̂(oh , ah ) − M(oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) π(τH ).
                             h=1 τH

The next proposition characterizes well-conditioned PSRs (Zhong et al., 2022), which is obtained
by noting that m(qℓh )⊤ is the ℓ-th row of Mh+1 (oh+1 , ah+1 ).
Proposition 2 For well-conditioned (self-consistent) PSR θ, we have
                                     X                                    QA
                     max         max     π(ωh ) ∥Mh+1 (oh+1 , ah+1 )x∥1 ≤    .
               x∈R dh−1
                        :∥x∥1 =1  π
                                     ω
                                                                           γ
                                               h


The following proposition characterizes the log-cardinality of the minimal optimistic net of the rank-
r PSRs. We note that this notion is closely related to the bracketing number, a typical complexity
measure in the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) anslysis (Geer, 2000). The proof follows
directly from Theorem C.9 in Liu et al. (2022b).
Proposition 3 (Optimistic net for tabular PSRs) Given any ϵ, there exists a finite parameter
space Θ̄ϵ satisfying the following property: for any θ ∈ Θ, we can find a θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ϵ associated
with a measure Pθ̄ such that
                               ∀π, h, Pπθ̄ (τh ) ≥ Pπθ (τh ),
                                       X
                               ∀π, h,        Pπθ̄ (τh ) − Pπθ (τh ) ≤ ϵ.
                                                τh
Moreover, log |Θ̄ϵ | ≤ 2r2 OAH 2 log OA
                                      ϵ .


B    G ENERAL MLE A NALYSIS
In this section, we present four general propositions that characterize the performance of MLE.
We start with a proposition that states that the log-likelihood of the true model is relatively high
compared to any model.
                          1
Proposition 4 Fix ε < KH    . With probability at least 1 − δ, for any θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ε and any k ∈ [K], the
following two inequalities hold:
                     X X                                 K|Θ̄ε | X X
         ∀θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ε ,              log Pπθ̄ (τh ) − 3 log        ≤                log Pπθ∗ (τh ),
                                                           δ
                        h (τh ,π)∈Dh                                           k
                                                                              h (τh ,π)∈Dh
                            X                                 K|Θ̄ε |       X
         ∀θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ε ,                 log Pπθ̄ (τH ) − 3 log           ≤               log Pπθ∗ (τH ).
                                                                δ
                       (τH ,π)∈D k                                        (τH ,π)∈D


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof: We start with the first inequality. Suppose the data in Dhk is indexed by t. Then,
                                                                          
                                      X X                      Pπθ̄ (τh )
                           E exp                        log π             
                                                              P θ ∗ (τh )
                                        h (τh ,π)∈Dh    k

                                                          
                                     Y Y Pπt (τht )
                                               θ̄
                              = E             π t (τ t )
                                                           
                                    t≤k h
                                             P θ∗ h
                                                                                 #
                                      Y Y Pπt (τht )
                                                                " k
                                                                       π      k
                                                                    P     (τ    )
                              = E                 θ̄
                                                   π t (τ t )
                                                              E πθ̄ k hk 
                                    t≤k−1 h
                                                  Pθ  ∗    h        Pθ∗ (τh )
                                                                                    
                                      Y Y Pπt (τht ) Y X k
                              = E                 θ̄
                                                   π t (τ t )
                                                                           Pπθ̄ (τh )
                                    t≤k−1 h
                                                  Pθ  ∗    h   h τh
                                                                              
                                                                   πt t
                              (a)
                                          H
                                                   Y        Y   P  θ̄
                                                                        (τ  )
                                                                          h 
                               ≤ (1 + ε) E                        π t (τ t )
                                                  t≤k−1 h
                                                                P  θ  ∗   h
                                            KH
                               ≤ (1 + ε)
                               (b)
                          ≤ e,
                                                                                        1
where (a) follows because τH |Pπθ̄ (τh ) − Pπθ (τh )| ≤ ε, and (b) follows because ε ≤ KH
                         P
                                                                                          .
By the Chernoff bound and the union bound over Θ̄ϵ and k ∈ [K], with probability at least 1 − δ,
we have,
                                     X X             Pπ (τh )             K Θ̄ϵ
                ∀k ∈ [K], θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ϵ ,             log πθ̄          ≤ 3 log       ,
                                                     P θ ∗ (τ h )           δ
                                               k
                                            h (τh ,π)∈Dh

which yields the first result of this proposition.
To show the second inequality, we follow an argument similar to that for the first inequality. We
have
                                                                              
                                    π                                       π
                      X           P   (τH )                  X            P   (τH )
         E exp              log πθ         ≤ E exp             log πθ̄        
                            k
                                 Pθ∗ (τH )                         k
                                                                         Pθ∗ (τH )
                      (τH ,π)∈D                                          (τH ,π)∈D
                                                           (a)
                                                           ≤ (1 + ε)KH ≤ e,
                                                                                         π
                                                                                     P
where (a) follows from the tower rule of the expectation and because                 τH Pθ̄ (τH ) ≤ ε.

Thus, with probability at least 1 − δ, for any k ∈ [K] and any θ̄ ∈ Θ, the following inequality holds
                                     X                Pπθ (τH )          K|Θ̄ϵ |
                                                log              ≤ 3 log         ,
                                                      Pπθ∗ (τH )           δ
                                  (τH ,π)∈D k

which completes the proof. ■
The following proposition upper bounds the total variation distance between the conditional distri-
butions over the future trajectory conditioned on the empirical history trajectories. This proposition
is crucial to ensure that the model estimated by PSR-UCB is accurate on those sample trajectories.

Proposition 5 Fix pmin and ε ≤ pKH
                                min
                                    . Let Θkmin = {θ : ∀h, (τh , π) ∈ Dhk , Pπθ (τh ) ≥ pmin }.
Consider the following event
           
                                  X X
     Eω = ∀k ∈ [K], ∀θ ∈ Θkmin ,                 D2TV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ))
                                              kh (τh ,π)∈Dh



                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                      
                                                         X       X          Pπθ∗ (τH )          K Θ̄ε 
                                                 ≤6                      log π         + 31 log         .
                                                                            Pθ (τH )              δ 
                                                         h (τH ,π)∈Dh  k



Then, P (Eω ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof: We start with a general upper bound on the total variation distance between two conditional
distributions. Note that for any θ, θ′ ∈ Θ ∪ Θ̄ϵ and fixed (τh , π), we have
        DTV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ′ (ωh |τh ))
               X Pπ′ (ωh , τh )Pπ (τh ) − Pπ (ωh , τh )Pπ′ (τh )
                       θ              θ            θ    θ
            =                           π (τ )Pπ (τ )
                ω
                                      P θ   h  θ ′   h
                   h
                X (Pπ′ (ωh , τh ) − Pπ (ωh , τh )) Pπ (τh ) + Pπ (ωh , τh ) (Pπ (τh ) − Pπ′ (τh ))
                           θ                 θ               θ           θ             θ           θ
            =
             ωh
                                                          Pπθ (τh )Pπθ′ (τh )
             |Pπ (τh ) − Pπθ′ (τh )|     1      X
            ≤ θ      π               + π           |(Pπθ′ (ωh , τh ) − Pπθ (ωh , τh ))|
                   Pθ′ (τh )          Pθ′ (τh ) ω
                                                 h

                   2
            ≤    π        DTV (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ′ (τH )) .
                Pθ′ (τh )

By symmetry, we also have
                                                            2
         DTV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ′ (ωh |τh )) ≤                               DTV (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ′ (τH )) .
                                                  max {Pθ (τh ), Pπθ′ (τh )}
                                                        π



We replace θ′ by a θ̄ ∈ Θ̄ε that is ε-optimistic over θ (recall Definition 2), i.e. DTV Pπθ , Pπθ̄ ≤ ε,


and Pπθ̄ (τh ) ≥ Pπθ (τh ) holds for any π and τh . Then, due the construction of Θkmin , we have
                                                                              2ϵ     2
                       ∀(τh , π) ∈ Dhk , DTV Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ) ≤

                                                                                  ≤    ,
                                                                             pmin   KH
which implies
 X X
                  D2TV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ))
              k
   h (τh ,π)∈Dh

                  (a) X        X
                                         2D2TV Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ) + 2D2TV Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )

                   ≤
                                     k
                          h (τh ,π)∈Dh

                         4    X            X
                                                   D2TV Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ) .

                  ≤        +2
                        KH                     k
                                    h (τh ,π)∈Dh

Here (a) follows because the total variation distance satisfies the triangle inequality and (a + b)2 ≤
2a2 + 2b2 .
Moreover, note that
                            D2TV Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )


                                (a)
                                ≤ 4(2 + 2/(KH))D2H Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )

                                                             s                   !
                                           1                      Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )
                                ≤6 1+          − E
                                         KH ωh ∼Pπθ∗ Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )
                                                          s
                                (b)                         Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )        6
                                ≤ −6 log      E              π (ω |τ ) + KH ,
                                         ωh ∼Pπ
                                              θ∗
                                                 (·|τ h )   Pθ ∗     h   h

where (a) is due to Lemma 12 and (b) follows because 1 − x ≤ − log x for any x > 0.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, the summation of the total variation distance between conditional distributions conditioned on
(τh , π) ∈ Dhk can be upper bounded by
              X X
                           D2TV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ))
                              k
                   h (τh ,π)∈Dh
                                                                                                             s
                                        18      X                       X                                        Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )
                                      ≤    − 12                                    log           E                              .
                                        KH                                                       π
                                                                                           ωh ∼Pθ∗ (·|τh )       Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )
                                                                          k
                                                               h (τh ,π)∈Dh


In addition, we have
                                                                                                                                       s                  
                                                                Pπ (ωh |τh )                                                                 Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )
                exp  1
                         X                    X                                X                     X
      E                                                     log πθ̄          −                                   log         E                              
            k
∀h,(τh ,π)∈Dh ,        2                                       Pθ∗ (ωh |τh )                                           ωh ∼Pπ
                                                                                                                            θ∗
                                                                                                                               (·|τh )       Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )
                                     h (ωh ,τh ,π)∈Dh     k                                               k
                                                                                               h (τh ,π)∈Dh
ωh ∼Pπ
     θ ∗ (·|τh )
                                                                r
                                     Q Q                             Pπθ̄
                                                                          (ωh |τh )
          E∀h,(τh ,π)∈Dhk ,            h                k
                                             (ωh ,τh )∈Dh            Pπ ∗  (ωh |τh )
                                                                      θ
              ωh ∼Pπ
                   θ ∗ (·|τh )
      =                                                     r                       = 1,
           Q Q                                                   Pπ
                                                                  θ̄
                                                                     (ωh |τh )
                              k Eωh ∼P ∗ (·|τh ) π
               h     (τh ,π)∈Dh       θ                          Pπ
                                                                  θ∗
                                                                      (ωh |τh )


where the last equality is due to the conditional independence of ωh ∈ Dhk given (τh , π) ∈ Dhk .
Therefore, by the Chernoff bound, with probability 1 − δ, we have

                                                     s
      X        X                                         Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )   1X                     X                 Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )      1
  −                     log            E                  π             ≤                                    log                  + log .
                                       π
                              ωh ∼Pθ∗ (·|τh )            Pθ∗ (ωh |τh )    2                                        Pπθ̄ (ωh |τh )      δ
                 k
      h (τh ,π)∈Dh                                                                                    k
                                                                                       h (ωh ,τh ,π)∈Dh


Taking the union bound over Θ̄ϵ , k ∈ [K], and rescaling δ, we have, with probability at least 1 − δ,
∀k ∈ [K], the following inequality holds:
    X X
                  D2TV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ))
                 k
      h (τh ,π)∈Dh

              18    X                      X                   Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )          K Θ̄ε
          ≤      +6                                      log     π            + 12 log
              KH                                               Pθ̄ (ωh |τh )             δ
                                             k
                              h (ωh ,τh ,π)∈Dh

                X          X                     Pπθ∗ (ωh , τh )    X                      X             Pπθ̄ (τh )          K Θ̄ε
          ≤6                               log     π             +6                               log     π         + 13 log       .
                                                 Pθ̄ (ωh , τh )                                          Pθ∗ (τh )             δ
                                  k
                   h (ωh ,τh ,π)∈Dh                                                      k
                                                                              h (τh ,π)∈Dh


Note that, following from Proposition 4, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have for any k ∈ [K],
                                       X             X               Pπθ̄ (τh )         K Θ̄ε
                                                               log    π         ≤ 3 log       .
                                                                     Pθ∗ (τh )            δ
                                                      k
                                           h (τh ,π)∈Dh


Hence, combining with the optimistic property of θ̄ and rescaling δ, we have that the following
inequality holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
  X        X                                                                 X             X             Pπθ∗ (τH )          K Θ̄ε
                      D2TV (Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )) ≤ 6                                     log     π        + 31 log       ,
                                                                                                         Pθ (τH )              δ
               k
    h (τh ,π)∈Dh                                                                         k
                                                                              h (τH ,π)∈Dh

which yields the final result. ■
The following proposition is standard in the MLE analysis, and we provide the full analysis here for
completeness.


                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 6 Fix ε < K 21H 2 . Define the following event:
                                                                                                                        
                             X                                  1                 X            Pπ∗ (τH )         K|Θ̄ε | 
Eπ = ∀θ ∈ Θ, ∀k ∈ [K],             D2H (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )) ≤                             log θπ       + 2 log           .
                                k
                                                                 2                         k
                                                                                                 Pθ (τH )           δ 
                                    π∈D                                        (τH ,π)∈D

We have P(Eπ ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof:  First, by the construction of Θ̄ε , for any θ, let θ̄ be optimistic over θ, i.e.,
         π         π                                                      ∗
P
    τH Pθ (τH ) − Pθ̄ (τH ) ≤ ε. We translate the distance between θ and θ to the distance between
        ∗
θ̄ and θ as follows.
               D2H (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH ))
                           Xq
                    =1−              Pπθ (τH )Pπθ∗ (τH )
                             τH
                       Xq
                   =1−   Pπθ̄ (τH )Pπθ∗ (τH ) + Pπθ (τH ) − Pπθ̄ (τH ) Pπθ∗ (τH )
                             τH
                   (a)       Xq                                Xq
                      ≤ 1−            Pπθ̄ (τH )Pπθ∗ (τH ) +              Pπθ (τH ) − Pπθ̄ (τH ) Pπθ∗ (τH )
                             τH                                τH
                                            s
                                                Pπθ̄ (τH )
                   (b)
                                                             sX
                   ≤ − log          E                      +              Pπθ (τH ) − Pπθ̄ (τH )
                              τH ∼Pπ
                                   θ∗
                                      (·)       Pπθ∗ (τH )    τH
                                          s
                                         Pπθ̄ (τH )   √
                   ≤ − log          Eπ    π         + ε,
                         τH ∼Pθ∗ (·)     Pθ∗ (τH )
                           √             √       p
where (a) follows because a + b ≥ a − |b| if a > 0 and a + b > 0, and (b) follows from the
Cauchy’s inequality and the fact that 1 − x ≤ − log x.
                                                    2 π         π
                                         P
Hence, in order to upper bound
                          r                 π∈Dk DH (Pθ (τH ), Pθ ∗ (τH )), it suffices to upper bound
P                            Pπ  (τH )
  π∈Dk − log EτH ∼Pθ∗ (·)    Pπ∗ (τH ) . To this end, we observe that,
                     π        θ̄
                                     θ

                                                                                       s              
                         1     X           Pπ (τH )       X                                  Pπθ (τH ) 
               E exp                 log πθ̄         −       log     E
                         2                Pθ∗ (τH )                τH ∼Pπ
                                                                        θ∗
                                                                           (·)               Pπθ∗ (τH )
                           (τH ,π)∈D k                   π∈D k
                         hQ              q π         i
                                           Pθ (τH )
                   (a)
                       E     (τH ,π)∈D k   Pπ∗ (τH )
                   = hQ                  q θπ        i = 1,
                                           Pθ (τH )
                       E     (τH ,π)∈D k    π
                                           P ∗ (τH )
                                                  θ


where (a) follows because (τH , π) ∈ Dk form a filtration.
Then, by the Chernoff bound, we have
                                                                       s                          
                                π                                            π
           1    X             P (τH )          X                            Pθ (τH )             1
       P                log πθ̄            −         log      Eπ            π (τ ) ≥ log δ
           2                 P  θ ∗ (τH  )                τ H ∼P θ∗
                                                                    (·)    P θ ∗     H
             (τH ,π)∈D k                      π∈D k
                                                                                       s                 
                                               π                                             π
                       1     X                P   (τ H )      X                            Pθ (τH )  1 
         = P exp                       log πθ̄          −          log       Eπ            π (τ )     ≥
                       2               k
                                             P θ ∗ (τ H )         k
                                                                         τ H ∼P  θ ∗ (·)   P θ ∗  H       δ
                          (τH ,π)∈D                          π∈D
                                                                                        s            
         (a)              1     X              Pπθ̄ (τH )      X                             Pπθ (τH ) 
          ≤ δE exp                       log π            −          log       Eπ
                          2              k
                                               Pθ∗ (τH )             k
                                                                           τH ∼Pθ∗ (·)      Pπθ∗ (τH )
                                  (τH ,π)∈D                         π∈D

           ≤ δ,


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (a) is due to the Markov inequality.
Finally, rescaling δ to δ/(K|Θ̄ε |) and taking the union bound over Θ̄ϵ and k ∈ [K], we conclude
that, with probability at least 1 − δ, ∀θ ∈ Θ, k ∈ [K],
                       X
                            D2H (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH ))
                      π∈D k
                                  √    1               X                Pπθ∗ (τH )       K|Θ̄ϵ |
                              ≤ KH ε +                            log              + log
                                       2                                Pπθ̄ (τH )         δ
                                                    (τH ,π)∈D k
                              (a) 1      X                 Pπθ∗ (τH )         K|Θ̄ϵ |
                              ≤                     log      π        + 2 log         ,
                                  2                        Pθ (τH )             δ
                                      (τH ,π)∈D k

where (a) follows because ε ≤ K 21H 2 . ■
The following proposition states that the constraint Θkmin does not rule out the true model.
                             δ
Proposition 7 Fix pmin ≤ KH(|O||A|)H . Consider the following event:

                                                                     \
        Emin = ∀k ∈ [K], ∀h, (τh , π) ∈ Dhk , Pπθ∗ (τh ) ≥ pmin =       θ∗ ∈ Θkmin .
                                                                                     k∈[K]

We have P(Emin ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof: For any k ∈ [K], h ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1} and (τh , π) ∈ Dhk , we have
                               P (Pπθ∗ (τh ) < pmin )
                                 = E P Pπθ∗ (τh ) < pmin π

                                       "                                  #
                                                       n t               o
                                             Pθ∗ (τh )1 Pθ∗ (τh ) < pmin
                                         X
                                               π   t     π     t
                                 =E
                                           τh
                                        "              #
                                         X
                                  ≤E            pmin
                                           τh
                                       δ
                                  ≤      .
                                      KH
Thus, taking the union bound over k ∈ [K], h ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1} and (τh , π) ∈ Dh , we conclude
that
                                                P(Emin ) ≥ 1 − δ.
■

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 ( FOR O NLINE PSR-UCB)
In this section, we present the full analysis for the online algorithm PSR-UCB to show Theorem 1.
In particular, the proof of Theorem 1 consists of three main steps. Step 1. We prove that the
estimated model θ̂k is not only accurate over the exploration policies, but also accurate conditioned
on emipircal samples τh ∈ Dhk . Step 2. Building up on the first step, we are able to show that Vθ̂πk ,b̂k
is a valid upper bound on the total variation distance between θ̂k and θ∗ . Step 3. Based on a newly
developed inequality that translates Vθ̂πk ,b̂k to the ground-truth prediction feature ψ̄ ∗ (τh ), we show
that the summation of Vθ̂πk ,b̂k over the iteration k grows sublinear in time. This finally characterizes
the optimality of the output policy, the accuracy of the output model and the sample complexity of
PSR-UCB, and finishes the proof.
Before we proceed, we use E to denote the event Eω ∩Eπ ∩Emin , where these three events are defined
in Appendix B. Due to Propositions 5 to 7 and union bound, we immediately have P(E) ≥ 1 − 3δ.


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1    S TEP 1: E STIMATION G UARANTEE

We show that the estimated model is accurate with the past exploration policies and dataset.

Lemma 1 Under event E, the following two inequalities hold:
                  X X
                  
                                   D2TV Pπθ̂k (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ) ≤ 7β,
                  
                   h (τ ,π)∈Dk
                           h      h
                     X
                           DH Pθ̂k (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH ) ≤ 7β,
                             2   π
                  
                  
                  
                  
                                  π∈D k

where β = 31 log K|δΘ̄ε | and ε ≤ K 2 H 2 (|O||A|)
                                            δ
                                                  H .


Proof: To show the first inequality, note that by the selection of θ̂k , we have θ̂k ∈ B k (defined in
Equation (2)).
Following from Proposition 5, we have
    X X
                D2TV Pπθ̂k (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )
                 k
      h (τh ,π)∈Dh
               X        X                                   X         X                                           K|Θ̄ε |
         ≤6                         log Pπθ∗ (τH ) − 6                          log Pπθ̄k (τH ) + 31 log
                                                                                                                    δ
                          k
               h (τH ,π)∈Dh                                             k
                                                             h (τH ,π)∈Dh

         (a)               X          X                                 X        X                                          K|Θ̄ε |
         ≤ 6 max                                   log Pπθ′ (τH ) − 6                        log Pπθ̄k (τH ) + 31 log
               θ ′ ∈Θk
                     min
                                                                                                                              δ
                                         k
                              h (τH ,π)∈Dh                                          k
                                                                         h (τH ,π)∈Dh

         ≤ 7β,

where (a) follows from θ∗ ∈ Θkmin (Proposition 7).
To show the second inequality, Proposition 6 implies that
              X
                  D2H Pπθ̂k (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )
                π∈D k
                                X                            X                                        K|Θ̄ε |
                          ≤           log Pπθ∗ (τH ) −              log Pπθ̂k (τH ) + 2 log
                                                                                                        δ
                              π∈D k                         π∈D k
                          (a)               X                           X                                       K|Θ̄ε |
                          ≤ max                     log Pπθ′ (τH ) −            log Pπθ̂k (τH ) + 2 log
                                θ ′ ∈Θk
                                      min
                                                                                                                  δ
                                            π∈D k                       π∈D k
                          ≤ 7β,

where (a) follows from θ∗ ∈ Θkmin (Proposition 7). ■

C.2    S TEP 2: UCB FOR T OTAL VARIATION D ISTANCE

Following from Proposition 1, the total variation distance between two PSRs is controlled by the
estimation error. Hence, we first characterize the estimation error of M∗h (oh , ah ) in the following
lemma.

Lemma 2 Under event E, for any k ∈ [K] and any policy π, we have
            X
                 m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂h−1
                                                              k
                                                                  (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                     τH

                                              k    ¯k
                              ≤ Eτh−1 ∼Pπ(k) αh−1 ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 )                              −1
                                                                                                      ,                               (9)
                                              θ̂                                  (Ûh−1
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         )


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                                          ¯           ¯
                                        X               h                         i
       k
     Ûh−1 = λI +                                        ψ̂ k (τh−1 )ψ̂ k (τh−1 )⊤ ,
                                     k
                              τh−1 ∈Dh−1

      k             4λQ2A d |A|2 Q2A                                X               uQexp                   uQexp
     αh−1 =                +                                                  D2TV Pθ̂k h−1 (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pθ∗ h−1 (ωh−1 |τh−1 ) .
                      γ4      γ2                                   k
                                                            τh−1 ∈Dh−1



Proof: We index future trajectory ωh−1  = (oh , ah , . . . , oH , aH ) by i, and
                                                                               history trajectory τh−1 by
                                           (k)                                             ¯(k)
                               ∗    ⊤
j. For simplicity, we denote m (ωh ) M̂h (oh , ah ) − Mh (oh , ah ) as wi⊤ , and ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 ) =
                                                                   ∗

    k
  ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 )
ϕ̂k⊤    k                as xj . We also denote π(ωh−1 |τh−1 ) as πi|j .
  h−1 ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 )

Then, the LHS of Equation (9) can be written as
                   X
            LHS =       m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂h−1
                                                                     k
                                                                         (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                                   τH
                             (a) X X
                             =                         |wi⊤ xj |πi|j Pπθ̂k (j)
                                     i        j
                                   XX
                             =       (πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi )⊤ xj · Pπθ̂k (j)
                                    j         i
                                                                                           !⊤
                                   X X
                             =                           πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi               xj · Pπθ̂k (j)
                                    j              i
                                                                          v                                                      
                                                                           u                           2
                             (b)                                           u X
                             ≤                                                             ⊤
                                                                               πi|j · sgn(wi xj ) · wi
                                        E  xj (Û k                                                                              ,
                                                                          u                                                      
                                                                        −1
                                   j∼Pπk                         h−1   ) t
                                         θ̂                                           i                                     k
                                                                                                                          Ûh−1


where (a) follows because Pπθ (τh ) = ϕ⊤
                                       h ψ(τh ), and (b) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality.
                                                           P                 ⊤            2
Fix τh−1 = j0 . We aim to upper bound the term I1 :=          i πi|j0 · sgn(wi xj0 ) · wi Û k . Then,                                      h−1
we have
                                                                                                                                      !⊤     2
                                                                         2
                   X                                                                  X          X
    I1 = λ                  πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi                        +                      πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi            xj  .
                    i                                                                τ
                                                                                  j∈Dh−1          i
           |                              {z                             }2       |                              {z                               }
                                          I2                                                                     I3


We first upper bound the first term I2 as follows:
   p            √                                         X
       I2 =         λ              max                          πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi⊤ x
                        x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥              2 =1     i
                √                                        X
          ≤         λ              max                           m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                        x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                          h−1

          (a) √                                           X
          ≤         λ              max                              m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                        x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                           h−1
                    √                                       X
               +        λ            max                             m∗ (ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                   dh−1
                            x∈R           :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                               h−1
                √                                                                                                     √
          (b)λ                                             X                                                           λ
          ≤        max                                               M̂kh (oh , ah )x          π(ah |oh , j0 ) +             max         ∥x∥1
            γ x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 o ,a                                                        1                          γ x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1
                                                           h    h


                                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      √
           (c) 2Q         dλ
                 A
            ≤                  ,
                     γ2
where (a) follows because |a + b| ≤ |a| + |b|, (b) follows
                                                         √ from Assumption 1, and (c) follows from
Proposition 2 and because maxx∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ∥x∥1 ≤ d.
We next upper bound the second term I3 as follows.
                                                                                          2
                                                                   ¯
        X        X
I3 ≤                  m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂ k (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                k
         τh−1 ∈Dh−1       ωh−1
                      
   (a)
                                                               ¯
              X            X
   ≤                                m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah )ψ̂ k (τh−1 ) − M∗h (oh , ah )ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                k
         τh−1 ∈Dh−1       ωh−1
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                          ¯
                                         X
                                    +           m∗ (ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂ (k) (τh−1 ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                         ωh−1

   (b)                    1 X
              X                                   ¯
   ≤                             Pθ̂k (oh |τh−1 )ψ̂hk (τh ) − Pθ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̄h∗ (τh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
                k
                          γ o ,a                                                      1
         τh−1 ∈Dh−1            h     h

                                                                                                     2
                                         1      X             ¯k               ∗
                                    +                        ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 ) − ψ̄h−1 (τh−1 )           
                                         γ          τ
                                                                                                 1
                                             τh−1 ∈Dh−1
                           
   (c)   1       X                 X |Q
                                     X  h|

   =                                              Pθ̂k (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
         γ2          k             oh ,ah ℓ=1
              τh−1 ∈Dh−1
                                                                                                                  2
                                         |Qh−1 |
                                          X
                                    +               Pθ̂k (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) 
                                          ℓ=1
                                                                                                                       2
     1           X                      X          X
                                                                 o                          o
   ≤ 2                                                   Pθ̂k (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 ) − Pθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 ) 
    γ                k
              τh−1 ∈Dh−1           ah−1 ∈Qexp
                                          h
                                               o
                                              ωh−1

         4|A|2 Q2A        X                    uQexp                   uQexp
   ≤                                     D2TV Pθ̂k h−1 (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pθ∗ h−1 (ωh−1 |τh−1 ) ,
            γ2              k
                     τh−1 ∈Dh−1

where (a) follows because |a + b| ≤ |a| + |b|, (b) follows from Equation (8) and Assumption 1, and
(c) follows from the physical meaning of the prediction feature, i.e. [ψ̄(τh )]ℓ = Pθ (oℓh |τh , aℓh ).
By combining the upper bounds for I2 and I3 , we conclude that
      4λQ2A d 4|A|2 Q2A      X
                                       2
                                            uQexp
                                                  h−1
                                                                      uQexp
                                                                          h−1

                                                                                                  k
 I1 ≤         +                      D TV  P          (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pθ ∗     (ω h−1 |τ h−1 )  = αh−1 ,
        γ4          γ2           k
                                             θ̂ k
                                             τh−1 ∈Dh−1

which completes the proof. ■
The following lemma validates that Vθ̂πk ,b̂k is an upper bound on the total variation distance between
the estimated model θ̂k and the true model θ∗ .

Lemma 3 Under event E, for any π, we have
                                                             v
                                                              uH−1                
                                                              uX ¯           2
                     DTV Pπθ̂k (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH ) ≤ αEτH ∼Pπk t    ψ̂ k (τh ) k  ,
                                                                               −1
                                                                                                                                (10)
                                                                          θ̂                             (Ûh )
                                                                                   h=0



                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                              4λHQ2A d 28|A|2 Q2A β
                                       α2 =           +             .
                                                γ4         γ2

Proof: We proceed the proof as follows:
X
   k        4λHQ2A d 4|A|2 Q2A X                          X
 (αh−1 )2 ≤         +                                               D2TV Pπθ̂k (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pπθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 )
              γ4        γ2
 h                                                          k
                                               h (τh−1 ,π)∈Dh−1

                   (a) 4λHQ2 d   28β|A|2 Q2A
                             A
                   ≤       4
                               +             ,
                         γ           γ2
where (a) follows from Lemma 1. The proof then follows directly from Proposition 1, Lemma 2
and the Cauchy’s inequality. ■
Note that the reward function R is within [0, 1]. We hence obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 2 (UCB) Under event E, for any k ∈ [K] and any reward R, we have

                                           Vθ̂πk ,R − Vθπ∗ ,R ≤ Vθ̂k ,b̂k ,
                       r
                         P ¯k       2
where b̂k (τH ) = min α   h ψ̂ (τ
                              h h )   k −1
                                           , 1   .
                                                 (Ûh )


C.3    S TEP 3: S UBLINEAR S UMMATION
                      k                                    √
To prove that k Vθ̂πk ,b̂k is sublinear, i.e., scales as O( K), we first prove the following lemma that
               P

relates the estimated feature and the ground-truth feature via the total variation distance between the
estimated model and the true model.

Lemma 4 Under the event E, for any k ∈ [K] and any policy π, we have
        v
         uH−1                        
         uX ¯             2
   E t        ψ̂ k (τh )         −1
                                     
τH ∼Pπ
     θ∗    h=0
                          (Ûhk )

                               √    H−1
                        2|A|QA 7rβ X            h                    i 2HQ
                                                                           A

          ≤        1+       √              Eπ     ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U k )−1 + √ DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂k (τH ) .
                              λ     h=0
                                        τh ∼Pθ∗                h         λ


Proof: Recall that
                                                     X ¯          ¯
                                       Ûhk = λI +     ψ̂ k (τh )ψ̂ k (τh )⊤ .
                                                         k
                                                     τ ∈Dh


We define the ground-truth counterpart of Ûhk as follows:
                                              X
                               Uhk = λI +          ψ̄ ∗ (τh )ψ̄ ∗ (τh )⊤ .
                                                         k
                                                     τ ∈Dh


Then, following from Lemma 13, we have
v
uH−1
uX ¯               2
t       ψ̂ k (τh )        −1
  h=0
                   (Ûhk )
         H−1
         X      ¯
     ≤         ψ̂ k (τh )         −1
         h=0
                            (Ûhk )


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                 r
                                                                         √
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                               ¯
                                                                                              ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) 
                                                                                     P
             H−1                                        H−1                  r            k
                                                                                     τh ∈Dh
      1      X¯                                         X                                                            2
             ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) +                                                                                     ∗
                                           
    ≤√                                     1 +                                               √                         ψ̄ (τh ) (Uhk )−1 .
       λ h=0                        2
                                       h=0
                                                                                                λ


Furthermore, note that
               ¯                                     ¯
              ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )             ≤ ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                              2                                      1
                                                  (a)           uQexp             uQexp
                                                  ≤ 2|A|QA DTV Pθ̂k h (ωh |τh ), Pθ∗ h (ωh |τh ) ,
where (a) follows from the physical meaning of the prediction feature.
Following from Lemma 1, we conclude that
      v
      uH−1
      uX ¯               2
      t       ψ̂ k (τh )        −1
         h=0
                         (Ûhk )
                 H−1                                  √    H−1
              1 X ¯k              ∗            2|A|QA 7rβ X
            ≤√       ψ̂ (τh ) − ψ̄ (τh ) + 1 +     √           ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U k )−1 .
               λ h=0                    2            λ     h=0
                                                                            h



For the first term, taking expectation, we have
     H−1
                              ¯
     X                  h                                   i
            Eτh ∼Pπθ∗        ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                                        1
      h=0
                 H−1
                 X X              ¯                                    ¯

            ≤                    ψ̂ k (τh ) Pπθ (τh ) − Pπθ̂k (τh ) + ψ̂ k (τh )Pπθ̂k (τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )Pπθ∗ (τh )
                                                                                                                        1
                  h=0 τh
                 H−1
                 X X              ¯

            ≤                    ψ̂ k (τh )       Pπθ (τh ) − Pπθ̂k (τh ) + ψ̂ k (τh ) − ψ ∗ (τh )           π(τh )
                                              1                                                          1
                  h=0 τh

            (a)    H−1
                   X
             ≤ 2            QA DTV Pπθ∗ (τh ), Pπθ̂k (τh )
                   h=0

            ≤ 2HQA DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂k (τH ) ,
                         ¯
where (a) follows from ∥ψ̂ k (τh )∥1 ≤ |QA
                                         h | ≤ QA , and the physical meaning of ψ(τh ).

Thus,
        v
         uH−1                        
         uX ¯             2
   E t        ψ̂ k (τh )         −1
                                     
τH ∼Pπ
     θ∗    h=0
                          (Ûhk )
                           √    H−1
                    2|A|QA 7rβ X            h                    i 2HQ
                                                                       A

        ≤        1+     √              Eπ     ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U k )−1 + √ DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂k (τH ) .
                          λ     h=0
                                    τh ∼Pθ∗                h         λ
■
The following lemma can be proved via the ℓ2 Eluder argument (Chen et al., 2022; Zhong et al.,
2022). Since we have a slightly different estimation oracle and guarantee, we provide the full proof
here for completeness.

Lemma 5 Under event E, for any h ∈ {0, . . . , H − 1}, we have
                  k              k
                                          |A|Q √β p
                                                  A
         X
             DTV Pπθ∗ (τh ), Pπθ̂k (τh ) ≲               rHK log(1 + dQA K/γ 4 ).
                                                 γ
                   k
Here, a ≲ b indicates that there is an absolute positive constant c such that a ≤ c · b.


                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof: First, by the first inequality in Proposition 1, we have
      k              k
                              XX
 DTV Pπθ∗ (τh ), Pπθ̂k (τh ) ≤          m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π k (τH ).
                                     h     τH


It suffices to upper bound τH m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(τH ) for any
                               P

policy π. For simplicity, we use similar notations as in Lemma 2. We index the future trajectory
                                                                                             ∗
ωh−1 = (oh , ah , . . . , oH , aH ) by i, and the history
                                                        trajectory τh−1 by j. We represent ψ̄ (τh−1 ) as
xj , and m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) as wi . We also denote π(ωh−1 |τh−1 ) by πi|j .

Let λ0 be a constant determined later and define the matrix
                                              X
                                Λkh = λ0 I +      Ej∼Pπ∗t xj x⊤

                                                              j .
                                                                                  θ
                                                                     t<k

Then, for any π, we have
                  X
                      m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                   τH
                                          "                                #
                                               X
                         = Ej∼Pπk                     |πi|j wi⊤ xj |
                                     θ∗
                                                i
                                                                                     !⊤       
                                                    X
                         = Ej∼Pπk                       πi|j sgn(wi⊤ xj )wi               xj 
                                     θ∗
                                                     i
                                                                                                       
                         (a)                                      X
                           ≤ Ej∼Pπk ∥xj ∥Λ†                              πi|j sgn(wi⊤ xj )wi           ,
                                     θ∗                     h
                                                                     i                             Λh

where (a) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality.
Now we fix j = j0 and consider the following term.
                                           2
        X
             πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi
         i                                 Λh
                                                                                                                          !2 
                                                            2
                 X                                                   X                    X
         = λ0          πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi                     +         Ej∼Pπ∗t            πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi⊤ xj     
                                                                                 θ
                   i                                                 t<k                   i
             |                 {z                           }2       |                             {z                         }
                               I1                                                                  I2

For the first term I1 , we have
             p    p                                             X
              I1 = λ 0                   max                             πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi⊤ x
                               x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥          2 =1        i
                    p                                        X
                   ≤ λ0                  max                             π(ωh−1 |j0 ) m̂k (ωh−1 )⊤ x
                               x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                                 h−1
                           p                                      X
                       +       λ0          max                             π(ωh−1 |j0 ) m̂k (ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah )x
                                          dh−1
                                    x∈R             :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                                     h−1
                         √                     √
                   (a) dλ0   QA dλ0
                   ≤       +
                       γ       γ2
                         √
                     2QA dλ0
                   ≤         ,
                        γ2
where (a) follows from Assumption 1, Proposition 2, and the fact that maxx∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ∥x∥1 ≤
p         √
  dh−1 ≤ d.


                                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the second term I2 , we have
                                                                                                2 
      X                 X
I2 ≤                        π(ωh−1 |j0 ) m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 )  
                                                                                                    
             E t 
                     π
       t<k τh−1 ∼Pθ∗            ωh−1
                          
                                                                                  ¯
       X                           X
   ≤             E                    π(ωh−1 |j0 ) m̂k (ωh−1 )⊤ ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) − ψ̂ k (τh−1 )
                     πt
       t<k τh−1 ∼Pθ∗            ωh−1
                                                                                                                                2 
                                                                                      ¯
                           X
                     +               π(ωh−1 |j0 ) m̂k (ωh )⊤          M̂kh (oh , ah )ψ̂ k (τh−1 ) − M∗h (oh , ah )ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 )  
                                                                                                                                   
                           ωh−1

   (a) X

                                   1                 ¯
   ≤             E                   ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) − ψ̂ k (τh−1 )
                   πt              γ                             1
        t<k τh−1 ∼Pθ∗
                                                                                                                        !2 
                       1 X k                                    ¯
                     +          π (ah |oh , j0 ) M̂k (oh , ah )ψ̂ k (τh−1 ) − M∗h (oh , ah )ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 )                    
                       γ o ,a                                                                            1
                          h h
                         
                              |Qh−1 |
       1 X                     X
   =                 E              Pθ̂k (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 )
       γ2          t
           τh−1 ∼Pπ∗
           t<k             θ            ℓ=1
                                                                                                                                  2 
                               X |Q
                                 X  h|

                     +                    π k (ah |oh , j0 ) Pθ̂k (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh )  
                                                                                                                                     
                           oh ,ah ℓ=1

       |Qexp
         h−1 |
               2 X               h   uQexp
                                   2          h−1
                                                                       uQexp
                                                                           h−1
                                                                                               i
   ≤                     E        DTV   P         (ω  h−1  |τh−1  ), P θ ∗      (ωh−1 |τh−1 )
         γ2                 πt           θ̂ k
                 t<k τh−1 ∼Pθ∗
   (b) 4|A|2 Q2 X
                            ν (πt ,u exp )             νh (π t ,uQexp )

                                h     Q
                A       2               h−1                       h−1
   ≤                   DH  P                  (τH  ), Pθ ∗               (τ H )   ,
          γ2                 θ̂ k
                     t<k

where (a) follows from Assumption 1, and (b) follows because |Qexp          A       A
                                                               h−1 | = |A||Qh | + |Qh−1 | ≤
2|A|QA .
Thus, we have
                         X
                                m̂k (ωh )⊤ M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                          τH
                                                h                                i
                                ≤       E π
                                                   k
                                                 α̃h−1 ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) Λ†               ,
                                    τh−1 ∼Pθ∗                              h−1


where
                                                                    ν (πt ,u exp )         νh (π t ,uQexp )
                    4λ0 Q2A d 4|A|2 Q2A X 2

                                                                      h     Q
           k
        (α̃h−1 )2 =          +              DH                     Pθ̂k      h−1
                                                                                   (τH ), Pθ∗         h−1
                                                                                                            (τH ) .
                      γ4         γ2
                                        t<k

                               4
By choosing λ0 = 4Qγ2 d , and recalling Lemma 1, we further have
                               A

                                              X
                                                       k          28|A|2 Q2A β
                                                    (α̃h−1 )2 ≤                ≜ α̃.
                                                                      γ2
                                                h

Hence, with the Cauchy’s inequality, we have
                                           v                                        
               k                            uH            h                   i     
                             k               u X                         2
         DTV Pθ̂πk (τH ), Pπθ (τH ) ≤ min α̃t        E       ψ̄ ∗ (τ   )
                                                                    h−1 Λ−1      , 2   .
                                                         k                 h−1
                                                τh−1 ∼Pπ∗         h=1
                                                                                     
                                                                                         θ


                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taking the summation and applying the elliptical potential lemma (i.e., Lemma 14), we have
                  K        k
                  X                       k
                      DTV Pθ̂πk (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )
                  k=1
                            v       (                                                             )
                            uK H
                         √ uX  X                                    h
                                                                                     2
                                                                                             i
                        ≤ K t    min α̃                     E           ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) Λ†          ,4
                                                                k                      h−1
                                   k=1 h=1            τh−1 ∼Pπ
                                                             θ∗

                            |A|QA p
                        ≲           rHKβ log(1 + dQA K/γ),
                              γ
which yields the final result. ■
                                                          πk
                                                 PK
The next lemma shows that the summation             k=1 Vθ̂ k ,b̂k grows sublinearly in K.


Lemma 6 Under the event E, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                  K                         √ !              √
                 X
                       πk
                                 √     QA H |A|Q2A H drHβKβ0
                     Vθ̂k ,b̂k ≲   r+                               ,
                                           γ                  γ2
                        k=1
                                                                                    2             √    √
where β0 = max{log(1 + K/λ), log(1 + dQA K/γ)}, and λ = γ|A| QA β max{
                                                                   √
                                                                     dH
                                                                        r,QA                               H/γ}
                                                                                                                  .


Proof: First, since b̂k (τH ) ∈ [0, 1], we have
                                        k           k      1     k         k

                                   Vθ̂πk ,b̂k ≤ Vθπ∗ ,b̂k + DTV Pπθ̂k , Pπθ∗ .
                                                           2

Then, following from Lemma 4, we have
K
X       k
    Vθπ∗ ,b̂k
k=1
         K
               (             √    H−1                                    K
                                                                                                               )
         X            2|A|QA 7rβ X             h
                                                    ∗
                                                                    i X     αHQA       k
                                                                                       π        πk

      ≤     min α 1 +     √               E       ψ̄ (τh ) (U k )−1 +         √ DTV Pθ∗ (τH ), Pθ̂k (τH ) , 1
        k=1
                            λ               πk
                                  h=0 τH ∼Pθ∗
                                                               h
                                                                        k=1
                                                                                λ
         K
               (             √    H−1                                   )    K
        X             2|A|QA 7rβ X             h                    i       X   αHQA      k             k

      ≤     min α 1 +     √              E       ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U k )−1 , 1 +        √ DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂k (τH ) .
        k=1
                            λ               πk
                                  h=0 τh ∼Pθ∗
                                                              h
                                                                            k=1
                                                                                   λ
        |                        {z                                     }
                                               I1


                                                                            ∗
We next analyze the term I1 . Recall that Uhk = λI +                            (τh )ψ̄ ∗ (τh )⊤ . Further note that
                                                            P
                                                                     k ψ̄
                                                                τh ∈Dh
                    n        h                    i                              oK
                     Eτh ∼Pπk ∥ψ̄ ∗ (τh )∥(Uhk )−1 − ∥ψ̄ ∗ (τhk+1,h+1 )∥(Uhk )−1
                              θ∗                                                             k=1

forms a martingale. Applying the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality (see Lemma 11), we have, with
probability at least 1 − δ,
                             K
                                   (              √     H−1                          )
         p                  X              2|A|QA 7rβ X          ∗ k+1,h+1
   I1 ≤ 2K log(2/δ) +           min α 1 +      √               ψ̄ (τh      ) k −1 , 1
                            k=1
                                                 λ       h=0
                                                                            (Uh )

      (a) p
                                          √
                                   2|A|QA 7rβ      p
      ≲ 2K log(2/δ) + α 1 +            √         H rK log(1 + K/λ)
                                         λ
                          √
                  |A|QA rβ        p
      ≲α 1+            √        H rK log(1 + K/λ),
                         λ
where (a) follows from Lemma 14.


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let β := max{log(1 + K/λ), log(1 + dQA K/γ)} for simplicity. By Lemma 5, we have,
   X k
       Vθ̂πk ,b̂k
      k
                            √                             √
                                                 αH |A|Q2A β p

                     |A|QA rβ         p
           ≲α 1+         √         H rKβ0 + √                   rHKβ0
                           λ                       λ    γ
                            √               √
                                     |A|Q2A βH

                     |A|QA rβ                        p
           ≤α 1+         √       +        √        H rKβ0
                           λ            γ λ
                      √         √          !            √        √    √   !
               |A|QA β       QA dH     √          |A|QA β max{ r, QA H/γ}     p
           ≲              +              λ    1 +             √             H  rKβ0
                   γ            γ2                               λ
                    √          !               √       √      √    !       √
                      dH √              |A|QA β max{ r, QA H/γ} |A|QA H rβKβ0
           = 1+       √      λ      1+               √
                  |A| βγ                               λ                  γ
                       √           √        √      !        √
           (a)     QA dH max{ r, QA H/γ} |A|QA H rβKβ0
           ≲ 1+
                                   γ                        γ
                        √ !              √
               √     QA H |A|Q2A H drHβKβ0
           ≤     r+                                  ,
                        γ                 γ2

where (a) follows by choosing
                                                         √     √
                                          γ|A|2 QA β max{ r, QA H/γ}
                                       λ=             √              .
                                                        dH
This completes the proof. ■

C.4       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 3 (Restatement of Theorem 1) Suppose Assumption 1 holds.                      Let√ pmin
                                                                                             √
                                                                                                 =
         δ                                              pmin             γ|A|2 QA β max{ r,QA H/γ}
O( KH|O|H |A|H ), β = O(log |Θ̄ε |), where ε = O( KH ), λ =                          √
                                                                                       dH
                                                                                                   ,
             √ √                   √
             QA Hd          |A|QA β
and α = O       γ2     λ+       γ      . Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, PSR-UCB outputs a
       ϵ
model θ and a policy π̄ that satisfy
                         ∗
                     Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R ≤ ϵ, and ∀π, DTV (Pπθϵ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )) ≤ ϵ.
In addition, PSR-UCB terminates with a sample complexity of
                                       Q2 H rdH 3 |A|2 Q4A β

                            Õ    r + A2                       .
                                         γ          γ 4 ϵ2

Proof: The proof is under event E, which occurs with probability at least 1 − 3δ.
Following from Corollary 2, if PSR-UCB terminates, we have
                ∀π, DTV (Pπθϵ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )) = 2 max Vθπϵ ,R − Vθπ∗ ,R ≤ 2Vθπϵ ,b̂ϵ ≤ ϵ,
                                                            R

where the last inequality follows from the termination condition of PSR-UCB.
In addition,
                             ∗
                      Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R
                                         ∗        ∗          ∗
                                 = Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπϵ ,R + Vθπϵ ,R − Vθπ̄ϵ ,R + Vθπ̄ϵ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R
                                 (a)
                                 ≤ 2 max Vθπϵ ,b̂ϵ ≤ ϵ,
                                          π

where (a) is due to the design of π̄ and Corollary 2.


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, recall that Lemma 6 states that
                       K                      √ !        √
                       X              √     QA H |A|Q2A H drHβKβ0
                         Vθ̂k ,b̂k ≲     r+                       .
                                              γ          γ2
                     k=1

By the pigeon-hole principle and the termination condition of PSR-UCB, if
                                           Q2 H rdH 2 |A|2 Q4A β

                           K = Õ       r + A2                       ,
                                             γ            γ 4 ϵ2
PSR-UCB must terminate within K episodes, implying that the sample complexity of PSR-UCB is
at most

                                              Q2A H       rdH 3 |A|2 Q4A β

                               Õ        r+                                        .
                                               γ2              γ 4 ϵ2
■

C.5   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1 (F OR POMDP S )

When PSR is specialized to an m-step decodable POMDP, we follow the setup described in Section
D in Liu et al. (2022b). In POMDPs, there exists a state space S such that the system dynamics
proceeds as follows. When h = 1, the system is at the state s1 and the agent observes o1 that is
determined by s1 . At any step h ≥ 1, if the system is at a state sh ∈ S and the agent takes an action
ah ∈ A, the system transits to a state sh+1 sampled from a transition distribution Th,ah (·|sh ), and
then the agent observes oh+1 sampled from an emission distribution Oh (·|sh+1 ). Notably, all states
are unobservable to the agent.
To define m-step decodability, we introduce the m-step emission-action matrix {Gh } where
       [Gh ](a,o),s = P(oh , . . . , omin{h+m−1,H} = o|sh = s, ah . . . , amin{h+m−2,H} = a).
                                                           m−1
                                                                 |O|m )×|S|
Therefore, for h ≤ H − h, we have Gh ∈ R(|A|                                  . To make a unified argument, we
define m-step decodability as follows.
Definition 3 (m-step decodable POMDPs) A POMDP with m-step emmision-action matrix {Gh }
is said to be m-step decodable if there exists an α > 0 such that minh≤H σ|S| (Gh ) ≥ α. Here
σn (A) is the n-th singular value of matrix A.
We remark that the key difference between our definition and the definition introduced in Liu et al.
(2022a) is that we allow h > H − m. This indicates that after step h > H − m, the process
is (H − h)-step decodable, which is reasonable in most real-world examples, since the closer we
approach to the end, the clearer our understanding of the current state becomes. Moreover, the new
definition admits more convenient notations with almost not impact on the logic of the proof.
In this section, a PSR θ = {ϕh , Mh (oh , ah )} is reparametrized by {Th,a , Oh }h∈[H],a∈A . More
importantly, we have the following equations and properties.


                                              ∥G†h + Yh ∥1
                     
                      Yh ∈ arg       min
                     
                                Yh :Yh Gh =0
                     
                       Mh (oh , ah ) = Gh+1 Th,ah diag(Oh (oh |·))(G†h + Yh )
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                       ϕ⊤
                        H MH (oH , aH ) = e(oH ,aH ) ∈ R
                                                         O×A
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                      min{m−1,H−h}
                     Qh = (O × A)
                     
                     
                     

                      QAh =A
                                min{m−1,H−h}                                                              (11)
                       d ≤ |O| |A|m
                               m
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                       r = |S|
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                       QA = |A|m−1
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                      m−1
                     γ = |S| + |A|
                     
                     
                                             r + QA
                                           =          .
                                   α             α

                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 3 (Restatement of Corollary 1) When PSR is specialized to m-step decodable POMDP,
                                                                                        ¯
for each k, there exists a set of matrices {Ĝkh }H
                                                  h=1 ⊂ R
                                                          d×r
                                                               such that if we replace ψ̂ k (τh )
             ¯
by (Ĝkh )† ψ̂ k (τh ) in Equation (3), then PSR-UCB terminates with a sample complexity of
poly(r, 1/γ, QA , H, |A|, β)/ϵ2 .

Proof: We use the notations defined in this section and particularly those in Equation (11).
The proof differentiates from the proof of Theorem 1 in two lemmas.
                                                         ¯                     ¯
First, in Lemma 2, the meaning of xj changes from ψ̂ k (τh−1 ) to (Ĝkh )† ψ̂ k (τh−1 ), and wi⊤ changes
from m∗ (ωh )(M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah )) to m∗ (ωh )(M̂kh (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ))Gh .
                                                                        √
Then, the proof of the upper bound of the term I2 will become QA rλ/γ 2 (without dependency on
d), simply because the dimension of bonus term b̂k is now r = |S| instead of d.
                                                                               ¯
Second, in Lemma 4, we need to show that the new bonus term ∥(Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂(τh )∥(Û k )−1 can still
                                                                                            h
                                                  ¯

be bounded in a similar way, namely, ∥(Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂(τh )∥(Û k )−1 ≤ Õ ∥(G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )∥(Uhk )−1 .
                                                                  h


We note that the matrices Ûhk and Uhk now have new definitions:
                                                   X h¯          ¯
                                                                           i
                         Ûhk = λI + (Ĝkh+1 )†       ψ̂ k (τh )ψ̂ k (τh )⊤ (Ĝkh+1 )†⊤ ,
                                                       k
                                                  τh ∈Dh
                                                   X
                         Uhk = λI + (G∗h+1 )†         ψ̄ k (τh )ψ̄ ∗ (τh )⊤ (G∗h+1 )†⊤ .

                                                       k
                                                  τh ∈Dh


To show such an upper bound, we next provide the key steps.
First, we apply Lemma 13 and obtain
             ¯
 (Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂ k (τh )      −1
                 (Ûhk )
      1            ¯
   ≤ √ (Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂ k (τh ) − (G∗h−1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
       λ                                            2
                r
             √ P
                                                                  2
                                                                     
                                  k    †  ¯k          ∗   †  ∗
              r             k
                       τh ∈Dh  (Ĝh+1 ) ψ̂ (τh ) − (Gh+1 ) ψ̄ (τh ) 
                                                                  2    ∗    † ∗
    +   1 +                             √                            (Gh+1 ) ψ̄ (τh ) (Uhk )−1 .
                                           λ


For any τh , we can derive
             ¯
 (Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂ k (τh ) − (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                              2
                              ¯k

= (Ĝh+1 ) + Ŷh+1 ψ̂ (τh ) − (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
          k      †       k

                                                        2
                                ¯k

≤ (Ĝh+1 ) + Ŷh+1 (ψ̂ (τh ) − ψ̄ (τh )) + (Ĝkh+1 )† + Ŷh+1
          k      †       k                    ∗                     k
                                                                        − (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                                    2
                                                                                                 2
                                ¯k

               †
        k
≤ (Ĝh+1 ) + Ŷh+1     k
                               ψ̂ (τh ) − ψ̄ (τh ) + (Ĝh+1 ) + Ŷh+1 I − Ĝh+1 (Gh+1 ) ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                              ∗           k  †     k           k       ∗      †
                           1                      1                                                2
   1 ¯k                ∗

                                           k    †   k

                                                           ∗     k

                                                                          ∗   † ∗
≤      ψ̂ (τh ) − ψ̄ (τh ) + (Ĝh+1 ) + Ŷh+1 Gh+1 − Ĝh+1 (Gh+1 ) ψ̄ (τh ) ,
   γ                         1                                                           2


where the last inequality is due to the m-step decodability.
The first term above has been bounded in Lemma 4. Then, we bound the second term by the
Cauchy’s inequality as follows:

     (Ĝkh+1 )† + Ŷh+1
                    k
                           G∗h+1 − Ĝkh+1 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                                                      2


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       ≤ (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (Ū k )−1
                                 h
          s
                            X                                                                    2
        × rQA λ/γ +             Eτh ∼πt (Ĝkh+1 )† + Ŷh+1
                                                       k     G∗h+1 − Ĝkh+1 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                                                                                          2
                                 t<k
                                               q
       ≤ 5 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U k )−1           rQA λ/γ + |A|Q2A β/γ 2 ,
                                         h



where Ūhk denotes the expected matrix of Uhk , and has the following form
                                             X
             Ūhk = E[Uhk ] = λI + (G∗h+1 )†      Eτh ∼πt ψ̄ k (τh )ψ̄ ∗ (τh )⊤ (G∗h+1 )†⊤ .


                                                         t<k

In particular, the last inequality above follows from two facts. First, we use Lemma 39 in Zanette
et al. (2021) to transform the expected matrix to the empirical matrix Uhk . Second, we use Lemma
                                                                                                2
Lemma 12 to upper-bound Eτh ∼πt (Ĝkh+1 )† + Ŷh+1    k
                                                             G∗h+1 − Ĝkh+1 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) by
                                                                                                          2
the Hellinger squared distance between the estimated model θ̂k and the true model θ∗ . Then, due to
the estimation guarantee (Lemma 1), we have
X                                                                       2
    Eτh ∼Pπ∗t (Ĝkh+1 )† + Ŷh+1
                              k
                                    G∗h+1 − Ĝkh+1 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
               θ                                                                   2
t<k
          1 X                                                              2
      ≤              Eτh ∼Pπ∗t       G∗h+1 − Ĝkh+1 (G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
          γ2                θ                                              1
               t<k
                                                                                                               2
        1 X                               X          X
      = 2   Eτh ∼Pπ∗t                                    Pθ̂k (o|a, sh+1 = s) − Pθ∗ (o|a, sh+1 = s) Pθ∗ (s|τh )
       γ          θ
               t<k               o∈Qh+1 ,a∈QA
                                            h+1
                                                s∈S
                                                                                                      2
          Q2A X
                                                         u                      uQA
                                                           QA
      ≤         Eτh ∼Pπ∗t            Es∼Pθ∗ (·|τh ) DTV Pθ̂k h+1 (·|sh+1 = s), Pθ∗ h+1 (·|sh+1 = s)
          γ2          θ
                   t<k
        Q2 X
                                                u                      uQA

                                                  QA
      ≤ 2A       Eτh ∼Pπ∗t Es∼Pθ∗ (·|τh ) D2TV Pθ̂k h+1 (·|sh+1 = s), Pθ∗ h+1 (·|sh+1 = s)
         γ             θ
             t<k
        |A|Q2A X 2   π π
      ≲               DH Pθ̂k , Pθ∗ = Õ(β).
           γ2       ∥π∈D

Combining above key steps, we obtain that
                      ¯
   Eτh ∼π (Ĝkh+1 )† ψ̂ k (τh )         −1
                                 (Ûhk )

   ≤ poly(r, |A|, QA , 1/γ) Eτh ∼π ∥(G∗h+1 )† ψ̄ ∗ (τh )∥(Uhk )−1 + DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂k (τH ) .

The rest of the proof follow the same argument as that for Theorem 1.
■

D      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 ( FOR O FFLINE PSR-LCB)
In this section, we present the full analysis for the offline algorithm PSR-LCB to show Theorem 2.
In particular, the proof of Theorem 2 consists of three main steps. Step 1: We provide the offline
estimation guarantee for the estimated model θ̂. Step 2: Building up on the first step, we are able
to show that Vθ̂,πb̂ is a valid upper bound of the total variation distance between θ̂ and θ∗ . Hence,
  π
Vθ̂,R − Vθ̂,πb̂ is a valid LCB for the true value Vθπ∗ ,R . Step 3: We translate Vθ̂,πb̂ to the ground-
                                                                                                √
truth prediction feature ψ̄ ∗ (τh ). Finally, we show that the Vθ̂,πb̂ scales in the order of 1/ K, which
characterizes the performance of PSR-LCB and completes the proof.


                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We first introduce the following definitions for good events.
                                             n                b
                                                                          o
Good Events.         Recall that Θmin = θ : ∀h, τh ∈ Dh , Pπθ (τh ) ≥ pmin , where pmin ≤
    δ
KH(|O||A|)H
            . Let ε ≤ pKH
                       min
                           . Analogous to the proof for online learning, we introduce three events
defined as follows.
              (
                                     X X                   b                b

        Eωo =       ∀θ ∈ Θmin ,                      D2TV Pπθ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh )
                                          h τh ∈Dh
                                                                                    b
                                                                                                            )
                                                             X X     Pπ∗ (τH )          3K Θ̄ε
                                                        ≤6        log πθ b     + 31 log                          ,
                                                                     Pθ (τH )             δ
                                                           h τ ∈D     H     h
                (                                                                       b
                                                                                                                 )
                                             b                              X       Pπ∗ (τH )         3K|Θ̄ε |
        Eπo =       ∀θ ∈ Θ, K,       D2H (Pπθ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )) ≤               log πθ b     + 2 log                ,
                                                                                    Pθ (τH )            δ
                                                                            τ ∈D
                                                                            H

                                            b
       o
      Emin =        ∀h, τh ∈ Dh ,        Pπθ∗ (τh ) ≥ pmin       .

                                                                                                 o
Following the proof steps similar to those in Appendix B, we can conclude that E o := Eωo ∩Eπo ∩Emin
occurs with probability at least 1 − δ.

D.1    S TEP 1: E STIMATION G UARANTEE

Lemma 7 (MLE guarantee) Under event E o , the estimated model θ̂ by PSR-LCB satisfies
                   X X            b                 b

                            D2TV Pπθ̂ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ) ≤ 7β̂,
                                 h τh ∈Dh
                                             b          b

                               D2H       Pθ̂π (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH ) ≤ 7β̂/K,

where β̂ = 31 log 3K|δΘ̄ε | .

Proof: The proof follows the steps similar to those in Lemma 1, except that we replace the explo-
ration policies νh (π k , uQexp
                            h−1
                                ) by the behavior policy. ■

D.2    S TEP 2: UCB FOR T OTAL VARIATION D ISTANCE AND LCB FOR VALUE F UNCTION

The following lemma provides an explicit upper bound on the total variation distance between the
estimated model and the true model.

Lemma 8 Under event E o , for any policy π, we have
                                       s
                                                  H
                                             β̂ X             h
                                                                   ∗
                                                                                  i
         DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) ≲                  E        ψ̄   (τh−1 )  −1    ,                                    (12)
                                          Hι2 γ 2   τh−1 ∼Pπ
                                                           θ∗
                                                                             Λh−1
                                                                      h=1
                                                                        4
                                                          , and λ0 = 4Qγ2 d .
                                  ∗          ∗        ⊤
where Λh−1 = λ0 I + K

                    H Eτh−1 ∼Pπb ψ̄ (τh−1 )ψ̄ (τh−1 )
                                             θ∗                                               A


                                                     we index ωh−1 = (oh , ah , . . . , oH , aH ) by
Proof: Similarly to the analysis in that for Lemma 9,
i, and τh−1 by j. In addition, we denote m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) by wi⊤ , denote
ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) by xj , and denote π(ωh−1 |τh−1 ) by πi|j . Then, we have
                      X
                          m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                      τH
                               XX
                           =                 |wi⊤ xj |πi|j Pπθ∗ (j)
                                i        j


                                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                        XX
                                    =                 (πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi )⊤ xj · Pπθ∗ (j)
                                         j        i
                                                                                            !⊤
                                        X X
                                    =                         πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi           xj · Pπθ∗ (j)
                                         j            i
                                                        v                                                              
                                                         u
                                                         u X                         2

                                    ≤                                    ⊤
                                                             πi|j · sgn(wi xj ) · wi
                                             Eπ  xj Λ−1 t                                                              ,
                                                        u                                                              
                                        j∼Pθ∗                         h−1
                                                                                   i                             Λh−1
                                  ∗          ∗       ⊤
where Λh−1 = λ0 I + K

                    H Eτh−1 ∼Pπb ψ̄ (τh−1 )ψ̄ (τh−1 )    and λ0 will be determined later. We fix
                                                          θ∗
τh−1 = j0 and aim to analyze the coefficient of ∥xj0 ∥Λ−1 . We have
                                                                                          h−1

                                                          2
    X
            πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi
       i                                                  Λh−1
                                                                    
                                                                          2                        !⊤ 2
                  X                                        K          X
       = λ0                   πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi +     E       πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi   xj  .
                      i
                                                           H j∼Pπ∗b   i
            |                          {z               }2 |    θ
                                                                                {z                       }
                                        I1                                                                 I2

For the first term I1 , we have
   p             p                                        X
       I1 =          λ0             max                            πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi⊤ x
                          x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1                    i
                  p                                               X
                 ≤ λ0                   max                             m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                                  h−1
                  p                                               X
                 ≤ λ0                   max                             m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                                  h−1
                          p                                        X
                  +            λ0            max                              m̂(ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                    x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                                    h−1
                  √                 √
            (a)   dλ0      λ0                X
             ≤         +        max              M̂h (oh , ah )x π(ah |oh , j0 )
                  γ      γ x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 o ,a                1
                                             h h
                     √
            (b) 2Q
                   A dλ0
            ≤            ,
                    γ2
where (a) follows from Assumption 1, and (b) follows from Proposition 2.
For the second term I2 , we have
                                                                                            2 
      K                X
I2 ≤                        m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 ) 
                                                                                               
            E
      H τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b
                   
                      ω   θ           h−1

                               
       K               X
                                                    ¯

   ≤        E             m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah )ψ̂(τh−1 ) − M∗h (oh , ah )ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
       H τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b    ωh−1
                θ

                                                                                             2 
                                                         ¯
                            X
                         +      m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 ) 
                                                                                                 
                                             ωh−1
                                "
   (a) K                             1 X                    ¯
   ≤              E                         Pθ̂ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̂h (τh ) − Pθ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̄h∗ (τh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
           H τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b              γ o ,a                                                    1
                          θ              h    h


                                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  2 #
                                   1 ¯              ∗
                                 +   ψ̂(τh−1 ) − ψ̄ (τh−1 )
                                   γ                           1
                               
            K                     X |Q
                                     X h|

     =             E                    P (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
                                                      θ̂
           Hγ 2 τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b             oh ,ah ℓ=1
                           θ

                                                                                                            2 
                                         |Qh−1 |
                                           X
                                   +                Pθ̂ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 )  
                                                                                                               
                                           ℓ=1
                                                                                                             2 
            K                              X         X
                                                                 o                          o
     ≤                                                     Pθ̂ (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 ) − Pθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 )  
                                                                                                                
                   E
           Hγ 2 τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b
                               
                           θ           ah−1 ∈Qexp
                                              h
                                                   o
                                                  ωh−1

     (b)    K                h   b                                   i
                               2   π                πb
     ≤                E       D  P   (ω    |τ
                                        h−1 h−1 ), Pθ ∗ (ω   |τ
                                                          h−1 h−1 )
           Hι2 γ 2 τh−1 ∼Pπ∗b TV θ̂
                               θ

     (c)   64K 2 πb                b

     ≤       2  2
                  DH Pθ̂ (τH ), Pπθ∗ (τH )
           Hι γ
     (d)    β̂
     ≲             ,
           Hι2 γ 2
where (a) follows from Assumption 1 and Equation (8), (b) follows because π b (ah−1 ) ≥ ι for all
ah−1 ∈ Qexp
         h−1 , (c) follows from Lemma 12, and (d) follows from Lemma 7.
                                          4
Thus, by choosing λ0 = 4Qγ2 d , we have
                          A
                 X
                      m̂(ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                           τH
                                       s
                                            β̂                h
                                                                   ∗
                                                                                  i
                                   ≲                  E         ψ̄   (τh−1 )  −1    .
                                           Hι2 γ 2 τh−1 ∼Pπθ∗                Λh−1

Following from Proposition 1, we conclude that
                                       s                                           
                                                 H
                                            β̂  X            h                   i 
      DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) ≲ min                E         ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) Λ−1 , 2 .
                                        Hι2 γ 2   τh−1 ∼Pπ
                                                          θ ∗                 h−1   
                                                                        h=1

■
Following from Proposition 1, we provide the following lemma that upper bounds the estimation
error by the bonus function.

Lemma 9 Under event E o , for any policy π, we have

                                                                              ¯
X
    ∗     ⊤                      ∗
   m (ωh ) M̂h (oh , ah ) − Mh (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) π(τH ) ≤ Eτh−1 ∼Pπ α̂h−1 ψ̂(τh−1 )                                        −1
                                                                                                                                       ,
τH
                                                                                                θ̂
                                                                                                                   (Ûh−1 )
where
                                              X       ¯        ¯
                Ûh−1 = λ̂I +                        ψ̂(τh−1 )ψ̂(τh−1 )⊤ ,
                                       τh−1 ∈Dh−1

                        λ̂Q2A d    4                       X           b                     b

                α̂h−1 =         + 2 2                            D2TV Pπθ̂ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pπθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ) .
                          γ4     ι γ
                                                    τh−1 ∈Dh−1



                ωh−1 = (oh , ah , . . . , oH , aH ) by i, and τh−1 by j. In addition, we de-
Proof: We index
                                                       ¯
note m (ωh ) M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) by wi⊤ , ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 ) = ϕ̂⊤ψ̂h−1
       ∗    ⊤
                                                                            ψ̂
                                                                               (τh−1 )
                                                                                  (τ   )
                                                                                         by xj , and
                                                                                               h−1   h−1   h−1


                                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


π(ωh−1 |τh−1 ) by πi|j . Then, we have
                X
                     m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂h−1 (τh−1 ) π(τH )
                      τH
                                  XX
                             =                   |wi⊤ xj |πi|j Pπθ̂ (j)
                                   i         j
                                  XX
                             =                   (πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi )⊤ xj · Pπθ (j)
                                   j         i
                                                                                     !⊤
                                  X X
                             =                        πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi            xj · Pπθ̂ (j)
                                   j             i
                                               v                                                                    
                                                u
                                                u X                          2

                             ≤ E  xj (Û k )−1 t   πi|j · sgn(wi⊤ xj ) · wi                                         .
                                               u                                                                    
                              j∼Pπ       h−1
                                        θ̂                                       i                           Ûh−1


                                                                        P                  ⊤            2
We fix an index j = j0 , and aim to analyze                                 i πi|j0 · sgn(wi xj0 ) · wi Ûh−1
                                                                                                          k   , which can be written
as
                                                       2
       X
            πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi
        i                                                k
                                                       Ûh−1
                                                                                                                          !⊤     2
                                                                   2
                X                                                               X        X
        = λ̂              πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi                    +                    πi|j0 · sgn(wi⊤ xj0 ) · wi        xj  .
                 i                                                          j∈Dh−1        i
            |                          {z                          }2       |                         {z                           }
                                       I1                                                             I2


For the first term I1 , we have
     p          p                                      X
         I1 =        λ̂          max                           πi|j0 sgn(wi⊤ xj0 )wi⊤ x
                                dh−1
                          x∈R          :∥x∥2 =1            i
                p                                     X
            ≤        λ̂          max                            m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                          x∈Rdh−1 :∥x∥2 =1 ω
                                                       h−1
                p                       X
            ≤        λ̂ max                          m (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                                       ∗
                          x:∥x∥2 =1
                                       ωh−1
                 p                           X
                + λ̂ max                               m∗ (ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah )x π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                            x:∥x∥2 =1
                                             ωh−1
                p                                                 p
                λ̂          X                                       λ̂
            ≤        max        M̂h (oh , ah )x π(ah |oh , j0 ) +      ∥x∥1
               γ x:∥x∥2 =1 o ,a                1                   γ
                            h h
                   p
              2QA dλ̂
            ≤          .
                  γ2

For the second term I2 , we have
                                                                                        2
                                                                    ¯
         X         X
I2 ≤                    m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
       τh−1 ∈Dh−1          ωh−1
                      
                                                            ¯
            X               X
   ≤                              m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah )ψ̂(τh−1 ) − M∗h (oh , ah )ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
       τh−1 ∈Dh−1          ωh−1



                                                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                             2
                                                                         ¯
                                        X
                                  +            m∗ (ωh )⊤ M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 ) π(ωh−1 |j0 )
                                       ωh−1

    (a)                  1 X
                X                                  ¯
    ≤                            Pθ̂ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̂(τh ) − Pθ (oh |τh−1 )ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
                         γ o ,a                                                          1
          τh−1 ∈Dh−1        h h
                                                                     2
                                1 ¯
                              +     ψ̂(τh−1 ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh−1 )
                                γ                                 1
                         
          1       X         X |Q Xh|

    =                                 Pθ̂ (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh , oh |τh−1 , ah , aℓh ) π(ah |oh , j0 )
          γ2                  oh ,ah ℓ=1
               τh−1 ∈Dh−1
                                                                                                                         2
                                       |Qh−1 |
                                        X
                                  +              Pθ̂ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) − Pθ∗ (oℓh−1 |τh−1 , aℓh−1 ) 
                                         ℓ=1
                                                                                                                             2
      1           X                    X          X
                                                                 o                          o
    ≤ 2                                                   Pθ̂ (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 ) − Pθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 , ah−1 ) 
     γ
               τh−1 ∈Dh−1        ah−1 ∈Qexp ωo
                                        h−1 h−1

    (b)     1        X                 b                     b

    ≤                            D2TV Pπθ̂ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pπθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ) ,
          ι γ2
           2
                 τh−1 ∈Dh−1

where (a) follows from Assumption 1, and (b) follows from the condition π b (ah ) ≥ ι for any
ah ∈ Qexp
       h−1 .
Thus, we conclude that
                 X
                                 m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) π(τH )
                         τH

                                                    ¯
                                 ≤ Eτh−1 ∼Pπ α̂h−1 ψ̂(τh−1 )                           −1
                                                                                                ,
                                                 θ̂
                                                                                (Ûh−1 )
where
                             4λ̂Q2A d    1                 X                    b                     b

               (α̂h−1 )2 =        4
                                      + 2 2                               D2TV Pπθ̂ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pπθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 ) .
                                γ      ι γ
                                                        τh−1 ∈Dh−1

■

Corollary 4 Under event E o , for any reward R, we have,
                                                           π
                                                         Vθ̂,R − Vθπ∗ ,R ≤ Vθ̂,πb̂ ,
                       r
                         P ¯          2                                                  q
                                                                                           4λHQ2A d
where b̂k (τH ) = min α̂  h ψ̂h (τh )                                 −1
                                                                         , 1  , and α̂ =     γ4     + ι27γβ̂2 .
                                                             (Ûh )



Proof: By the definition of the total variation distance, we have

         π
       Vθ̂,R − Vθπ∗ ,R ≤ DTV Pπθ̂ , Pπθ∗
                                     H X
                                 (a) X
                                 ≤                    m∗ (ωh )⊤ M̂h (oh , ah ) − M∗h (oh , ah ) ψ̂(τh−1 ) π(τH )
                                       h=1 τH
                                           (H                                                                        )
                                 (b)        X                                     ¯
                                 ≤ min                 Eτh−1 ∼Pπ α̂h−1           ψ̂(τh−1 )             −1
                                                                                                                ,1
                                               h=1
                                                                 θ̂
                                                                                                (Ûh−1 )


                                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                              v         v                         
                         (c)  u H
                                uX
                                         uH−1
                                         uX ¯           2          
                         ≤ min t     2
                                   α̂h−1 t    ψ̂h (τh )         , 1  ,
                                                       (Ûh )−1 
                                       h=1                h=0

where (a) follows from Proposition 1, (b) follows from Lemma 9 and because R(τH ) ∈ [0, 1], and
(c) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality.
By Lemma 7, we further have
      H
      X
              2       4λ̂HQ2A d     1 X                 X                 b                      b

            α̂h−1 ≤             +                                   D2TV Pπθ̂k (ωh−1 |τh−1 ), Pπθ∗ (ωh−1 |τh−1 )
                         γ4       ι2 γ 2
      h=1                                      h τh−1 ∈Dh−1

                   4λHQ2A d   7β̂
                 ≤          + 2 2,
                     γ4      ι γ
which concludes the proof. ■

D.3    S TEP 3: R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN E MPIRICAL B ONUS AND G ROUND -T RUTH B ONUS

Lemma 10 (Offline empirical bonus and true bonus term) Under event E o , for any π, we have
         v
          uH−1                        
          uX ¯              2
    E t         ψ̂h (τh )         −1
                                      
 τH ∼Pπ
      θ∗    h=0
                            (Ûh )
                 q        
                2 7rβ̂ H−1    X             h                  i 2HQ
                                                                     A

         ≤ 1 + p                     Eπ     ψ̄h∗ (τh ) (U )−1 + p DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) .
                                    τh ∼Pθ∗                h
                  ι λ̂        h=0                                  λ̂

Proof: Recall that
                                                         X ¯       ¯
                                     Ûh = λ̂I +           ψ̂(τh )ψ̂(τh )⊤ .
                                                        τh ∈Dh

We define the ground-truth counterpart of Ûh as follows:
                                               X
                                Uh = λ̂I +           ψ̄(τh )ψ̄(τh )⊤ .
                                                        τh ∈Dh

Then, by Lemma 13, we have
s
  X ¯            2
        ψ̂(τh )        −1
   h
                 (Ûh )
     X ¯
  ≤         ψ̂h (τh )         −1
       h
                        (Ûh )
                                                                    r
                                                            √
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                       
                                                                        P        ¯            ∗ (τ )
                                                                r        τh ∈Dh ψ̂(τ h ) − ψ̄     h
     1 X ¯                        X                                                                 2
   ≤p      ψ̂(τh ) − ψ̄h∗ (τh ) +   1 +                                        p                       ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                                                                                                    (Uh )−1
                                                                                                                            .
                               2                                                                      
      λ̂ h                        h                                               λ̂

Furthermore, note that
                         ¯                  ¯
                        ψ̂(τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )
                                       ≤ ψ̂h (τh ) − ψ̄h∗ (τh )
                                                2               1
                                          1        b              b

                                       ≤ DTV Pθ̂ (ωh |τh ), Pπθ∗ (ωh |τh ) ,
                                                    π
                                          ι
where the second inequality follows because π b (ah ) ≥ ι for all ah ∈ Qexp
                                                                          h . By Lemma 7, we
conclude that
          s
             X ¯           2
                 ψ̂h (τh )        −1
              h
                           (Ûh )


                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                   q     
                  1  X   ¯            ∗
                                                      7rβ̂ X ∗
                ≤p      ψ̂h (τh ) − ψ̄h (τh ) + 1 + p       ψ̄h (τh ) (U k )−1 .
                                             2                            h
                   λ̂ h                              ι λ̂   h


For the first term, following an argument similar to those in Lemma 4 and taking the expectation,
we have
                         ¯
         X             h                 i
             Eτh ∼Pπθ∗ ψ̂(τh ) − ψ̄(τh )
                                                           1
          h
                XX  ¯
                                                      ¯

              ≤     ψ̂(τh ) Pπθ (τh ) − Pπθ̂ (τh ) + ψ̂(τh )Pπθ̂ (τh ) − ψ̄(τh )Pπθ∗ (τh )
                                                                                                                        1
                    h       τh
                   XX                 ¯

              ≤                      ψ̂(τh )           Pπθ (τh ) − Pπθ̂ (τh ) + ψ̂(τh ) − ψ̄ ∗ (τh )       π(τh )
                                                   1                                                   1
                    h       τh
                    X
              ≤2             |QA |D
                               h TV   P π
                                        θ ∗ (τ h ), Pπ
                                                       (τ
                                                     θ̂ h
                                                          )
                        h

              ≤ 2HQA DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) ,

which completes the proof. ■

D.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Now, we are ready to prove Theorem 2.

Theorem 4 (Restatement of Theorem 2) Suppose Assumption 1 holds.                              Let ι        =
                  b                              δ                         pmin
minah ∈Qexp
          h
               π    (a h ),  pmin  =      O( KH(|O||A|)H ),    ε =     O(  KH   ),  β̂    =    O(log | Θ̄ε |),
                           √    √                       √ √
          π
        γCπ                                                             √
            b ,∞ β̂ max{ r,QA H/γ}                      Q     dH         β
λ̂ =                      √
                    ι2 QA dH
                                       , and α̂ = O       A
                                                            γ2   λ + ιγ . Then, with probability at
least 1 − δ, the output π̄ of Algorithm 2 satisfies that
                                                            √ ! π
                                                                                  s       
                                                                                 2
                                                √       QA     H C π b ,∞ QA H        rdβ̂
                 ∀π, Vθπ∗ ,R − Vθπ̄∗ ,R ≤ Õ     r+                                       .
                                                            γ           ιγ 2           K


Proof: Under event E o , the performance difference can be upper bounded as follows.
       Vθπ∗ ,r − Vθπ̂∗ ,r
              = Vθπ∗ ,r − (Vθ̂,r
                             π
                                 − Vθ̂,πb̂ ) + (Vθ̂,r
                                                  π
                                                      − Vθ̂,πb̂ ) − (Vθ̂,r
                                                                       π̂                   π̂
                                                                           − Vθ̂,π̂b̂ ) + Vθ̂,r − Vθ̂,π̂b̂ − Vθπ̂∗ ,r
                                               |                  {z                 } |           {z               }
                                                                             I1                               I2
              (a) 1
               ≤        DTV Pπθ̂ , Pπθ∗ + Vθ̂,πb̂
                    2
              (b)
               ≤ DTV Pπθ̂ , Pπθ∗ + Vθπ∗ ,b̂ ,

where (a) follows from the design of π̄ that results in I1 ≤ 0, and from Corollary 4 which implies
I2 ≤ 0, and (b) follows from Corollary 4.
By Lemma 8, we have
                                                   s
                                                           H
                                                      β̂ X              h
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                                i
                  DTV       Pπθ̂ , Pπθ∗       ≲                   E        ψ̄   (τ h−1 )     −1
                                                  Hι2 γ 2     τh−1 ∼Pπ
                                                                     θ∗
                                                                                           Λh−1
                                                          h=1
                                                        s
                                              (a)                 H
                                                            β̂ X                  h
                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                                        i
                                              ≤ Cππb ,∞                   E          ψ̄   (τ h−1 )  −1
                                                          Hι2 γ 2    τh−1 ∼Pπ∗
                                                                                b                  Λh−1
                                                                       h=1          θ


                                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                              s             r                    s
                                                   β̂           rH                    rβ̂
                                ≤ Cππb ,∞ H                        = Cππb ,∞ H               ,
                                                  Hι2 γ 2       K                    Kι2 γ 2
where (a) follows from the definition of the coverage coefficient.
By Lemma 10, we have
Vθπ∗ ,b̂
               q                                                                                       
               2 7rβ̂ H−1
                         X             h                     i 2α̂HQ
                                                                         A
                                                                                                        
≤ min α̂ 1 + p                 Eπ      ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U )−1 + p             DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) , 1
                             τ   ∼P                     h
                ι λ̂    h=0
                               h    θ∗                                λ̂                                  
               q                                              
               2 7rβ̂ H−1
                         X             h                     i  2α̂HQ
                                                                               A

≤ min α̂ 1 + p                 Eπ      ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U )−1 , 1 + p               DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH )
                             τh ∼Pθ∗                    h
                ι λ̂    h=0
                                                                           λ̂
                     q                                               
                     2 7rβ̂ H−1 X             h                   i  2α̂HQ
                                                                                      A

≤ min α̂Cππb ,∞ 1 + p                  E        ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U )−1 , 1 + p             DTV Pπθ∗ (τH ), Pπθ̂ (τH ) .
                                           πb                  h
                      ι λ̂      h=0 τh ∼Pθ∗
                                                                                  λ̂
    |                            {z                                      }
                                       I3

                                                                                                    b
Recall that Uh = λ̂I + τh ∈Dh ψ̄ ∗ (τh )ψ̄ ∗ (τh )⊤ and the distribution of τh ∈ Dh follows Pπθ∗ .
                         P
Therefore, by the Azuma-Hoeffding’s inequality (Lemma 11), with probability at least 1 − δ, we
have
                                                     q                                         
                                                                 H−1
            p                                       2   7r β̂   X X                              
   KI3 ≤ 2K log(2/δ) + min α̂Cππb ,∞ 1 + p                                ψ̄ ∗ (τh ) (U )−1 , 1
                                                                                         h
                                                      ι λ̂      h=0 τh ∈Dh
                                                                                                  
                                           q        r
         (a) p                                 r β̂        rK
         ≲ K log(2/δ) + α̂Cππb ,∞ 1 + p  H
                                             ι λ̂           H
                         q 
                            rβ̂ p
         ≲ α̂Cππb ,∞ 1 + p  rHK log(2/δ),
                          ι λ̂
where (a) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality.
Combining the above results, we have
  Vθπ∗ ,r − Vθπ̂∗ ,r
                            q                                               s
                                                                      π
                                       r
                               r β̂      rH    log(2/δ)    α̂HQ     C  b
                                                                  A π ,∞    H   rβ̂
         ≲ α̂Cππb ,∞ 1 + p                             + p
                             ι λ̂                K             λ̂       ιγ      K
                          √                                   √ √
                                        q                                     ! s
                     QA dH                   β̂
                                                 1 + max{ r,p HQA /γ} H rH β̂ log(2/δ)
                                 p
         ≲ Cππb ,∞                 λ̂ +
                          γ2               ιγ                     ι λ̂                        K
                           √                                √ √
                                                                            !   q     s
                     ιQ  A    dH  p                    max{  r,    HQ   A /γ}   H    β̂   rH β̂ log(2/δ)
         = Cππb ,∞       q          λ̂ + 1 1 +               p
                                                              ι λ̂                ιγ             K
                         γ β̂
                  (      √          )
                                                     2
                                                       √ s
         (a)        √      HQA                 QA H d rβ̂ log(2/δ)
         ≲ max        r,              Cππb ,∞                             ,
                             γ                    ιγ 2           K
where (a) follows because
                                       q
                                                √    √
                                      γ β̂ max{ r, QA H/γ}
                                   λ=             √        .
                                            ι2 QA dH

                                                      40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This completes the proof. ■

E    AUXILIARY L EMMAS
Lemma 11 (Azuma–Hoeffding inequality) Consider a domain X , and a filtration F1 ⊂ . . . ⊂
Fk ⊂ . . . on the domain X . Suppose that {X1 , . . . , Xk , . . .} ⊂ [−B, B] is adapted to the filtration
(Ft )∞
     t=1 , i.e., Xk is Fk -measurable. Then
                                k−1
                                                                        !
                                X                   p
                            P       Xt − E[Xt ] ≥ 2kB 2 log(2/δ) ≤ δ.                                 (13)
                                   t=1

The following lemma characterize the relationship between the total variation distance and the
Hellinger-squared distance. Note that the result for probability measures has been proved in Lemma
H.1 in Zhong et al. (2022). Since we consider more general bounded measures, we provide the full
proof for completeness.
                                                                                       P
Lemma 12PGiven two bounded measures P and Q defined on the set X . Let |P | = x∈X P (x)
and |Q| = x∈X Q(x). We have
                                    D2TV (P, Q) ≤ 4(|P | + |Q|)D2H (P, Q)
In addition, if PY |X , QY |X are two conditional distributions over a random variable Y , and PX,Y =
PY |X P , QX,Y = QY |X Q are the joint distributions when X follows the distributions P and Q,
respectively, we have                2                       2

                              E DH (PY |X , QY |X ) ≤ 8DH (PX,Y , QX,Y ).
                              X∼P


Proof: We first prove the first inequality. By the definition of total variation distance, we have
                                                   !2
                               X
              D2TV (P, Q) =        |P (x) − Q(x)|
                                    x
                                                                                        !2
                                   X  p              p          p       p
                             =             P (x) −       Q(x)    P (x) + Q(x)
                                    x
                                                               !                                !
                             (a)   X  p       p      2                     X
                             ≤         P (x) − Q(x)                    2       (P (x) + Q(x))
                                    x                                      x
                             ≤ 4(|P | + |Q|)D2H (P, Q),
where (a) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality and because (a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2b2 .
For the second inequality, we have,
            2
      E DH (PY |X , QY |X )
    X∼P
                                                                   !
              X             X  q           q          2
          =           P (x)     PY |X (y) − QY |X (y)
                x            y
              X  q                       q             q               q               2
          =              PX,Y (x, y) −    QX,Y (x, y) + QY |X (y)Q(x) − QY |X (y)P (x)
                x,y
                 X  q                  q            2   X            p              2
                                                                             p
          ≤2              PX,Y (x, y) − QX,Y (x, y) + 2   QY |X (y)    Q(x) − P (x)
                 x,y                                               x,y
                                                          Xp
          = 4D2H (PX,Y , QX,Y ) + 2(|P | + |Q| − 2             P (x)Q(x))
                                                           x
          (a)                                             XXq
          ≤ 4D2H (PX,Y , QX,Y ) + 2(|P | + |Q| − 2           PY |X (y)P (x)QY |X (y)Q(x))
                                                           x   y


                                                     41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         = 8D2H (PX,Y , QX,Y ),
                                                                       P p
where (a) follows from the Cauchy’s inequality that applies on              y   PY |X (y)QY |X (y). ■

Lemma 13 Consider                   P {xi }i∈I⊤ and {yi }i∈I and an index subset J ⊂ I.
                P two vector sequences
Suppose A = λI + j∈J xj x⊤
                         j and B =     j∈J yj yj , and rank ({xi }i∈I ) = rank ({yi }i∈I ) = r.
Then
                                                  √ qP                   2
                                                                            
                          1                      2   r    j∈J ∥xj − yj ∥2
      ∀i ∈ I, ∥xi ∥A−1 ≤ √ ∥xi − yi ∥2 + 1 +              √                 ∥yi ∥B −1 .
                           λ                                  λ


Proof: We first write
                           ∥xi ∥A−1 − ∥yi ∥B −1
                              = ∥xi ∥A−1 − ∥yi ∥A−1 + ∥yi ∥A−1 − ∥yi ∥B −1
                                            I                          I
                                 z        }|1      { z          }|2        {
                                      2          2
                                 ∥xi ∥A−1 − ∥yi ∥A−1   ∥yi ∥A−1 − ∥yi ∥2B −1
                                                            2
                               =                     +                       .
                                 ∥xi ∥A−1 + |yi ∥A−1   ∥yi ∥A−1 + ∥yi ∥B −1

For the first term I1 , we repeatedly apply the Cauchy’s inequality, and have
                         ∥xi ∥2A−1 − ∥yi ∥2A−1
                               = x⊤
                                  i A
                                      −1
                                         (xi − yi ) + yi⊤ A−1 (xi − yi )
                               ≤ ∥xi ∥A−1 ∥xi − yi ∥A−1 + ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥xi − yi ∥A−1
                                  1
                               ≤ √ (∥xi ∥A−1 + ∥yi ∥A−1 ) ∥xi − yi ∥2 .
                                   λ

For the second term I2 , we repeatedly apply the Cauchy’s inequality, and have
             ∥yi ∥2A−1 − ∥yi ∥2B −1
                 = yi⊤ A−1 (B − A)B −1 yi
                   X
                 =       yi⊤ A−1 xj (yj − xj )⊤ B −1 yi + yi⊤ A−1 (yj − xj )yj⊤ B −1 yi
                     j∈J
                     X
                 ≤         ∥xj ∥A−1 ∥yj − xj ∥B −1 ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥yi ∥B −1
                     j∈J
                         X
                     +         ∥yj − xj ∥A−1 ∥yj ∥B −1 ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥yi ∥B −1
                         j∈J
                                                sX                    sX
                    1
                 ≤ √ ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥yi ∥B −1                ∥xj − yj ∥22         ∥xj ∥2A−1
                     λ                           j∈J                  j∈J
                                                 sX                   sX
                      1
                  + √ ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥yi ∥B −1      ∥xj − yj ∥22        ∥yj ∥2B −1
                       λ                  j∈J                 j∈J
                    √                   sX
                   2 r
                 ≤ √ ∥yi ∥A−1 ∥yi ∥B −1      ∥xjh − yjh ∥22 .
                     λ                   j∈J


Therefore, the lemma follows from the fact that ∥yi ∥A−1 ≤ ∥yi ∥A−1 + ∥yi ∥B −1 . ■
The following lemma and its variants has been developed in Dani et al. (2008); Abbasi-Yadkori
et al. (2011); Carpentier et al. (2020). We slightly generalize the padding term from 1 to an arbitrary
positive number B and provide the full proof for completeness.


                                                       42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   P potential lemma ) For any sequence of vectors X = {x1 , . . . , xn , . . .} ⊂
Lemma 14 (Elliptical
Rd , let Uk = λI + t<k xk x⊤   k , where λ is a positive constant, and B > 0 is a real number. If the
rank of X is at most r, then, we have
                    K
                    X        n              o
                          min ∥xk ∥2U −1 , B ≤ (1 + B)r log(1 + K/λ),
                                     k
                    k=1
                    K
                    X        n           √ o p
                          min ∥xk ∥U −1 , B ≤ (1 + B)rK log(1 + K/λ).
                                     k
                    k=1


Proof: Note that the second inequality is an immediate result from the first inequality by the
Cauchy’s inequality. Hence, it suffices to prove the first inequality. To this end, we have
     K
     X        n             o (a)      K
                                       X
                    2
           min ∥xk ∥U −1 , B ≤ (1 + B)   log 1 + ∥xk ∥2U −1
                      k                                              k
     k=1                                   k=1
                                           K
                                           X
                                                 log 1 + trace (Uk+1 − Uk ) Uk−1

                               = (1 + B)
                                           k=1
                                           K
                                                                −1/2               −1/2
                                           X
                               = (1 + B)         log 1 + trace Uk    (Uk+1 − Uk ) Uk
                                           k=1
                                           K
                                                               −1/2               −1/2
                                           X
                               ≤ (1 + B)         log det Id + Uk    (Uk+1 − Uk ) Uk
                                           k=1
                                           K
                                           X           det (Uk+1 )
                               = (1 + B)         log
                                                        det(Uk )
                                           k=1
                                                 det(UK+1 )
                               = (1 + B) log
                                                  det(U1 )
                                                                K
                                                                         !
                                                     1X
                               = (1 + B) log det I +    xk x⊤
                                                            k
                                                     λ
                                                               k=1
                               (b)
                               ≤ (1 + B)r log(1 + K/λ),
where (a) follows because x ≤ (1 + B) log(1 + x) if 0 < x ≤ B, and (b) follows because
rank(X ) ≤ r. ■


                                                   43
