Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


COP LANNER : P LAN TO ROLL O UT C ONSERVATIVELY
BUT TO E XPLORE O PTIMISTICALLY FOR M ODEL -
BASED RL
 Xiyao Wang1 Ruijie Zheng1 Yanchao Sun2
 Ruonan Jia3 Wichayaporn Wongkamjan1 Huazhe Xu3,4 Furong Huang1
 1
   University of Maryland, College Park 2 JPMorgan AI Research
 3
   Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
 {xywang, rzheng12, wwongkam, furongh}@umd.edu
 yanchao.sun@jpmchase.com jiaruonan97@gmail.com
 huazhe_xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
         Dyna-style model-based reinforcement learning contains two phases: model roll-
         outs to generate sample for policy learning and real environment exploration using
         current policy for dynamics model learning. However, due to the complex real-
         world environment, it is inevitable to learn an imperfect dynamics model with
         model prediction error, which can further mislead policy learning and result in
         sub-optimal solutions. In this paper, we propose COPlanner, a planning-driven
         framework for model-based methods to address the inaccurately learned dynam-
         ics model problem with conservative model rollouts and optimistic environment
         exploration. COPlanner leverages an uncertainty-aware policy-guided model
         predictive control (UP-MPC) component to plan for multi-step uncertainty estima-
         tion. This estimated uncertainty then serves as a penalty during model rollouts and
         as a bonus during real environment exploration respectively, to choose actions. Con-
         sequently, COPlanner can avoid model uncertain regions through conservative
         model rollouts, thereby alleviating the influence of model error. Simultaneously,
         it explores high-reward model uncertain regions to reduce model error actively
         through optimistic real environment exploration. COPlanner is a plug-and-play
         framework that can be applied to any dyna-style model-based methods. Experi-
         mental results on a series of proprioceptive and visual continuous control tasks
         demonstrate that both sample efficiency and asymptotic performance of strong
         model-based methods are significantly improved combined with COPlanner.
         Our code is available at https://github.com/umd-huang-lab/COPlanner.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) has emerged
as a promising approach to improve the sample efficiency of
model-free RL methods. Most MBRL methods contain two
phases that are alternated during training: 1) the first phase
where the agent interacts with the real environment using a
policy to obtain samples for dynamics model learning; 2) the
second phase where the learned dynamics model rolls out
to generate massive samples for updating the policy. Conse-
quently, learning an accurate dynamics model is critical as the Figure 1: Mean performance of
model-generated samples with high bias can mislead the policy COPlanner compared with base-
learning (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011; Wu et al., 2022). lines across 3 diverse benchmarks.
However, dynamics model errors are inevitable due to the complex real-world environment. Existing
methods try to avoid model errors in two main ways. 1) Design different mechanisms such as filtering
out error-prone samples to mitigate the influence of model errors after model rollouts (Buckman et al.,
2018; Yu et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021). 2) Actively reduce model errors during


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: COPlanner Framework. The most essential part of COPlanner is the Uncertainty-aware Policy-
Guided MPC (UP-MPC) phase in which we plan trajectories of length H, according to the learned dynamics
model and learned policy network π, to select the action with highest trajectory reward. This UP-MPC phase is
implemented differently for the two different purposes: environment exploration v.s. dynamics model rollouts.
In environment exploration, trajectory reward has an uncertainty bonus term to encourage exploring uncertain
regions in the environment. In dynamics model rollouts, trajectory reward, on the contrary, has an uncertainty
penalty term to encourage policy learning on confident regions of the learned dynamics model.
real environment interaction through uncertainty-guided exploration (Shyam et al., 2019; Ratzlaff
et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2021). While both categories of methods have
achieved advancements, each comes with its own set of limitations. For the first category, although
these approaches are shown to be empirically effective, they primarily concentrate on estimating
uncertainty at the current step, often neglecting the long-term implications that present samples might
have on model rollouts. Moreover, post-processing samples after model rollouts can compromise
rollout efficiency as many model-generated samples are discarded or down-weighted. As for the
second category, it is intrinsically challenging to achieve low model error and high long-term reward
without sacrificing the sample efficiency by learning exploration policies.
To tackle the aforementioned limitations, we introduce a novel framework, COPlanner, which
mitigates the model errors from two aspects: 1) avoid being misled by the existing model errors
via conservative model rollouts, and 2) keep reducing the model error via optimistic environment
exploration. The two aspects are achieved simultaneously by a novel uncertainty-aware multi-step
planning method, which requires no extra exploration policy training nor additional samples, resulting
in stable policy updates and high sample efficiency. COPlanner is structured around three core
components: the Planner, conservative model rollouts, and optimistic environment exploration. In
the Planner, we employ an Uncertainty-aware Policy-guided Model Predictive Control (UP-MPC)
to forecast future trajectories in terms of selecting actions and to estimate the long-term uncertainty
associated with each action. As shown in Figure 2, this long-term uncertainty serves as dual roles. In
the model rollouts phase, the uncertainty acts as a penalty on the total planning trajectory, guiding the
selection of conservative actions. Conversely, during the model learning phase, it serves as a bonus
on the total planning trajectory, steering towards optimistic actions for environment exploration.
Compared to previous methods, COPlanner has the following advantages: (a) COPlanner has
higher exploration efficiency, as it focuses on investigating high-reward uncertain regions to broaden
the dynamics model, thereby preventing unnecessary excessive exploration of areas with low rewards.
(b) COPlanner has higher model-generated sample utilization rate. Through planning for multi-
step model uncertainty estimation, COPlanner can prevent model rolled out trajectories from falling
into uncertain areas, thereby avoiding model errors before model rollouts and improving the utility of
model generated samples. (c) COPlanner enjoys an unified policy framework. Unlike previous
methods (Sekar et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2021) that require training two separate policies for
different usage, COPlanner only requires training a single policy and we only change the way
model-based planning is utilized, thus improving training efficiency and resolving potential policy
distribution mismatches. (d) COPlanner ensures undistracted policy optimization. Notably,
COPlanner diverges from existing approaches by not using long-term uncertainty as an intrinsic
reward. Instead, the policy’s objective remains focused on maximizing environmental rewards,
thereby avoiding the introduction of spurious behaviors due to model uncertainty.
Summary of Contributions: (1) We introduce COPlanner framework which can mitigate the
influence of model errors during model rollouts and explore the environment to actively reduce
model errors simultaneously by leveraging our proposed uncertainty-aware policy-guided MPC. (2)


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


COPlanner is a plug-and-play framework that can be applicable to any dyna-style MBRL method.
(3) After being integrated with other MBRL baseline methods, COPlanner improves the sample
efficiency of these baselines by nearly double. (4) Besides, COPlanner also significantly improves
the performance on a suite of proprioceptive and visual control tasks compared with other MBRL
baseline methods (16.9% on proprioceptive DMC, 32.8% on GYM, and 9.6% on visual DMC).

2     P RELIMINARIES
Model-based reinforcement learning. We consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined
by the tuple (S, A, T , ρ0 , r, γ), where S and A are the state space and action space respectively,
T (s′ |s, a) is the transition dynamics, ρ0 is the initial state distribution, r(s, a) is the reward function
and γ is the discount factor. In model-based RL, the transition dynamics T in the real world is
unknown, and we aim to construct a model T̂ (s′ |s, a) of transition dynamics and use it to find an
optimal policy π which can maximize the expected sum of discounted rewards,
                                                                 "∞               #
                                                                  X
                                                                       t
                             π = argmax E st ∼T̂ (·|st−1 ,at−1 )     γ r(st , at ) .                       (1)
                                    π            at ∼π(a|st )
                                                                t=0


Model predictive control. Model predictive control (MPC) has a long history in robotics and
control systems (Garcia et al., 1989; Qin and Badgwell, 2003). MPC find the optimal action through
trajectory optimization. Specifically, given the transition dynamics T in the real world, the agent
obtains a local solution at each step t by estimating optimal actions over a finite horizon H (i.e., from
t to t + H) and executing the first action at from the computed optimal sequence at time step t:
                                         "H                #
                                          X
                                                i
                       at = argmax E          γ r(si , ai ) , si ∼ T (·|si−1 , ai−1 ),                 (2)
                              at:t+H
                                           i=t

where γ is typically set to 1. In model-based control methods, the transition dynamics T is simulated
by the learned dynamics model T̂ (Chua et al., 2018; Wang and Ba, 2019; Hansen et al., 2022).

3     T HE COP L A N N E R F RAMEWORK
In this section, we will introduce COPlanner framework. COPlanner consists of three compo-
nents: the Planner, conservative model rollouts, and optimistic environment exploration. Within
the Planner, we propose using an Uncertainty-aware Policy-guided MPC to predict potential future
trajectories when selecting different actions under the current state and estimate the long-term uncer-
tainty associated with each action, which will be introduced in Sec 3.1. Depending on the phase, this
long-term uncertainty is used to further guide the selection of conservative actions for policy learning
or optimistic actions for environment exploration which will be introduced in Sec 3.2 and Sec 3.3.

3.1    “T HE P LANNER ”: U NCERTAINTY-AWARE P OLICY-G UIDED MPC

In this section, we present the core part of our pro-
posed framework which is called Uncertainty-aware
Policy-guided MPC (UP-MPC). Inspired by MPC,
we apply the random shooting method (Rao, 2009)
to introduce a long-term vision. Specifically, given
the current state st , before each interaction with the            Figure 3: The Planner.
model or real environment, we first generate an action candidate set containing K actions using the
                  (1) (2)       (k)
policy: at = {at , at , ..., at }. Then, for each action candidate, we perform Hp -step planning
and calculate the reward r, and model uncertainty u for each step. Finally, we select the action
according to accumulated reward and model uncertainty, (to interact with the learned dynamics for
the model rollouts or to interact with the environment for the model learning), as will be discussed in
details in Sec 3.2 and Sec 3.3.
Incorporating model uncertainty is crucial for action selection to compensate for model error. As
illustrated in Algorithm 1, we calculate the model uncertainty u through the model disagreement


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Pathak et al., 2019) method. Model disagreement is closely related to model learning and is currently
the most common way to estimate model uncertainty in MBRL (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al.,
2020; Pan et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021; Mendonca et al., 2021). We train a
                                           (1)   (2)      (n)
dynamics model ensemble T̂θ = {T̂θ , T̂θ , ..., T̂θ } to predict the next state given the current
state-action pair (st , at ) as input. Utilizing the ensemble, we approximate the model uncertainty by
calculating the variance over predicted states of the different ensemble members. This estimation
closely represents the expected information gain (Pathak et al., 2019):
                                 1 X (n)                                1 X (n)
               u(st , at ) =             (T̂θ (st , at ) − µ′ )2 , µ′ =      T̂ (st , at ).        (3)
                              N −1 n                                    N n θ
See Figure 3 for the illustration of the process. The pseudocode for the Planner, i.e., the UP-MPC
process, is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 The Planner: UP-MPC πϕ , s, T̂θ , K, H, α
Require: Policy πϕ , State s, learned dynamics model T̂θ , number of candidates actions K, planning
    horizon Hp , optimistic/conservative parameter α
                                             (k)
 1: Initialize R(k) = 0 for k = 1, ..., K, s0 = s for k = 1, ..., K
 2: for k = 1 to K do
 3:    for t = 0 to Hp − 1 do
                   (k)          (k)
 4:       Sample at ∼ πϕ (·|st )
                                     (k)         (k) (k)    (k)         (k) (k)
 5:       Rollout dynamics model rt = R̂(·|st , at ), st+1 ∼ T̂θ (·|st , at )
                                         (k)
 6:       Compute model uncertainty ut according to Eq. 3
                           (k)      (k)
 7:       R(k) = R(k) + rt + αut
 8: Select k ∗ = arg maxk=1,...,K R(k)
                (k∗ )
 9: return a0

Although in Algorithm 1 model uncertainty u is implemented through model disagreement, our
proposed UP-MPC is a generic framework, any method for calculating intrinsic rewards to encourage
exploration can be embedded into our framework for computing u. In Appendix D.5 we provide an
ablation study of uncertainty estimation methods to further illustrate this point.

3.2    C ONSERVATIVE MODEL ROLLOUTS

In model-based RL, due to the limited samples available for model learning, model prediction errors
are inevitable. If a policy is trained using model-generated samples with a large error, these samples
will not provide correct gradient and may mislead the policy update. Previous methods estimate the
model uncertainty of each sample after generation and re-weight or discarded samples with high
uncertainty. However, re-weighting samples based on uncertainty still leads to samples with high
uncertainty participating in the policy learning process, while filtering requires manually setting
an uncertainty threshold, and determining the optimal threshold is difficult. Discarding too many
samples can result in inefficient rollouts.
We apply our Planner to plan for maximizing the future reward while minimizing the model uncer-
tainty during model rollouts before executing the action. After calculating the reward and model
uncertainty for the Hp -step trajectories of K action candidates (line 5 and 6 in Algorithm 1), we
replace α = −αc , for a positive αc > 0 at line 7 in Algorithm 1. Mathematically, we select the action
according to Eq. 4 to interact with the model for model rollouts:
                h             PHp                         PHp                      i
a = argmaxat ∈at r(st , at ) + i=1 r(ŝt+i , π(ŝt+i ))−αc i=1 u(ŝt+i , π(ŝt+i )) , ŝt+i ∼ T̂ (·|ŝt+i−1 , at+i−1 ).
                                                                                                  (4)
The negative −αc is a coefficient that adds the model uncertainty as a penalty term to the trajectory
total reward. By employing this approach, we can prevent model rollout trajectories from falling into
model-uncertain regions while obtaining samples with higher rewards.

3.3    O PTIMISTIC ENVIRONMENT EXPLORATION

In addition to model rollouts, another crucial part of MBRL is interacting with the real environment
to obtain samples to improve the dynamics model. Since the main purpose of MBRL is to improve


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sample efficiency, we should acquire more meaningful samples for improving the dynamics model
within a limited number of interactions. Therefore, unlike previous methods that merely aimed to
thoroughly explore the environment to obtain a comprehensive model (Shyam et al., 2019; Ratzlaff
et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020), we do not expect the dynamics model to learn all samples in the state
space. This is because many low-reward samples do not contribute to policy improvement. Instead,
we hope to obtain samples with both high rewards and high model uncertainty to sufficiently expand
the model and reduce model uncertainty.
Similar to model rollouts, we also employ our Planner in the process of selecting actions when
interacting with the environment. However, the difference lies in that we replace α = αo , for a
positive αo > 0 at line 7 in Algorithm 1. Mathematically, we choose the action with both high
cumulative rewards and model uncertainty according to Eq. 5, which is a symmetric form of Eq. 4.
αo is a hyperparameter to balance the reward and exploration. Such an action can guide the trajectory
towards regions with high rewards and model uncertainty in the real environment, thereby effectively
expanding the learned dynamics model.
                h             PHp                         PHp                      i
a = argmaxat ∈at r(st , at ) + i=1 r(ŝt+i , π(ŝt+i ))+αo i=1 u(ŝt+i , π(ŝt+i )) , ŝt+i ∼ T̂ (·|ŝt+i−1 , at+i−1 )
                                                                                                                  (5)
In summary, by simultaneously using conservative model rollouts and optimistic environment explo-
ration, COPlanner effectively alleviates the model error problem in MBRL. As we will show in
Section 5, this is of great help in improving the sample efficiency and performance. The pseudocode
of COPlanner is shown in Algorithm 2, and a more detailed figure is shown in Appendix A. Very
importantly, COPlanner achieves both conservative model rollouts and optimistic environment ex-
ploration using a single policy. Different from prior exploration methods, the policy that COPlanner
learns does not have to be an “exploration” policy which is inevitably suboptimal.
Algorithm 2 Main Algorithm: COPlanner
Require: Interaction epochs I, rollout horizon Hr , planning horizon Hp , number of candidates
    actions K, conservative rate αc , optimistic rate αo
 1: Initialize policy πϕ , dynamics model T̂ , real sample buffer De , model sample buffer Dm
 2: for I epochs do
 3:    while not Done do
 4:       Select action at = UP-MPC πϕ , st , T̂θ , K, Hp , αo
 5:       Execute in real environment, add (st , at , rt , st+1 ) to De
 6:       Train dynamics model T̂θ with De
 7:       for M model rollouts do
 8:          Sample initial states from real sample buffer De
 9:          for h = 0 to Hr do
10:            Select action ât+h = UP-MPC πϕ , ŝh , T̂θ , K, Hp , −αc
11:            Rollout learned dynamics model and add to Dm
12:       Update current policy πϕ with Dm

4    R ELATED WORK
Mitigating model error by improving rollout strategies. Prior methods primarily focus on using
dynamics model ensembles (Kurutach et al.; Chua et al., 2018) to assess model uncertainty of samples
after they were generated by the model, and then apply weighting techniques (Buckman et al., 2018;
Yao et al., 2021), penalties (Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020) or filtering (Pan et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2022) to those high uncertainty samples to mitigate the influence of model error. These methods
only quantify uncertainty after generating the samples and since their uncertainty metrics are based on
the current step and are myopic, these metrics can not evaluate the potential influence of the current
sample on future trajectories. Therefore, they fail to prevent the trajectories, which is generated
through model rollout on the current policy, from entering high uncertainty regions, eventually leading
to a failed policy update. Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2022) proposed Plan to Predict (P2P), which reverses
the roles of the model and policy during model learning to learn an uncertainty-foreseeing model,
aiming to avoid model uncertain regions during model rollouts. Combined with MPC, their method
achieved promising results. However, their approach lacks effective exploration of the environment.
Branched rollout (Janner et al., 2019) and bidirectional rollout (Lai et al., 2020) take advantage of


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


small model errors in the early stages of rollouts and uses shorter rollout horizons to avoid model
errors, but these approaches limit the planning capabilities of the learned dynamics model. Besides,
different model learning objectives (Shen et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023;
Zheng et al., 2023b) are designed to solve objective mismatch (Lambert et al., 2020) in model-based
RL and further mitigate model error during model rollouts.
Reducing model error by improving environment exploration. Another approach to mitigate
model error is to expand the dynamics model by obtaining more diverse samples through exploration
during interactions with the environment. However, previous methods mostly focused on pure
exploration, i.e., how to make the dynamics model learn more comprehensively (Lowrey et al., 2018;
Shyam et al., 2019; Ratzlaff et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020; Seyde et al., 2020; Ball et al., 2020;
Mendonca et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023). In complex environments, thoroughly exploring the entire
environment is very sample-inefficient and not practical in real-world applications. Moreover, using
pure exploration to expand the model may lead to the discovery of many low-reward samples, which
are not very useful for policy learning. Mendonca et al. (Mendonca et al., 2021) proposed Latent
Explorer Achiever (LEXA) which involves a explorer for exploring the environment and one achiever
for solving diverse tasks based on collected samples, but the explorer and achiever may experience
policy distribution shift under specific single-task settings, causing the achiever to potentially not
converge to the optimal solution.
Mitigating model error from both sides. One most relevant work is Model-Ensemble Exploration
and Exploitation (MEEE) (Yao et al., 2021) which simultaneously expands the dynamics model and
reduces the impact of model error during model rollouts. During the rollout process, it uses uncertainty
to weight the loss calculated for each sample to update the policy and the critic. Before interacting
with the environment, they first generate k action candidates and then select the action with the
highest sum of Q-value and one-step model uncertainty to execute. However, as we mentioned earlier,
weighting samples cannot fundamentally prevent the impact of model errors on policy learning, and
it may still mislead policy updates. Moreover, since the one-step prediction error of dynamics models
is often small (Pan et al., 2020), relying only on the sum of Q-values and one-step model uncertainty
may not effectively differentiate action candidates. As a result, samples collected during interactions
with the environment might not efficiently expand the model.

5     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we conduct experiments to investigate following questions: (a) Can COPlanner
be applied to both proprioceptive control MBRL and visual control MBRL methods, to improve
their sample efficiency and asymptotic performance? (b) How does each component of COPlanner
impact the performance? (c) How does COPlanner influence model learning and model rollouts?

5.1   E XPERIMENT ON PROPRIOCEPTIVE CONTROL TASKS

Baselines: In this section, we conduct experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of COPlanner
on proprioceptive control MBRL methods. We combine COPlanner with MBPO (Janner et al.,
2019), the most classic method in proprioceptive control dyna-style MBRL, and we name the
combined method as COPlanner-MBPO. The implementation details can be found in Appendix B.
Consequently, MBPO naturally becomes one of our baselines. The other three baselines are P2P-
MPC (Wu et al., 2022), MEEE (Yao et al., 2021), and M2AC (Pan et al., 2020). These three methods
also aim to mitigate the impact of model errors in model-based RL. We choose one of the most
popular model-free RL mtheod D4PG (Barth-Maron et al., 2018) as another baseline. More details
of P2P-MPC, MEEE, and M2AC can be found in Section 4. We also provide comparison with more
proprioceptive control MBRL methods in Appendix D.1.
Environment and hyperparameter settings: We conduct experiments on 8 proprioceptive continu-
ous control tasks of DeepMind Control (DMC) and 4 proprioceptive control tasks of MuJoCo-GYM
(GYM). MBPO trains an ensemble of 7 networks as the dynamics model while using the Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) as the policy network. In COPlanner-MBPO, we adopt the setting of MBPO
and directly use the dynamics model ensemble to calculate model uncertainty for action selection
in Policy-Guided MPC. For hyperparameter setting, we set optimistic rate αo to be 1, conservative
rate αc to be 2 in all tasks, and set action candidate number K, planning horizon Hp equal to 5 in all
tasks. The specific setting are shown in the Appendix C.1.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Experiment results of COPlanner-MBPO and other five baselines on proprioceptive control
environments. The curves in the first eight figures originate from DM Control tasks, while those in
the last four are from GYM tasks. The results are averaged over 8 random seeds, and shaded regions
correspond to the 95% confidence interval among seeds. During evaluation, for each seed of each
method, we test for up to 1000 steps in the test environment and perform 10 evaluations to obtain an
average value. The evaluation interval is every 1000 environment steps.
COPlanner significantly improves the sample efficiency and performance of MBPO: Through
the results in Figure 4 we can find that both sample efficiency and performance of MBPO have a
significant improvement after combining COPlanner. (a) Sample efficiency: In proprioceptive
control DMC, the sample efficiency is improved by 40% on average compared to MBPO. For
example, in the Walker-walk task, MBPO requires 100k steps for the performance to reach 700,
while COPlanner-MBPO only needs approximately 60k steps. In more complex GYM tasks, the
improvement brought by COPlanner is even more significant. Compared to MBPO, the sample
efficiency of COPlanner-MBPO has almost doubled. (b) Performance: From the performance
perspective, as shown in Figure 1, the performance of MBPO has improved by 16.9% after combining
COPlanner. Moreover, it is worth noting that our method successfully solves the Walker-run task,
which MBPO fails to address, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed framework. In
GYM tasks, the average performance at convergence has increased by 32.8%. Besides, COPlanner-
MBPO also outperforms other baselines.

5.2   E XPERIMENT ON VISUAL CONTROL TASKS

Baselines: We conduct experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework on
visual control environments. We integrate our algorithm with DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023), the
state-of-the-art Dyna-style model-based RL approach recently introduced for visual control. The
implementation details can be found in Appendix B. We choose LEXA (Mendonca et al., 2021) as
our another baseline. LEXA uses Plan2Explore (Sekar et al., 2020) as intrinsic reward to explore
the environment and learn a world model, then using this model to train a policy to solve diverse
tasks such as goal achieving. Since pure exploration base on Plan2Explore is sample inefficient
for model learning when solving specific tasks, we use the real reward provided by environment as
extrinsic reward and add it to intrinsic reward provided by Plan2Explore to train the explorer. We
adopt this method on DreamerV3 and call it LEXA-reward-DreamerV3. Besides, we compare our
method with the SOTA model-free visual RL method DrQV2 (Yarats et al., 2021). We also provide
comparison with more visual control MFRL and MBRL methods in Appendix D.2.
Environment and hyperparameter settings: We use 8 visual control tasks of DMC as our en-
vironment. In COPlanner-DreamerV3, we learn a latent one-step prediction dynamics model as
Plan2Explore (Sekar et al., 2020), the ensemble size is 8. We set action candidate number K and
planning horizon Hp equal to 4 in all tasks. For optimistic rate αo and conservative rate αc , we set
them to be 1 and 0.5, respectively. Other hyperparameters remain consistent with DreamerV3 paper.
COPlanner significantly improves the sample efficiency and performance of DreamerV3:
From the experiment results in Figure 5, we observe that COPlanner-DreamerV3 improves the


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Experiment results of COPlanner-Dreamerv3 and other three baselines on pixel-input DMC.
The results are averaged over 8 random seeds, and shaded regions correspond to the 95% confidence
interval among seeds. During evaluation, for each seed of each method, we test for up to 1000 steps
in the test environment and perform 10 evaluations to obtain an average value. The evaluation interval
is every 1000 environment steps.
sample efficiency and performance significantly over DreamerV3, and it demonstrated a significant
advantage over DrQv2. The sample efficiency of COPlanner-DreamerV3 is more than twice that of
DreamerV3, and the performance is improved by 9.6%. After adding real reward as extrinsic reward
for explorer learning, LEXA-reward-DreamerV3 delivers performance comparable to DreamerV3
in most environments. It outperforms DreamerV3 in Cartpole-swingup-sparse and Hopper-stand.
However, its performance and sample efficiency are still worse than COPlanner-DreamerV3, further
indicates the effectiveness of COPlanner.

5.3   A BLATION STUDY

In this section, we aim to investigate the impact of different components within COPlanner on
the sample efficiency and performance. We conduct experiments on two proprioceptive control
DMC tasks (Walker-stand and Walker-run) using MBPO as baseline and two visual control DMC
tasks (Hopper-hop and Cartpole-swingup-sparse) with DreamerV3 as baseline. The results are
demonstrated in Figure 6. Due to page limitations, we provide the ablation study on various
hyperparameters of COPlanner in Appendix D.4 and the ablation study of uncertainty estimation
methods in Appendix D.5.
From this ablation study, we can see that effectively combining optimistic exploration and
conservative rollouts is necessary to achieve the best results. We find that when only using
optimistic exploration (COPlanner w. Explore only), the sample efficiency and performance in all
tasks are significantly improved, which highlights the importance of expanding the model. When
only using conservative rollouts (COPlanner w. Rollout only), there is some improvement in sample
efficiency and performance but to a lesser extent. In more complex visual control tasks, only using
conservative rollouts may lead to over-conservatism, resulting in an inability to learn an effective
policy in sparse reward environments (as observed with a broken seed in Cartpole-swingup-sparse) or
a decrease in sample efficiency during the early stages of learning (Hopper-hop). This is reasonable
because conservative rollouts may avoid high uncertainty and high reward areas to ensure the stability
of policy updates. Moreover, without efficiently expanding the model, it is challenging to find better
solutions using only conservative rollouts in complex visual control tasks. Experimental results show
that both optimistic exploration and conservative rollouts are crucial, and using either one individually
can lead to an improvement in performance. When combining the two (as in COPlanner), we can
achieve the best results, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.

5.4   M ODEL ERROR AND ROLLOUT UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS

In this section, we will investigate the impact of COPlanner on model learning and model roll-
outs. We provide the curves of how model prediction error and rollout uncertainty change as the
environment step increases in Figure 7. We conduct experiments on two proprioceptive control
DMC tasks (Cheetah-run and Walker-run) and two visual control DMC tasks (Hopper-hop and
Cartpole-swingup-sparse).


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Ablation studies of optimistic exploration and conservative rollouts on different tasks using
different mbrl baselines. In the first two proprioceptive control tasks we use MBPO as baseline. For
the last two visual control tasks we employ DreamerV3. The results are averaged over 8 random
seeds. We can observe that the best results are achieved when combining optimistic exploration and
conservative rollouts. The benefit is more pronounced in more-challenging visual tasks.


Figure 7: Model learning loss and rollout uncertainty curves for COPlanner and two other model-
based RL baselines. The left four are proprioceptive control DMC tasks, and the right four are visual
control DMC tasks.

(1) In proprioceptive control DMC, we use the MSE loss between model prediction and ground
truth next state to evaluate model prediction error during training, while in visual control DMC, we
use the KL divergence between the latent dynamics prediction and the next stochastic representa-
tion to compute latent model prediction error. We observe that after integrating COPlanner in
proprioceptive control tasks, the model prediction error is significantly reduced. In more complex
visual control tasks, due to obtaining more diverse samples through exploration in the early stages
of training, the model prediction error of COPlanner is higher than the baseline (DreamerV3).
However, as training progresses, the model prediction error rapidly decreases, becoming significantly
lower than the model prediction error of DreamerV3. This allows the model to fully learn from
the diverse samples, leading to an improvement in policy performance. (2) For the evaluation of
rollouts uncertainty, we calculate the model disagreement for each sample in the model-generated
replay buffer used for policy training using dynamics model ensemble. We find that COPlanner
significantly reduces rollout uncertainty due to conservative rollouts, suggesting that the impact of
model errors on policy learning is minimized. This experiment further demonstrates that the success
of COPlanner is attributed to both optimistic exploration and conservative rollouts.


6   C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

We investigate how to effectively address the inaccurate learned dynamics model problem in MBRL.
We propose COPlanner, a general framework that can be applied to any dyna-style MBRL method.
COPlanner utilizes Uncertainty-aware Policy-Guided MPC phase to predict the cumulative uncer-
tainty of future steps and symmetrically uses this uncertainty as a penalty or bonus to select actions
for conservative model rollouts or optimistic environment exploration. In this way, COPlanner can
avoid model uncertain areas before model rollouts to minimize the impact of model error, while also
exploring high-reward model-uncertain areas in the environment to expand the model and reduce
model error. Experiments on a range of continuous control tasks demonstrates the effectiveness
of our method. One drawback of COPlanner is that MPC can lead to additional computational
time and we provide a detailed computational time consumption in Appendix D.6. We can improve
computational efficiency by parallelizing planning, which we leave for future work.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Wang, Zheng, and Huang are supported by National Science Foundation NSF-IIS-2147276 FAI,
DOD-ONR-Office of Naval Research under award number N00014-22-1-2335, DOD-AFOSR-Air
Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-23-1-0048, DOD-DARPA-Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency Guaranteeing AI Robustness against Deception (GARD)
HR00112020007, Adobe, Capital One and JP Morgan faculty fellowships.

R EFERENCES
Philip Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen Roberts.
  Ready policy one: World building through active learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 591–601. PMLR, 2020.
Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matthew W Hoffman, David Budden, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Dhruva Tb,
  Alistair Muldal, Nicolas Heess, and Timothy Lillicrap. Distributed distributional deterministic
  policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08617, 2018.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-efficient
  reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
 search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-11),
 pages 465–472, 2011.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Alexander Khazatsky, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Mismatched
  no more: Joint model-policy optimization for model-based rl. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:23230–23243, 2022.
Carlos E Garcia, David M Prett, and Manfred Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and
  practice—a survey. Automatica, 25(3):335–348, 1989.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019a.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on
  machine learning, pages 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019b.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
  world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
  control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04955, 2022.
Edward S Hu, Richard Chang, Oleh Rybkin, and Dinesh Jayaraman. Planning goals for exploration.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13002, 2023.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  21810–21823, 2020.
Thanard Kurutach, Ignasi Clavera, Yan Duan, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Model-ensemble
  trust-region policy optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Hang Lai, Jian Shen, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. Bidirectional model-based policy optimization.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5618–5627. PMLR, 2020.
Nathan Lambert, Brandon Amos, Omry Yadan, and Roberto Calandra. Objective mismatch in
  model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04523, 2020.
Kendall Lowrey, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, Emanuel Todorov, and Igor Mordatch. Plan
  online, learn offline: Efficient learning and exploration via model-based control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.01848, 2018.
Arjun Majumdar, Karmesh Yadav, Sergio Arnaud, Yecheng Jason Ma, Claire Chen, Sneha Silwal,
  Aryan Jain, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Tingfan Wu, Jay Vakil, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, Dhruv
  Batra, Yixin Lin, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Franziska Meier. Where are
  we in the search for an artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence? In Thirty-seventh
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=6qLzQeFGio.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discovering
  and achieving goals via world models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  24379–24391, 2021.
Andrew S Morgan, Daljeet Nandha, Georgia Chalvatzaki, Carlo D’Eramo, Aaron M Dollar, and Jan
  Peters. Model predictive actor-critic: Accelerating robot skill acquisition with deep reinforcement
  learning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
  6672–6678. IEEE, 2021.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tGbpgz6yOrI.
Feiyang Pan, Jia He, Dandan Tu, and Qing He. Trust the model when it is confident: Masked
  model-based actor-critic. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:10537–10546,
  2020.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International conference on machine learning, pages 5062–5071. PMLR, 2019.
S Joe Qin and Thomas A Badgwell. A survey of industrial model predictive control technology.
  Control engineering practice, 11(7):733–764, 2003.
Anil V Rao. A survey of numerical methods for optimal control. Advances in the Astronautical
 Sciences, 135(1):497–528, 2009.
Neale Ratzlaff, Qinxun Bai, Li Fuxin, and Wei Xu. Implicit generative modeling for efficient
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7985–7995. PMLR, 2020.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Younggyo Seo, Lili Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. State entropy
  maximization with random encoders for efficient exploration. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 9443–9454. PMLR, 2021.
Tim Seyde, Wilko Schwarting, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Learning to plan optimistically:
  Uncertainty-guided deep exploration via latent model ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14641,
  2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jian Shen, Han Zhao, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. Model-based policy optimization with unsu-
   pervised model adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2823–2834,
   2020.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International conference on machine learning, pages 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019.
Tingwu Wang and Jimmy Ba. Exploring model-based planning with policy networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.08649, 2019.
Xiyao Wang, Wichayaporn Wongkamjan, Ruonan Jia, and Furong Huang. Live in the moment:
  Learning dynamics model adapted to evolving policy. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning. PMLR, 2023.
Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang, Qi Zhou, Bin Li, and Houqiang Li. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning
  via conservative model-based actor-critic. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 36, pages 8612–8620, 2022.
Zifan Wu, Chao Yu, Chen Chen, Jianye Hao, and Hankz Hankui Zhuo. Plan to predict: Learning
  an uncertainty-foreseeing model for model-based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:15849–15861, 2022.
Guowei Xu, Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Xiyao Wang, Tianying Ji Zhecheng Yuan, Yu Luo,
 Xiaoyu Liu, Jiaxin Yuan, Pu Hua, Shuzhen Li, Yanjie Ze, Hal Daumé III, Furong Huang, and
  Huazhe Xu. Drm: Mastering visual reinforcement learning through dormant ratio minimization.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=MSe8YFbhUE.
Yao Yao, Li Xiao, Zhicheng An, Wanpeng Zhang, and Dijun Luo. Sample efficient reinforcement
  learning via model-ensemble exploration and exploitation. In 2021 IEEE International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4202–4208. IEEE, 2021.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous control:
  Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09645, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:14129–14142, 2020.
Tianjun Zhang, Paria Rashidinejad, Jiantao Jiao, Yuandong Tian, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Stuart
  Russell. Made: Exploration via maximizing deviation from explored regions. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:9663–9680, 2021.
Ruijie Zheng, Xiyao Wang, Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Jieyu Zhao, Huazhe Xu, Hal Daumé III, and
  Furong Huang. TACO: Temporal latent action-driven contrastive loss for visual reinforcement
  learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=ezCsMOy1w9.
Ruijie Zheng, Xiyao Wang, Huazhe Xu, and Furong Huang. Is model ensemble necessary? model-
  based rl via a single model with lipschitz regularized value function. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Xiyao Wang, Shuang Ma, Hal Daumé III, Huazhe Xu, John Langford,
  Praveen Palanisamy, Kalyan Shankar Basu, and Furong Huang. Premier-taco: Pretraining multitask
  representation via temporal action-driven contrastive loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06187, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Appendix
A     D ETAILED FIGURE OF COP L A N N E R
We present a more detailed figure to illustrate our COPlanner framework. During environment
exploration, we first choose an action using UP-MPC with multi-step uncertainty bonus, then interact
with the real environment to obtain real samples for dynamics model learning. In dynamics model
rollouts, at each rollout step, we select the actions using UP-MPC with multi-step uncertainty penalty
to avoid model uncertain regions and interact with the learned dynamics model to get model-generated
samples to update the policy.


            Figure 8: Figure illustration of COPlanner framework with more details.


B     I MPLEMENTATION
COPlanner framework is versatile and applicable to any dyna-style MBRL algorithm. In this
section, we are going to introduce the implementation of two algorithms we used for experiment
in Section 5: COPlanner-MBPO for proprioceptive control and COPlanner-DreamerV3 for visual
control.

B.1   COP LANNER -MBPO

MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) trains an ensemble of probabilistic neural networks (Chua et al., 2018) as
dynamics model. It utilises negative log-likelihood loss to update each network in the ensemble:
                                       ⊤ b −1
         PN       b
L(θ) =      n=1 [µθ (sn , an ) − sn+1 ] Σθ    (sn , an )[µbθ (sn , an ) − sn+1 ] + log det Σbθ (sn , an )
                                                                                         (6)
For the policy component, MBPO adopts soft actor-critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018). We combine
COPlanner with MBPO, the pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 3.

B.2   COP LANNER -D REAMERV3

DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023) is a dyna-style MBRL method that solves long-horizon tasks from
visual inputs purely by latent imagination. Its world model consists of an image encoder, a Recurrent


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 COPlanner-MBPO
Require: interaction epochs I, rollout horizon Hr , planning horizon Hp , number of candidates
    actions K, conservative rate αc , optimistic rate αo
 1: Initialize policy πϕ , dynamics model ensemble T̂θ = {T̂θ1 , ..., T̂θi }, real sample buffer De , model
    sample buffer Dm
 2: for I epochs do
 3:    for t = 1 to T do
 4:       // Optimistic environment exploration
 5:       Select action with optimistic rate at = UP-MPC πϕ , st , T̂θ , K, Hp , αo
 6:       Interact with the real environment with at , add real sample (st , at , rt , st+1 ) to real sample
          buffer De
 7:       Train dynamics model T̂θ via Equation 6
 8:       for M model rollouts do
 9:          Sample initial rollout states from real sample buffer De
10:          for h = 0 to Hr − 1 do
11:             // Conservative model rollouts
12:             âh = UP-MPC πϕ , ŝh , T̂θ , K, Hp , −αc (Select action with conservative rate), roll-
                out learned dynamics model and add to model sample buffer Dm
13:       for G gradient updates do
14:          Update current policy πϕ using model-generated samples from model sample buffer Dm



State-Space Model (RSSM) (Hafner et al., 2019b) to learn the dynamics, and predictors for the image,
reward, and discount factor. The world model components are:

                         Recurrent model:                ht = fϕ (ht−1 , zt−1 , at−1 )
                         Representation model:           zt ∼ qϕ (zt |ht , xt )
                         Transition predictor:           ẑt ∼ pϕ (ẑt |ht )
                         Image predictor:                x̂t ∼ pϕ (x̂t |ht , zt )
                         Reward predictor:               r̂t ∼ pϕ (r̂t |ht , zt )
                         Discount predictor:             γ̂t ∼ pϕ (γ̂t |ht , zt )

where the recurrent model, the representation model, and the transition predictor are components of
RSSM. The loss function for the world model learning is:


                                        T
                                        X
        L(ϕ) = Eqϕ (z1:T |a1:T ,x1:T ) [ (−lnpϕ (xt |ht , zt ) − lnpϕ (rt |ht , zt ) − lnpϕ (γt |ht , zt )
                                       t=1                                                                   (7)
                                             + β1 max(1, KL[sg(qϕ (zt |ht , xt ))||pϕ (zt |ht )])
                                             + β2 max(1, KL[qϕ (zt |ht , xt )||sg(pϕ (zt |ht ))]))],

where sg means stop gradient. Besides, DreamerV3 also use actor-critic framework as their policy.
In particular, they leverage a stochastic actor that chooses actions and a deterministic critic. The
actor and critic are trained cooperatively. The actor goal is to output actions leading to states that
maximize the critic output, while the critic aims to accurately estimate the sum of future rewards that
the actor can achieve from each imagined state (or model rollout state). For more training details
about DreamerV3, please refer to their original paper (Hafner et al., 2023).
To estimate model uncertainty in COPlanner-DreamerV3, we train an ensemble of one-step predictive
models T̂θ = {T̂θ1 , ..., T̂θi }, each of these models takes a latent stochastic state zt and action at as
input and predicts the next latent deterministic recurrent states ht . The ensemble is trained using
MSE loss. During model rollouts, we use the world model to generate trajectories, and the one-step
model ensemble to evaluate the uncertainty of sample at each rollout step. Here we provide the
pseudocode of COPlanner-DreamerV3 in Algorithm 4.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 COPlanner-DreamerV3
Require: Rollout horizon Hr , planning horizon Hp , number of candidates actions K, conservative
    rate αc , optimistic rate αo
 1: Initialize real sample buffer De with S random seed episodes.
 2: Initialize policy πψ , critic vξ , one-step model ensemble T̂θ = {T̂θ1 , ..., T̂θi }, world model parame-
    ter ϕ
 3: while not converged do
 4:    for update step c = 1..C do
 5:       Draw B data sequences {(at , xt , rt )}k+L  t=k ∼ De
 6:       Compute a latent stochastic states zt ∼ qϕ (zt |ht , xt )
 7:       Update world model parameter ϕ via Equation 7
 8:       // Conservative model rollouts
 9:       Imagine      trajectories       {(zτ , a τ )}t+H
                                                       τ =t
                                                            r
                                                              from     each       zt       with   aτ       =
          UP-MPC πψ , zτ , T̂θ , K, Hp , −αc .
10:       Update vξ and πψ using imagined trajectories.
11:    for time step t = 1..T do
12:       Compute zt ∼ qϕ (zt |ht , xt )
13:       // Optimistic environment exploration
14:       Select action at = UP-MPC πψ , zt , T̂θ , K, Hp , αo .
15:       Interact with the real environment and obatin (xt , at , rt , xt + 1)
16:    Add experience to De ← De ∪ {(xt , at , rt , xt + 1)}Tt=1


C     H YPERPARAMETERS
In this section, we provide the specific parameters used in each task in our experiments.

         Table 1: Hyperparameters of COPlanner-MBPO on proprioceptive control DMC.

                      Parameter                          Value
                      Conservative rate αc               2
                      Optimistic rate αo                 1
                      Action candidate number K          5
                      Planning horizon Hp                5
                      Real ratio                         0.5 Reacher-xx
                                                         0.8 Finger-spin
                                                         0 Others
                      Rollout horizon Hr                 [20, 150, 1, 1] Finger-spin
                                                         [20, 150, 1, 4] Others


C.1    P ROPRIOCEPTIVE CONTROL DMC AND M U J O C O

We use COPlanner-MBPO in all proprioceptive control tasks. For the dynamics model ensemble, we
adopted the same setup as MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) original paper, with an ensemble size of 7 and
an elite number of 5, which means each time we select the best five out of seven neural networks
for model rollouts. Each network in the ensemble is MLP with 4 hidden layers of size 200, using
ReLU as the activation function. We train the dynamics model every 250 interaction steps with the
environment. The actor and critic structures are both MLP with 4 hidden layers. In proprioceptive
control DMC, the hidden layer size of actor and critic is 512, and updated 10 times each environment
step, while in MuJoCo the hidden layer size is 256, and they are updated 20 times each environment
step. The batch size for model training and policy training is both 256. The learning rate for model
training is 1e-3, while the learning rate for policy training is 3e-4.
In MBPO, the authors use samples from both the real sample buffer and the model sample buffer to
train the policy, and the ratio of the two is referred to as the real ratio. In addition, MBPO has a unique


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mechanism for the rollout horizon Hr , which linearly increases with the increase of environment
epochs, with each environment epoch including 1000 environment steps. [a, b, x, y] denotes a
thresholded linear function, i.e. at epoch e, rollout horizon is h = min(max(x + e−a  b−a (y − x), x), y).
The settings for conservative rate αc , optimistic rate αo , action candidate number K, planning horizon
Hp and the above two parameters in different environments are provided in Table 1 and 2.

                    Table 2: Hyperparameters of COPlanner-MBPO on MuJoCo.

                      Parameter                         Value
                      Conservative rate αc              2
                      Optimistic rate αo                1
                      Action candidate number K         5
                      Planning horizon Hp               5
                      Real ratio                        0.05
                      Rollout horizon Hr                [20, 100, 1, 4] Hopper
                                                        1 Walker
                                                        [20, 150, 1, 15] Ant
                                                        [20, 300, 1, 15] Humanoid


C.2   V ISUAL CONTROL DMC

In Visual control DMC, we use the COPlanner-DreamerV3 method. We keep all parameters consistent
with the DreamerV3 original paper (Hafner et al., 2023), except for our newly introduced conservative
rate αc , optimistic rate αo , action candidate number K, and planning horizon Hp . In Table 3, we
provide the specific settings of conservative rate αc , optimistic rate αo , action candidate number
K, and planning horizon Hp for each task. It’s worth noting that, although using a conservative
rate of 0.5 can perform well, we find that for the two tasks in Quadruped, using a conservative rate
of 2 yields the best sample efficiency and performance. For other parameters, please refer to the
original DreamerV3 paper. For the one-step predictive model ensemble, we use a model ensemble
with ensemble size of 8. Each network in the ensemble is MLP with 5 hidden layers of size 1024.

Table 3: Hyperparameters of COPlanner-DreamerV3 on visual control DMC. We keep all other
hyperparameters consistent with the DreamerV3 original paper.

                                  Parameter                       Value
                                  Conservative rate αc            0.5
                                  Optimistic rate αo              1
                                  Action candidate number K       4
                                  Planning horizon Hp             4


D     M ORE EXPERIMENTS
D.1    C OMPARISON WITH MORE PROPRIOCEPTIVE CONTROL MBRL METHODS

In this section, we compared our approach with more proprioceptive control MBRL methods on
MuJoCo tasks. In addition to the three baseline methods from Section 5.1, MBPO (Janner et al.,
2019), P2P-MPC (Wu et al., 2022), and MEEE (Yao et al., 2021), we introduced two more baselines:
PDML (Wang et al., 2023), a method that dynamically adjusts the weights of each sample in the real
sample buffer to enhance the prediction accuracy of the learned dynamics model for the current policy,
thereby significantly improving the performance of MBPO. And MoPAC (Morgan et al., 2021), a
method that also uses policy-guided MPC to reduce model bias. Unlike our approach, MoPAC’s
policy-guided MPC is solely used for multi-step prediction during rollout based on total reward to


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


select actions. It does not incorporate a measure of model uncertainty, and therefore, cannot achieve
the optimistic exploration and conservative rollouts of COPlanner. The experiment results are shown
in Table 4.
As can be seen from Table 4, our method still holds a significant advantage, achieving the best
performance in three tasks (Hopper, Walker2d, and Ant). In Humanoid task, it is only surpassed by
PDML but is substantially better than the other methods. It’s worth mentioning that our approach is
orthogonal to PDML, and they can be combined. We believe that by integrating COPlanner with
PDML, the performance can be further enhanced.

Table 4: Comparison of different MBRL methods on proprioceptive control MuJoCo tasks. Perfor-
mance is averaged over 8 random seeds.

                    Hopper (70k)     Walker2d (150k)        Ant (150k)       Humanoid (150k)
        Ours      3360.3 ± 165.0      4595.3 ± 350.2      5268.3 ± 291.4      4833.7 ± 320.1
       PDML       3274.2 ± 224.1      4378.5 ± 248.9      4992.5 ± 365.1      5396.7 ± 391.3
       MBPO       2844.6 ± 158.0      4221.1 ± 281.1      2311.1 ± 252.5      1706.0 ± 976.3
      P2P-MPC     2316.8 ± 459.9      4151.7 ± 516.9      4681.7 ± 591.6     3706.1 ± 1360.4
       MEEE       3076.4 ± 165.3      3873.8 ± 549.6      3932.8 ± 352.7       654.2 ± 94.7
       MoPAC      3174.2 ± 233.8      2893.6 ± 472.6      4382.5 ± 301.7      1084.6 ± 573.2

Besides, we also conduct comparisons with DreamerV3 and D4PG on six medium-difficulty proprio-
ceptive control DMC tasks, with the experimental results shown in the Figure 9. We find that after
integrating with COPlanner, both sample efficiency and performance of DreamerV3 are improved
significantly.


Figure 9: Experiment results of COPlanner-DreamerV3 on 6 medium-difficulty proprioceptive control
DMC tasks. The results are averaged over 8 random seeds, and shaded regions correspond to the
95% confidence interval among seeds.


D.2   C OMPARISON WITH MORE VISUAL CONTROL METHODS

In this section, we conducted comparisons with more MFRL and MBRL methods for visual control
on 8 tasks from visual DMC. In addition to DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023) and LEXA-reward-
DreamerV3 (LEXA-RW), we introduced five more baselines. The first is TDMPC (Hansen et al.,
2022). TDMPC learns a task-oriented latent dynamics model and uses this model for planning.
During the planning process, TDMPC also learns a policy to sample a small number of actions,
thereby accelerating MPC. The second is PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019b). PlaNet uses the RSSM latent
model, which is the same as the Dreamer series (Hafner et al., 2019a; 2020; 2023), and directly uses


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this model to perform MPC in the latent space to select actions. Additionally, we also include three
more model-free visual RL baselines: TACO (Zheng et al., 2023a), DrM (Xu et al., 2024) and DrQ-v2
(Yarats et al., 2021). The experiment results are shown in Table 5. From the results, it is evident that
our method has a significant advantage over all the baselines. In future work, as the representation
in COPlanner is learned from scratch, we will also integrat pretrained visual representations such
as Zheng et al. (2024); Majumdar et al. (2023); Nair et al. (2022) into the COPlanner algorithm
framework to accelerate the learning process.

Table 5: Performance comparison of different MBRL and MFRL methods on visual DMC tasks at 1
million environment steps.

                   Hopper-stand              Hopper-hop             Quadruped-walk       Quadruped-run
     Ours           937.8 ± 9.7             444.2 ± 113.2            803.9 ± 59.3         787.9 ± 111.9
 DreamerV3         888.5 ± 60.7             395.3 ± 50.1              749.2 ± 65.3        696.0 ± 132.2
 LEXA-RW           905.7 ± 25.1             353.0 ± 33.8             591.0 ± 110.9        549.5 ± 186.2
   TDMPC           821.6 ±70.8              189.2 ± 19.7              427.8 ± 50.2         393.8 ± 40.9
 PlaNet (5m)           5.96                      0.37                    238.90               280.45
    TACO             923 ± 22                 261 ± 52                  798 ± 15             531 ± 38
     DrM             910 ± 15                 162 ± 82                  750 ± 29             452 ± 32
   DrQ-v2            918 ± 12                 192 ± 41                  702 ± 42             407 ± 21
                 Acrobot-swingup       Cartpole-swingup-sparse      Finger-turn-easy     Finger-turn-hard
     Ours          434.4 ± 31.0             787.5 ± 37.5              889.8 ± 28.3         867.1 ± 50.6
 DreamerV3         354.9 ± 37.9             814.7 ± 22.3              853.9 ± 37.5         751.3 ± 93.1
 LEXA-RW           337.7 ± 24.9             683.5 ± 145.6             825.5 ± 55.9        740.7 ± 162.0
   TDMPC           227.5 ± 16.9              668.3 ± 49.1             703.8 ± 65.2        402.7 ± 112.6
 PlaNet (5m)           3.21                      0.64                    451.22               312.55
    TACO             241 ± 21                  802 ± 21                 752 ± 45             618 ± 17
     DrM             228 ± 15                   799 ± 7                 692 ± 39             459 ± 36
   DrQ-v2            210 ± 12                  794 ± 14                 576 ± 42             248 ± 52


D.3    E XPERIMENTS COMBINED WITH D REAMERV2

We also combine COPlanner with DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2020) for experimentation, with the
results shown in Figure 10. After integrating with DreamerV2, our method also achieves a significant
improvement in both sample efficiency and performance.


Figure 10: Experiment results of COPlanner-DreamerV2 on 7 visual control DMC tasks. The results
are averaged over 4 random seeds, and shaded regions correspond to the 95% confidence interval
among seeds. During evaluation, for each seed of each method, we test for up to 1000 steps in the
test environment and perform 10 evaluations to obtain an average value. The evaluation interval is
every 1000 environment steps.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.4    H YPERPARAMETER STUDY


                           (a) COPlanner-MBPO on proprioceptive Walker-run


                           (b) COPlanner-MBPO on proprioceptive Cheetah-run


                         (c) COPlanner-DreamerV3 on proprioceptive Hopper-hop

Figure 11: Ablation studies of COPlanner’s different hyperparameters. Experiments are conducted
using COPlanner-MBPO on proprioceptive Walker-run and proprioceptive Cheetah-run, and using
COPlanner-DreamerV3 on proprioceptive Hopper-hop. The results are averaged over 4 random seeds.
From left to right, the results are for different parameters of optimistic rate αo , conservative rate αc ,
action candidate number K, and planning horizon Hp .

In this section, we conduct hyperparameter studies to investigate the impact of different hyperpa-
rameters on COPlanner. We perform experiments on the Walker-run and Cheetah-run task of
proprioceptive control DMC using COPlanner-MBPO, and on the Hopper-hop using COPlanner-
DreamerV3. The original hyperparameter settings are: optimistic rate αo is 1, conservative rate αc
is 2, action candidate number K is 5, and planning horizon Hp is 5. When conducting ablation
experiments for each hyperparameter, other parameters remain unchanged. The results are shown
together in Figure 11.
Optimistic rate αo : we observe that the best αo lies between 0.5 to 1. When the αo is too large,
COPlanner tends to excessively explore high uncertainty areas while neglecting rewards, leading
to a decrease in sample efficiency and performance. On the other hand, when the αo is too small,
COPlanner fails to achieve the desired exploration effect.
Conservative rate αc : the optimal range for the αc is between 1 and 2. A too large αc may lead to
overly conservative selection of low-reward actions, while a too small αc would be unable to make
model rollouts avoid model uncertain areas.
Action candidate number K: we find that K has a significant impact on sample efficiency and
performance. When K is set to 2, the improvement of COPlanner over MBPO in terms of
performance and sample efficiency is relatively limited. This is reasonable because if there are only
a few action candidates, our selection space is very limited, and even with the use of uncertainty
bonus and penalty to select actions, there may not be much difference. When K increases to more
than 5, the effect of COPlanner becomes very stable, and more candidates do not bring noticeable
improvements in performance and sample efficiency.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Planning horizon Hp : when Hp is 1, we find that COPlanner’s improvement on performance
and sample efficiency is relatively limited. This also confirms what we mentioned in Section 1:
only considering the current step while ignoring the long-term uncertainty impact cannot completely
avoid model errors, as samples with low current model uncertainty might still lead to future rollout
trajectories falling into model uncertain regions. As the planning horizon gradually increases,
performance and sample efficiency also rise. When the planning horizon is too long (Hp equals to 7
or 9), it is possible that due to the bottleneck of the model planning capability, most action candidates’
corresponding trajectories fall into model uncertain areas, leading to a slight decline in performance
and sample efficiency.


D.5    A BLATION STUDY OF MODEL UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION METHODS

We conduct an ablation study on the Hopper-hop task in visual control DMC to evaluate different
uncertainty estimation methods. We adopt two methods, RE3 (Seo et al., 2021) and MADE (Zhang
et al., 2021), which are used to estimate intrinsic rewards in pixel input, to replace the disagreement
in calculating u(s, a) in Equation 4 and 5. The results are shown in Figure 12. We find that the
performance achieved using these two methods is similar to that of disagreement. This demonstrate
that using disagreement to calculate uncertainty is not the primary reason for the observed performance
improvement.


               Figure 12: Ablation study of different uncertainty estimation methods.


D.6    C OMPUTATIONAL TIME CONSUMPTION OF COP L A N N E R

We provide a comparison of the computational time consumption between the baseline methods and
COPlanner across different domains in Table 6. All timings are reported using a single NVIDIA
2080ti GPU.

                               Table 6: Average time consumption (h).

                                         MuJoCo      Proprioceptive DMC        Visual DMC
             COPlanner-MBPO                41.2               11.3                 N/A
                  MBPO                    33.78               10.6                 N/A
            COPlanner-DreamerV3            N/A                N/A                  17.9
                DreamerV3                  N/A                N/A                  13.1



                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.7   D IVERSITY EVALUATION OF REAL SAMPLE BUFFER

In this section, to further demonstrate that our method achieves better exploration of the environment,
we evaluate the average state entropy of the real sample buffer obtained using our method and
DreamerV3 at 1 million environment steps. A higher average state entropy implies that the real
sample buffer covers more states in the real environment, indicating that the samples in the real
sample buffer are more diverse and thus suggesting more thorough exploration of the environment
(Seo et al., 2021). We conduct evaluations on four visual DMC tasks include Hopper-hop, Quadruped-
walk, Acrobot-swingup, and Finger-turn-hard. Following the work of RE3 (Seo et al., 2021), in
order to estimate state entropy in environments with high-dimensional observations, we utilize a
k-nearest neighbor entropy estimator in the low-dimensional representation space of a randomly
initialized encoder. Our encoder consists of three convolutional layers with 3x3 kernels, a stride of
2, and padding of 1, followed by a flattening layer. The activation function between each layer is
ReLU. After passing through the encoder, each image from the replay buffer is compressed into a
512-dimensional latent state, and the k-nearest neighbor state entropy is estimated as follows:

                                 e(si ) = log(||yi − yik−N N ||2 + 1),                              (8)

where where yi = fθ (si ) is a fixed representation from a random encoder and yik−N N is the k-nearest
neighbor of yi within a set of N representations {y1 , y2 , ..., yn }. We set N = 1024. Then we average
the k-nearest neighbor state entropy of each sample in real sample buffer. The final results are shown
in Figure 13.


Figure 13: K-nearest neighbor state entropy estimation on different visual DMC tasks compared with
DreamerV3.

The figure clearly shows that the state entropy of the real sample buffer significantly increases after
integrating our method. This indicates that the real samples obtained by our method are more diverse,
achieving better exploration of the environment.

D.8   V ISUALIZATION OF EXPERIMENT RESULTS


             Figure 14: Visualization of policy learned by DreamerV3 on Hopper-hop.


       Figure 15: Visualization of policy learned by COPlanner-DreamerV3 on Hopper-hop.



                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Figure 16: Visualization of policy learned by DreamerV3 on Quadruped-walk.


    Figure 17: Visualization of policy learned by COPlanner-DreamerV3 on Quadruped-walk.


In this section, to better demonstrate the improvements brought by our method, we visualize the
trajectories obtained from evaluations in the real environment after convergence using DreamerV3 and
our method (COPlanner-DreamerV3). We visualize trajectories in Hopper-hop and Quadruped-walk
tasks, as shown in Figure 14, 15, 16, and 17.
From the comparison between Figure 14 and Figure 15, we can observe that in the Hopper hop task,
DreamerV3 is only able to learn to jump using the knee, whereas our method can learn to jump
using the feet and perform somersaults during the jump. Through the comparison of Figure 16 and
Figure 17, we can see that in the Quadruped-walk task, our method is able to learn a more stable
behavior of walking using all four legs, as opposed to DreamerV3, which learns to walk using only
three legs.


                                                22
