Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE S TABILITY OF I TERATIVE R ETRAINING OF
G ENERATIVE M ODELS ON THEIR OWN DATA
 Quentin BertrandвҲ—                                                                                Avishek (Joey) Bose
 UniversitГ© de MontrГ©al and Mila                                                                  McGill and Mila

 Alexandre Duplessis                      Marco Jiralerspong                      Gauthier GidelвҖ 
 ENS, PSL                                 UniversitГ© de MontrГ©al and Mila         UniversitГ© de MontrГ©al and Mila



                                                           A BSTRACT

                       Deep generative models have made tremendous progress in modeling complex data,
                       often exhibiting generation quality that surpasses a typical humanвҖҷs ability to dis-
                       cern the authenticity of samples. Undeniably, a key driver of this success is enabled
                       by the massive amounts of web-scale data consumed by these models. Due to these
                       modelsвҖҷ striking performance and ease of availability, the web will inevitably be in-
                       creasingly populated with synthetic content. Such a fact directly implies that future
                       iterations of generative models will be trained on both clean and artificially gen-
                       erated data from past models. In this paper, we develop a framework to rigorously
                       study the impact of training generative models on mixed datasetsвҖ”from classical
                       training on real data to self-consuming generative models trained on purely syn-
                       thetic data. We first prove the stability of iterative training under the condition that
                       the initial generative models approximate the data distribution well enough and the
                       proportion of clean training data (w.r.t. synthetic data) is large enough. We empiri-
                       cally validate our theory on both synthetic and natural images by iteratively training
                       normalizing flows and state-of-the-art diffusion models on CIFAR10 and FFHQ.
        Fully synth.
        Half synth.
       No synth.


                        (a) 0 retrain.    (b) 5 retrain.     (c) 10 retrain.    (d) 15 retrain.     (e) 20 retrain.
Figure 1: Samples generated from EDM trained on the FFHQ dataset. As observed in Shumailov
et al. (2023); Alemohammad et al. (2023), iteratively retraining the model exclusively on its own
generated data yields degradation of the image (top row). On the other hand, retraining on a mix of
half real and half synthetic data (middle) yields a similar quality as retraining on real data (bottom).
   вҲ—
       Corresponding authors: quentin.bertrand@mila.quebec
   вҖ 
       Canada Cifar AI Chair


                                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1     I NTRODUCTION
One of the central promises of generative modeling is the ability to generate unlimited synthetic
data indistinguishable from the original data distribution. Access to such high-fidelity synthetic data
has been one of the key ingredients powering numerous machine learning use cases such as data
augmentation in supervised learning (Antreas et al., 2018), de novo protein design (Watson et al.,
2023), and text-generated responses to prompts that enable a suite of natural language processing
applications (Dong et al., 2022). Indeed, the scale and power of these modelsвҖ”in particular
large language models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Anil et al.,
2023)вҖ”have even led to significant progress, often exceeding expert expectations (Steinhardt, 2022),
in challenging domains like mathematical reasoning, or code assistance (Bubeck et al., 2023).
In addition to the dramatic increase in computational resources, a key driver of progress has been
the amount and the availability of high-quality training data (Kaplan et al., 2020). As a result,
current LLMs and text-conditioned diffusion models like DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021), Stable
Diffusion (Stability AI, 2023), Midjourney (Midjourney, 2023) are trained on web-scale datasets
that already potentially exhaust all the available clean data on the internet. Furthermore, a growing
proportion of synthetic data from existing deep generative models continues to populate the webвҖ”to
the point that even existing web-scale datasets are known to contain generated content (Schuhmann
et al., 2022). While detecting generated content in public datasets is a challenging problem in its
own right (Mitchell et al., 2023; Sadasivan et al., 2023), practitioners training future iterations of
deep generative models must first contend with the reality that their training datasets already contain
synthetic data. This raises the following fundamental question:
    Does training on mixed datasets of finite real data and self-generated data alter performance?
Our Contributions. We study the iterative retraining of deep generative models on mixed datasets
composed of clean real data and synthetic data generated from the current generative model itself. In
particular, we propose a theoretical framework for iterative retraining of generative models that builds
upon the standard maximum likelihood objective, extending it to retraining on mixed datasets. It
encompasses many generative models of interest such as VAEs (Kingma and Welling, 2019), normal-
izing flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015), and state-of-the-art diffusion models (Song et al., 2021).
Using our theoretical framework, we show the stability of iterative retraining of deep generative
models by proving the existence of a fixed point (Theorem 1) under the following conditions: 1.) The
first iteration generative model is sufficiently вҖңwell-trained" and 2.) Each retraining iteration keeps
a high enough proportion of the original clean data. Moreover, we provide theoretical (Proposition 1)
and empirical (Figure 1) evidence that failure to satisfy these conditions can lead to model collapse
(i.e., iterative retraining leads the generative model to collapse to outputting a single point). We then
prove in Theorem 2 that, with high probability, iterative retraining remains within a neighborhood
of the optimal generative model in parameter space when working in the stable regime. Finally, we
substantiate our theory on both synthetic datasets and high dimensional natural images on a broad
category of models that include continuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018) constructed using
a conditional flow-matching objective (OTCFM, Tong et al. 2023), Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPM, Ho et al. 2020) and Elucidating Diffusion Models (EDM, Karras et al. 2022).
We summarize the main contributions of this paper below:
    вҖў We provide a theoretical framework to study the stability of the iterative retraining of likelihood-
       based generative models on mixed datasets containing self-generated and real data.
    вҖў Under mild regularity condition on the density of the considered generative models, we prove
      the stability of iterative retraining of generative models under the condition that the initial
      generative model is close enough to the real data distribution and that the proportion of real data
      is sufficiently large (Theorems 1 and 2) during each iterative retraining procedure.
    вҖў We empirically validate our theory through iterative retraining on CIFAR10 and FFHQ using
      powerful diffusion models in OTCFM, DDPM, and EDM.

2     I TERATIVE R ETRAINING OF G ENERATIVE M ODELS
Notation and convention. Let pdata вҲҲ P(Rd ) be a probability distribution over Rd . An empirical
distribution sampled from pdata in the form of a training dataset, Dreal = {xi }ni=1 , is denoted pМӮdata .


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Iterative Retraining of Generative Models
input : Dreal := {xi }ni=1 , A // True data, learning procedure (e.g., Eq. 2)
param : T , О» // Number of retraining iterations, proportion of gen. data
pОё 0 = A(Dreal ) // Learn generative model on true data
for t in 1, . . . , T do
                       вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
     Dsynth = {xМғi }i=1 , with xМғi вҲј pОё tвҲ’1 // Sample вҢҠО» В· nвҢӢ synthetic data points
     pОё t = A(Dreal вҲӘDsynth ) // Learn generative model on synthetic and true data
return pОё T


We write pОё to indicate a generative model with parameters Оё while Оҳ is the entire parameter space. A
synthetic dataset sampled from a generative model is written as Dsynth . The optimal set of parameters
and its associated distribution are denoted as Оё вӢҶ and pОё вӢҶ . We use subscripts, e.g., Оё t , Dt , to denote
the number of iterative retraining steps, and superscripts to indicate the number of samples used,
e.g., Оё nt uses n training samples at iteration t. Moreover, we use the convention that Оё 0 is the initial
generative model pОё 0 trained on pМӮdata . The asymptotic convergence notation ut = OМғ(ПҒt ) where
ПҒ > 0, refers to вҲҖПө > 0, вҲғC > 0 such that ut вүӨ C(ПҒ + Пө)t , вҲҖt вүҘ 0, i.e., ut almost converges at a
linear rate ПҒt . The Euclidean norm of vectors and the spectral norm of matrices is denoted вҲҘвҲҘ2 . Let
S+ be the set of symmetric positive definite matrices, for S1 and S2 вҲҲ S+ , S1 вӘ° S2 if S1 вҲ’ S2 вӘ° 0.

2.1    P RELIMINARIES

The goal of generative modeling is to approximate pdata using a parametric model pОё . For
likelihood-based models, this corresponds to maximizing the likelihood of pМӮdata , which is an
empirical sampling of n data points from pdata and leads to the following optimization objective:
                                  Оҳn0 := argmax ExвҲјpМӮdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] .                                    (1)
                                             Оё вҖІ вҲҲОҳ

Note that the argmax operator defines a set of equally good solutions to Equation (1). We follow
the convention of selecting Оё n0 = argminОё вҖІ вҲҲОҳ0 вҲҘОёОё вҖІ вҲҘ as the canonical choice. After obtaining
the trained generative model pОё 0 , we are free to sample from it and create a synthetic dataset
                 вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
Dsynth = {xМғ0i }i=1 , where xМғ0i вҲј pОё 0 and О» > 0 is a hyperparameter that controls the relative size of
Dsynth with respect to Dreal . We can then update our initial generative model on any combination of
real data pМӮdata and synthetic data drawn from pОё 0 to obtain pОё 1 and repeat this process ad infinitum.
We term this procedure iterative retraining of a generative model (Algorithm 1). In the context of
maximum likelihood, the iterative retraining update can be formally written as:
                Оҳnt+1 := local-argmax ExвҲјpМӮdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] + О»ExМғвҲјpМӮОё t [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)] .

                                                                                                      (2)
                                Оё вҖІ вҲҲОҳ

The notation local-argmax corresponds to any local maximizer of the loss considered.1 The
formulation   Equation (2) precisely corresponds to training a model on the empirical dataset
Dreal Dsynth of size вҢҠn + О» В· nвҢӢ. Note that Оҳnt+1 may be a set; we thus need to provide a tie-breaking
      S
rule to pick Оё nt+1 вҲҲ Оҳnt+1 . Since most training methods are local search method, we will select the
closest solution to the previous iterate Оё nt ,2
                                 Оё nt+1 = GО»n (ОёОё nt ) := argmin вҲҘОёОё вҖІ вҲ’ Оё nt вҲҘ .                             (3)
                                                        Оё вҖІ вҲҲОҳn
                                                              t+1


Setting О» = 0 corresponds to only sampling from pМӮdata and is thus equivalent to training pОё 0 for more
iterations. The main focus of this work is studying the setting where О» > 0 and, more specifically,
analyzing the discrete sequence of learned parameters Оё n0 вҶ’ Оё n1 вҶ’ В· В· В· вҶ’ Оё nT and thus their induced
distributions and characterize the behavior of the generative model in reference to pdata . As a result,
this means that iterative retraining at timestep t + 1вҖ”i.e., Оё nt+1 вҖ”resumes from the previous iterate
Оё nt . In practice, this amounts to finetuning the model rather than retraining from scratch.
   1
      Given a function f continuously twice differentiable, a sufficient condition for Оё to locally maximize f is
вҲҮf (ОёОё ) = 0 and вҲҮ2 f (ОёОё ) вүә 0.
    2
      For simplicity of presentation, we assume that such a Оё n
                                                              t+1 is uniquely defined which will be the case under
the assumptions of Theorems 1 and 2.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2    WARM - UP WITH M ULTIVARIATE G AUSSIAN

As a warm-up, we consider a multivariate Gaussian with parameters NВө ,ОЈ obtained from being fit on
pМӮdata вҲј NВө 0 ,ОЈ0 . This example corresponds to a special case of Equation (2), where О» вҶ’ вҲһ (i.e., we
do not reuse any training data). We analyze the evolution of the model parameters when iteratively
retraining on its own samples. For each retraining, a multivariate Gaussian model is learned from
finite samples. In the case of a single multivariate Gaussian, the unbiased update of the mean and
covariance parameters has a closed-form formula. For all t вүҘ 0:
                          n            вҲҡ                  i.i.d.
       Sampling step:       xjt = Вө t + ОЈt zjt , with zjt вҲј N0,I , 1 вүӨ j вүӨ n ,                     (4)
                                                                                            вҠӨ

                                       P j                       P j
       Learning step:      Вө t+1 = n1     xt , ОЈt+1 = nвҲ’1      1
                                                                    xt вҲ’ Вө t+1 xjt вҲ’ Вө t+1 . (5)
                                         j                      j

Proposition 1 states that retraining a multivariate Gaussian only on its generated data leads to its col-
lapse: its covariance matrix vanishes to 0 linearly as a function of the number of retraining.

    Proposition 1. (Gaussian Collapse) For all initializations of the mean Вө0 and the covariance
    ОЈ0 , iteratively learning a single multivariate Gaussian solely on its generated data yields model
    collapse. More precisely, if Вөt and ОЈt follows Equations (4) and (5), then, there exists Оұ < 1,
                                        p            p
                                      E( ОЈt ) вӘҜ Оұt ОЈ0 вҲ’вҶ’ 0 .                                       (6)
                                                          tвҶ’+вҲһ


The proof of Proposition 1 is provided in Appendix A. Interestingly, the convergence rate Оұn
goes to 1 as the number of samples n goes to infinity. In other words, the larger the number of
samples, the slower the model collapses. Proposition 1 is a generalization of Shumailov et al. (2023);
Alemohammad et al. (2023), who respectively proved convergence to 0 of the standard deviation
of a one-dimensional Gaussian model, and the covariance of a single multivariate Gaussian, without
rates of convergence. While Proposition 1 states that learning a simple generative model retrained
only on its own output yields model collapse, in Section 3, we show that if a sufficient proportion
of real data is used for retraining the generative models, then Algorithm 1 is stable.


3     S TABILITY OF I TERATIVE RETRAINING

We seek to characterize the stability behavior of iterative retraining of generative models on datasets
that contain a mixture of original clean data as well as self-generated synthetic samples. As deep
generative models are parametric models, their performance is primarily affected by two sources of
error: 1.) statistical approximation error and 2.) function approximation error. The first source of error
occurs due to the sampling bias of using pМӮdata rather than pdata . For instance, due to finite sampling,
pМӮdata might not contain all modes of the true distribution pdata , leading to an imperfect generative
model irrespective of its expressive power. The function approximation error chiefly arises due to a
mismatch of the model class achievable by Оё , and consequently the induced distribution pОё and pdata .
Recent advances in generative modeling theory have proven the universal approximation abilities of
popular model classes, e.g., normalizing flows (Teshima et al., 2020) and diffusion models (Oko et al.,
2023). In practice, state-of-the-art generative models such as StableDiffusion (Stability AI, 2023)
and MidJourney (Midjourney, 2023) exhibit impressive qualitative generative ability which dampens
the practical concern of the magnitude of the function approximation error in generative models.
Consequently, we structure our investigation by first examining the stability of iterative training in the
absence of statistical error in Section 3.1, which is an idealized setting. In Section 3.2, we study the
stability of iterative retraining of practical generative models where the statistical error is non-zero,
which is reflective of the setting and use cases of actual SOTA generative models in the wild.

3.1    I TERATIVE RETRAINING UNDER NO S TATISTICAL E RROR

We first study the behavior of iterative retraining under the setting of no statistical error. As the
primary source of statistical error comes from using pМӮdata we may simply assume full access to pdata


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


instead and an infinite sampling budget. In this setting, we define the optimal generative model pОё вӢҶ
with parameters Оё вӢҶ as the solution to the following optimization problem,
                                          Оё вӢҶ вҲҲ argmax ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] .                            (7)
                                                    Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                                         Оё

Compared to Equation (1), infinitely many samples are drawn from pdata in Equation (7); hence,
there is no statistical error due to finite sampling of the dataset. As the capacity of the model class
(pОё )Оё вҲҲОёОё is limited, the maximum likelihood estimator pОё вӢҶ does not exactly correspond to the data
distribution pdata . We note Оө is the Wasserstein distance (Villani et al., 2009) between pОё вӢҶ and pdata ,
                    Оө = dW (pОё вӢҶ , pdata ) :=            sup         ExвҲјpОё вӢҶ [f (x)] вҲ’ ExвҲјpdata [f (x)] ,   (8)
                                                   f вҲҲ{Lip(f )вүӨ1}

where {Lip(f ) вүӨ 1} is the set of 1-Lipschitz functions. We assume the Hessian of the maximum
log-likelihood from Equation (7) has some regularity and Оё вӢҶ is a strict local maximum.

   Assumption 1. For Оё close enough to Оё вӢҶ , the mapping x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is L-Lipschitz.


We use this assumption to show that if pОё вӢҶ is close to pdata (i.e., Оө small), then the Hessians of the
maximum likelihood with respectively real and synthetic data are close to each other.

   Assumption 2. The mapping Оё 7вҶ’ ExвҲјpdata [log pОё (x)] is continuously twice differentiable
   locally around Оё вӢҶ and ExвҲјpdata [вҲҮОё2 log pОё вӢҶ (x)] вӘҜ вҲ’ОұId вүә 0.


Assumption 2 imposes local strong concavity around the local maximum Оё вӢҶ , and Assumption 1
implies Hessian Lipschitzness when close to Оё вӢҶ . For example, Assumptions 1 and 2 are valid for
the Gaussian generative model described in Section 2.2.

                                                    1     вҠӨ вҲ’         p
   Proposition 2. Let pОё : x 7вҶ’ NВө ,ОЈ (x) = eвҲ’ 2 (xвҲ’ВөВө) ОЈ 1(xвҲ’ВөВө) / (2ПҖ)d |ОЈ|, with Вө вҲҲ Rd ,
               Вө, ОЈвҲ’1 ), then ExвҲјpОё (x) [вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x)] вүә 0 and x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is 1-Lipschitz.
   ОЈ вү» 0, Оё = (Вө


A direct consequence of the proposition is that the class of generative models (NВө ,ОЈ ) follows As-
sumptions 1 and 2. Thus, it proves that under these assumptions, a finite О» is necessary for the stability
of iterative retraining. Now, we study what conditions are sufficient for the stability of iterative
                                                         1             О»
retraining with О» > 0, i.e., training by sampling from 1+О» pdata + 1+О»    pОё вӢҶ , which corresponds to,
                    GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) вҲҲ local-argmax(ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] +О» ExМғвҲјpОё [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)]) .           (9)
                                     Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                          Оё  |        {z           }    |        {z          }
                                                             :=H1     ОёвҖІ)
                                                                     (Оё                    :=H2   (Оё  ОёвҖІ)
                                                                                                   Оё ,Оё

If ties between the maximizers are broken as in Equation (3),3 we can show that the solution
of Equation (9) is locally unique, ensuring that GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) is well defined and differentiable.

   Proposition 3. (The Local Maximum Likelihood Solution is Unique) Let Оё вӢҶ be a solution
   of Equation (7) that satisfies Assumptions 1 and 2. If ПөL < Оұ, then for all О» > 0 and Оё in a
   small enough neighborhood U around Оё вӢҶ , there exists a unique local maximizer GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) in U.


The proof of Proposition 3 is provided in Appendix C. Interestingly, the solution Оё вӢҶ of the maximum
infinite sample likelihood Equation (7) is a fixed point of the infinite sample iterative retraining
procedure via maximum likelihood in Equation (9).



   3
       Formally, GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) = argminОё вҖІ вҲҲОёМ„Оё вҲҘОёОё вҖІ вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ, ОёМ„Оё = local-argmaxОё вҖІ вҲҲОёОё HО» (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ).


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Proposition 4. (The Optimal Parametric Generative Model is a Fixed Point) For a given data
   distribution pdata , any Оё вӢҶ solution of Equation (7), and for all О» > 0 we have,
                                                Оё вӢҶ = GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ ) .                                         (10)


The proof of Proposition 4 can be found in Appendix D. In the zero statistical error case, Оё вӢҶ
corresponds to the perfectly trained generative model obtained after the first iteration of training exclu-
sively on real data (see Equation (1)). The main question is the stability of iterative retraining around
Оё вӢҶ . Even with pdata , one can consider small sources of error such as optimization error or numerical
error in floating point precision leading to an initial Оё 0 вүҲ Оё вӢҶ only approximately solving Equation (7).
For our stability analysis, given Оё , we decompose the maximum likelihood loss as
HО» (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) := H1 (ОёОё вҖІ ) + О»H2 (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) := ExМғвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)] + О»ExвҲјpОё [log pОё вҖІ (x)]. With this decou-
pling, we can view H2 as a regularizer injecting synthetic data and О» as the amount of regularization.
Our first main result states that iterative retraining of generative models is asymptotically stable if
the amount of real data is вҖңlarge enough" with respect to the amount of synthetic data.

   Theorem 1. (Stability of Iterative Retraining) Given Оё вӢҶ as defined in Equation (7) that
   follows Assumptions 1 and 2, we have that, if О»(1 + LОө
                                                       Оұ ) < /2, then the operator norm of the
                                                            1
   Jacobian is strictly bounded by 1, more precisely,
                                                          О»(Оұ + ОөL)
                                  вҲҘJОё GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ                 <1 .                                  (11)
                                                        Оұ вҲ’ О»(Оұ + ОөL)
   Consequently, there exists a R > 0 such that for all Оё 0 вҲҲ Оё that satisfy вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ R, then
   starting at Оё 0 and having Оё t+1 = GО»вҲһ (ОёОё t ) we have that Оё t вҲ’вҶ’ Оё вӢҶ and
                                                                       tвҶ’+вҲһ
                                                                       t               !
                                   вӢҶ                 О»(Оұ + ОөL)                     вӢҶ
                          вҲҘОёОё t вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ = OМғ                                 вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ     .                (12)
                                                   Оұ вҲ’ О»(Оұ + ОөL)


Proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Appendix E. Theorem 1 establishes the stability property of
generative modelsвҖҷ iterative retraining and quantifies the convergence rate to the fixed point Оё вӢҶ .
Interestingly, setting О» small enough is always sufficient to get вҲҘJОё GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ )вҲҘ < 1. However, it is
important to notice that, to prove that the local maximizer of Оё вҖІ 7вҶ’ H(ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) is unique, we needed to
assume that ОөL < Оұ. Similarly, we speculate that with additional assumptions on the regularity of H,
the neighborhood size Оҙ for the local convergence result of Theorem 1 could be controlled with Оө.
The limitation of Theorem 1 is that it is based on using infinite samples from pdata and only provides
a sufficient condition for stability. Informally, we show that if dW (pОё вӢҶ , pdata ) and О» are small
enoughвҖ“i.e., our class of generative model can approximate well enough the data distribution and
we re-use enough real dataвҖ“, then, the procedure of iterative training is stable. On the one hand, It
remains an open question to show that similar conditions as the ones of Theorem 1 are necessary
for stability. On the other hand, Proposition 2 implies that in the general case under Assumptions 1
and 2, a finite value for О» is necessary since for a multivariate Gaussian, regardless of the value of
dW (pОё вӢҶ , pdata ), if О» is infinite (i.e., we only use generated data) then we do not have stability and
collapse to a generative model with a vanishing variance.
Our theoretical results point to a different conclusion than the one experimentally obtained
by Alemohammad et al. (2023, Fig.3). In particular, stability may be ensured without injecting more
вҖҳfresh dataвҖҷ. Instead, a sufficient condition for stability is to have a good enough initial model (Оө
small) and a sufficient fraction of вҖҳfixed real dataвҖҷ (О» small enough) for each iterative training step.

3.2    I TERATIVE R ETRAINING UNDER S TATISTICAL A PPROXIMATION E RROR

We now turn our attention to iterative retraining for generative models under finite sampling. Mo-
tivated by generalization bounds in deep generative models (Yang and E, 2021a;b; Ji et al., 2021;
Jakubovitz et al., 2019), we make the following additional assumption on the approximation capability


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of generative models as a function of dataset size: we suppose we have a generalization bound for
our class of models with a vanishing term as the sample size increases.

    Assumption 3. There exists a, b, ОөOPT вүҘ 0 and a neighborhood U of Оё вӢҶ such that with
    probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the samplings, we havea
                                                                     r
                                       n        вҲһ                 a      b
                    вҲҖОё вҲҲ U, вҲҖn вҲҲ N, вҲҘGО» (Оё ) вҲ’ GО» (Оё )вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT +
                     Оё                    Оё        Оё             вҲҡ    log .         (13)
                                                                   n     Оҙ
       a
           We could have kept a more general bound as C(n, Оҙ), and this choice comes without loss of generality.



The constant ОөOPT is usually    negligible and mainly depends on the (controllable) optimization error.
                    вҲҡ p
As for the term a/ n В· log b/Оҙ, it vanishes to 0 when increasing n. Intuitively, this assumption
means that, in the neighborhood of Оё вӢҶ , the practical iterate GО»n (ОёОё ) can get as close as desired to the
ideal parameter GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) by increasing the size of the sample from the dataset Dt used for retraining
at iteration t and thus decreasing the optimization error. On the one hand, it is relatively strong to
assume that one can approximate GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) in the parameter space (usually such bounds regard the
expected loss). On the other hand, the fact that this assumption is local makes it slightly weaker.
We now state our main result with finite sample size, with high probability, that iterative retraining
remains within a neighborhood of the fixed point Оё вӢҶ.

    Theorem 2. (Approximate Stability) Under the same assumptions of Theorem 1 and Assump-
    tion 3, we have that there exists 0 < ПҒ < 1 and R > 0 such that if вҲҘОёОё n0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ R then, with
    probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                           r       ! t
                                        a        bt X l
                 n    вӢҶ
             вҲҘОёОё t вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ          log       ПҒ + ПҒt вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ , вҲҖt вҲҲ NвҲ— .         (14)
                                         n       Оҙ
                                                              l=0



Proof can be found in Appendix F. The main takeaway on Theorem 2 is that the error between the
iteratively retrained parameters Оё nt and Оё вӢҶ can bepdecomposed in three main terms: the optimization
                Pt                               вҲҡ                  Pt
error ОөOPT В· l=0 ПҒl , the statistical error a/ nВ· log bt/Оҙ В· l=0 ПҒl , and the iterative retraining error
ПҒt вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ. Interestingly, the error between Оё nt and Оё вӢҶ can be controlled in the regime where the log
of the number of retraining is much smaller than the number of samples, i.e., in the regime log t вүӘ n.

4    R ELATED W ORK
Generative Models trained on Synthetic Data. The study of generative models within a feedback
loop has been a focus of recent contemporary works by Alemohammad et al. (2023); Shumailov et al.
(2023). Both these works exhibit the model collapse phenomenon in settings where the generative
model is iteratively retrained from scratch (Alemohammad et al., 2023) and finetuned (Shumailov
et al., 2023). Similar in spirit to our work, Alemohammad et al. (2023) advocates for the injection of
real dataвҖ”and even to add more fresh dataвҖ”to reduce model collapse but falls short of providing
theoretical stability guarantees which we provide. The effect of generative models trained on web-
scale datasets contaminated with synthetic samples has also been investigated; corroborating the
degradation of generated sample quality (MartГӯnez et al., 2023a;b; Hataya et al., 2023).
Performative Predicition. The nature of the stability results in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 bear
connections with the literature on вҖңperformative prediction" in supervised classification (Perdomo
et al., 2020). In both cases, the outputs of the models affect the sampling distribution, which
influences the objectives themselves. As such, we seek to characterize the existence and nature of
fixed points. However, we note that performative prediction focuses on supervised learning, and the
required assumption in iterative stability for generative models is weaker than those to ensure global
convergence in the performative prediction literature. For instance, Perdomo et al. (2021) require
strong convexity with respect to Оё , while Mofakhami et al. (2023) need stronger continuity properties
of the mapping Оё 7вҶ’ pОё . In contrast, we only require assumptions on pОё around an optimal point Оё вӢҶ .


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5       E XPERIMENTS

We now investigate the iterative retraining of deep generative models in practical settings4 . As our
real-world models ingest datasets sampled from empirical distributions, they necessarily operate under
statistical error arising from finite sampling. Other sources of error that inhibit learning the perfect
generative modelвҖ”irrespective of the expressiveness of the architectureвҖ”include optimization errors
from the learning process and other numerical errors from lack of numerical precision. Our goal with
this empirical investigation is to characterize the impact on the performance of these models as a
function of О» and iterative retraining iterations while holding the size of the real dataset constant.
Datasets and Models. We perform experiments on synthetic toy data as found in Grathwohl
et al. (2018), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009), and FlickrFacesHQ 64 Г— 64 (FFHQ-
64 Karras et al. 2019) datasets. For deep generative models, we conduct experiments with con-
tinuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018) constructed using a conditional flow-matching
loss (CFM Lipman et al. 2022; Tong et al. 2023) and two powerful diffusion models in Denois-
ing Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM, Ho et al. 2020) and Elucidating Diffusion Models
(EDM, Karras et al. 2022) where we relied on the original codebases torch-cfm (https:
//github.com/atong01/conditional-flow-matching), ddpm-torch (https://
github.com/tqch/ddpm-torch) and edm (https://github.com/NVlabs/edm) for
faithful implementations.
Results on Synthetic Data. In Figures 3 and 4 in Appendix G we illustrate the learned densities
of DDPM (Figure 3) on the 8 Gaussians dataset and conditional normalizing flows (Figure 4) on
the two moon datasets. On the one hand, we observe model collapse if the generative models are
fully retrained on their own synthetic data (top rows). On the other hand, if the model is retrained
on a mix of real and generated data (bottom rows), then the iterative process does not diverge. In
Figures 3 and 4, the model is iteratively retrained on as much generated data as real data. For Figure 3
we iteratively retrain a DDPM diffusion model for 200 epochs on 104 samples. For Figure 4 we
iteratively retrain a conditional flow matching model for 150 epochs on 103 samples.
Experimental Setup. For EDM we use the code, pre-trained models, and optimizers from the official
implementation (specifically the ddpmpp architecture with unconditional sampling) and a batch size
of 128 for FFHQ-64 and 256 for CIFAR-10. For OTCFM, we used the torch-cfm implementation.
All other hyperparameters are those provided in the official implementations. After each training
iteration, we generate a set of images of the same size as the training set, {xМғi }ni=1 , xМғi вҲј pОё . This
corresponds to 5 В· 104 images for CIFAR-10 and 7 В· 104 images for FFHQ-64. At each iteration, we
compute the FID (Heusel et al., 2017) as well as precision and recall (KynkГӨГӨnniemi et al. 2019, which
are correlated with fidelity and diversity) between the real data and the full set of generated data. All
the metrics are computed using the FLS package (https://github.com/marcojira/fls,
Jiralerspong et al. 2023, ee Appendix G for further details). Then, following Algorithm 1 we
create a dataset which is a mix of all the real data Dreal , and a fraction of the generated data
                  вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
Dsynth = {xМғi }i=1 . After each retraining iteration, the network and the optimizer are saved,
and the next retraining step resumes from this checkpoint: CIFAR-10 and FFHQ-64 models are
finetuned for 106 and 1.4 В· 106 images, which is equivalent to 20 epochs on the real dataset. Note
                                             вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
that since the created datasets Dreal вҲӘ {xi }i=1 do not have the same size, i.e., their size depends on
                  вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
О»: |Dreal вҲӘ {xi }i=1 | = n + вҢҠО» В· nвҢӢ, we train on a constant number of images and not epochs which
is necessary for a fair comparison between multiple fractions О» of the incorporated generated data.
Analysis of Results. Iterative retraining of OTCFM and EDM are displayed in Figure 2. In particular,
we report FID, precision, and recall as a function of the number of retraining iterations for various
values of О». Note that the dashed black line with circles corresponds to the baseline of retraining
without synthetic data О» = 0, while the solid yellow line О» = 1 is retraining with equal amounts of
synthetic and original real data. The dashed red line with triangles corresponds to retraining generative
models only on their own data. Every other line is an interpolation between the settings of the black
and yellow lines. As predicted by Theorem 2, if the proportion of real data is large enough, i.e., the
value of О» is small enough, then the retraining procedure is stable, and models do not diverge (see for
instance, the CIFAR-10 and FFHQ-64вҖ”EDM rows of Figure 2. If the fraction of used generated
data О» is too large, e.g., О» = 1, we observe that FID might diverge. This provides empirical evidence
    4
        Code can be found at https:github.com/QB3/gen_models_dont_go_mad.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                           No Synth. Data (О» = 0)        О» = 0.01              О» = 0.2             О» = 0.4      О» = 0.6        О» = 0.8            О»=1
                           О» = 0.001                     О» = 0.1               О» = 0.3             О» = 0.5      О» = 0.7        О» = 0.9            Fully Synthetic


                   10
                                            FID                                              Precision              0.60
                                                                                                                                         Recall


CIFAR-10 вҖ“ OTCFM
                                                                    0.69

                       7                                                                                            0.55
                                                                    0.67


                       4
                                                                    0.65                                            0.50
                       8
      CIFAR-10 вҖ“ EDM


                                                                    0.65

                       5                                                                                            0.60
                                                                    0.60


                       2                                            0.55                                            0.55
                   12                                                                                                0.6
                                                                    0.70
FFHQ-64 вҖ“ EDM


                       7                                            0.65                                             0.5


                       2                                            0.60                                             0.4
                            0        5        10    15       20            0             5        10      15   20          0    5         10       15        20
                                      # retraining                                       # retraining                            # retraining
Figure 2: FID, precision, and recall of the generative models as a function of the number of retraining for
                                                                                                       вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
multiple fractions О» of generated data, D = Dreal вҲӘ {xМғi }i=1 , xМғi вҲј pОё t . For all models and datasets, only
training on synthetic data (dashed red line with triangles) yields divergence. For the EDM models on CIFAR-10
(middle row), the iterative retraining is stable for all the proportions of generated data from О» = 0 to О» = 1. For
the EDM on FFHQ-64 (bottom row), the iterative retraining is stable if the proportion of used generated data is
small enough (О» < 0.5).


in support of the model collapse phenomenon in both Alemohammad et al. (2023); Shumailov et al.
(2023) where the generative models diverge and lead to poor sample quality. Interestingly, for all
fractions О» used to create the iterative training dataset Dt , the precision of EDM models decreases
with the number of retraining while their recall increases. It is worth noting we observe the inverse
trend between precision for OTCFM on CIFAR-10.

6                      C ONCLUSION AND O PEN Q UESTIONS
We investigated the iterative retraining of generative models on their own synthetic data. Our main
contribution is showing that if the generative model initially trained on real data is good enough, and
the iterative retraining is made on a mixture of synthetic and real data, then the retraining procedure
Algorithm 1 is stable (Theorems 1 and 2). Additionally, we validate our theoretical findings
(Theorems 1 and 2) empirically on natural image datasets (CIFAR-10 and FFHQ-64) with various
powerful generative models (OTCFM, DDPM, and EDM). One of the limitations of Theorems 1
and 2 is that the proposed sufficient condition to ensure stability may not be necessary. Precisely,
under Assumptions 1 and 2, there is a gap to close between the necessity of О» < +вҲһ and the
sufficiency О»(1 + LПө Оұ ) < 1 for local stability. Another avenue for future work is to understand better
the impact of the finite sampling aspect (described in Section 3.2) on iterative retaining stability.


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
QB would like to thank Kilian Fatras for providing guidance on the conditional flow matching
experiments, Nate Gillman for fruitful discussions yielding proof clarifications, and Samsung
Electronics Co., Ldt. for partially funding this research. The authors would like to thank Nvidia
for providing computing resources for this research.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
S. Alemohammad, J. Casco-Rodriguez, L. Luzi, A. I. Humayun, H. Babaei, D. LeJeune, A. Siahkoohi,
   and R. G. Baraniuk. Self-consuming generative models go mad, 2023.
R. Anil, A. M. Dai, O. Firat, M. Johnson, D. Lepikhin, A. Passos, S. Shakeri, E. Taropa, P. Bailey,
  Z. Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
A. Antreas, S. Amos, and E. Harrison. Data augmentation generative adversarial networks. 2018.
T. D. Barfoot. Multivariate gaussian variational inference by natural gradient descent. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2001.10025, 2020.
S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
   G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 2020.
S. Bubeck, Y. Cherapanamjeri, G. Gidel, and R. T. des Combes. A single gradient step finds
  adversarial examples on random two-layers neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:10081вҖ“10091, 2021.
S. Bubeck, V. Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke, E. Horvitz, E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y. T. Lee, Y. Li,
   S. Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
R. T. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung,
  C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Q. Dong, L. L. Li, D. Dai, C. Zheng, Z. Wu, B. Chang, X. Sun, J. Xu, and Z. Sui. A survey for
  in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
J. Duchi. Probability bounds. URL: http://www. cs. berkeley. edu/jduchi/projects/probability bounds.
   pdf, 2009.
W. Grathwohl, R. T. Chen, J. Bettencourt, I. Sutskever, and D. Duvenaud. Ffjord: Free-form
  continuous dynamics for scalable reversible generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01367,
  2018.
R. Hataya, H. Bao, and H. Arai. Will large-scale generative models corrupt future datasets? In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 20555вҖ“20565,
  2023.
M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two
 time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 30, 2017.
J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural
   information processing systems, 33:6840вҖ“6851, 2020.
D. Jakubovitz, R. Giryes, and M. R. Rodrigues. Generalization error in deep learning. In Compressed
  Sensing and Its Applications: Third International MATHEON Conference 2017, pages 153вҖ“193.
  Springer, 2019.
K. Ji, Y. Zhou, and Y. Liang. Understanding estimation and generalization error of generative
  adversarial networks. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(5):3114вҖ“3129, 2021.
M. Jiralerspong, A. J. Bose, I. Gemp, C. Qin, Y. Bachrach, and G. Gidel. Feature likelihood score:
 Evaluating generalization of generative models using samples, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu,
   and D. Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
   networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pages 4401вҖ“4410, 2019.
T. Karras, M. Aittala, T. Aila, and S. Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
   models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565вҖ“26577, 2022.
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations and TrendsВ®
  in Machine Learning, 12(4):307вҖ“392, 2019.
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
T. KynkГӨГӨnniemi, T. Karras, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila. Improved precision and recall metric
   for assessing generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
S. Lang. Fundamentals of differential geometry. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le. Flow matching for generative
  modeling, Oct. 2022.
A. W. Marshall, I. Olkin, and B. C. Arnold. Inequalities: theory of majorization and its applications.
  1979.
G. MartГӯnez, L. Watson, P. Reviriego, J. A. HernГЎndez, M. Juarez, and R. Sarkar. Combining
  generative artificial intelligence (ai) and the internet: Heading towards evolution or degradation?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01255, 2023a.
G. MartГӯnez, L. Watson, P. Reviriego, J. A. HernГЎndez, M. Juarez, and R. Sarkar. Towards un-
  derstanding the interplay of generative artificial intelligence and the internet. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.06130, 2023b.
Midjourney. https://www.midjourney.com/home/, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-09.
E. Mitchell, Y. Lee, A. Khazatsky, C. D. Manning, and C. Finn. Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-
  generated text detection using probability curvature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11305, 2023.
M. Mofakhami, I. Mitliagkas, and G. Gidel. Performative prediction with neural networks, 2023.
K. Oko, S. Akiyama, and T. Suzuki. Diffusion models are minimax optimal distribution estimators.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01861, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
J. Perdomo, T. Zrnic, C. Mendler-DГјnner, and M. Hardt. Performative prediction. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7599вҖ“7609. PMLR, 2020.
J. C. Perdomo, T. Zrnic, C. Mendler-DГјnner, and M. Hardt. Performative prediction, 2021.
A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, M. Chen, and I. Sutskever. Zero-shot
  text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021.
D. Rezende and S. Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In International
  conference on machine learning, pages 1530вҖ“1538. PMLR, 2015.
V. S. Sadasivan, A. Kumar, S. Balasubramanian, W. Wang, and S. Feizi. Can ai-generated text be
   reliably detected? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11156, 2023.
M. S.-M. Sajjadi, O. Bachem, M. Lucic, O. Bousquet, and S. Gelly. Assessing generative models via
  precision and recall. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
C. Schuhmann, R. Beaumont, R. Vencu, C. Gordon, R. Wightman, M. Cherti, T. Coombes, A. Katta,
  C. Mullis, M. Wortsman, et al. LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation
  image-text models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I. Shumailov, Z. Shumaylov, Y. Zhao, Y. Gal, N. Papernot, and R. Anderson. The curse of recursion:
   Training on generated data makes models forget, 2023.
Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative
   modeling through stochastic differential equations. ICLR, 2021.
Stability AI. https://stability.ai/stablediffusion, 2023. Accessed: 2023-09-09.
J. Steinhardt. AI Forecasting: One Year In . https://bounded-regret.ghost.io/
   ai-forecasting-one-year-in/, 2022. Accessed: 2023-09-09.
T. Teshima, I. Ishikawa, K. Tojo, K. Oono, M. Ikeda, and M. Sugiyama. Coupling-based invertible
   neural networks are universal diffeomorphism approximators. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33:3362вҖ“3373, 2020.
A. Tong, N. Malkin, G. Huguet, Y. Zhang, J. Rector-Brooks, K. Fatras, G. Wolf, and Y. Bengio.
  Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models with minibatch optimal transport. arXiv
  preprint 2302.00482, 2023.
C. Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
J. L. Watson, D. Juergens, N. R. Bennett, B. L. Trippe, J. Yim, H. E. Eisenach, W. Ahern, A. J. Borst,
   R. J. Ragotte, L. F. Milles, et al. De novo design of protein structure and function with rfdiffusion.
   Nature, pages 1вҖ“3, 2023.
H. Yang and W. E. Generalization error of gan from the discriminatorвҖҷs perspective, 2021a.
H. Yang and W. E. Generalization and memorization: The bias potential model, 2021b.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                         n            вҲҡ                  i.i.d.
        Sampling step:     xjt = Вө t + ОЈt zjt , with Ztj вҲј N0,I , 1 вүӨ j вүӨ n ,                      (4)

                                      P j                       P  j                     T
        Learning step:    Вө t+1 = n1    xt , ОЈt+1 = nвҲ’1      1
                                                                  xt вҲ’ Вө t+1 xjt вҲ’ Вө t+1 .         (5)
                                               j                       j

Proposition 1. (Gaussian Collapse) For all initializations of the mean Вө0 and the covariance ОЈ0 ,
iteratively learning a single multivariate Gaussian solely on its generated data yields model collapse.
More precisely, if Вөt and ОЈt follows Equations (4) and (5), then, there exists Оұ < 1,
                                       p          p
                                    E( ОЈt ) вӘҜ Оұt ОЈ0 вҲ’вҶ’ 0 .                                          (6)
                                                                 tвҶ’+вҲһ


For exposition purposes, we first prove Proposition 1 for a single one-dimensional Gaussian (Ap-
pendix A.1). Then prove Proposition 1 for a single multivariate Gaussian in Appendix A.2.

A.1     1D-G AUSSIAN CASE .

In the one-dimensional case, the sampling and the learning steps become
                               n
                                                              i.i.d.
             Sampling step:      xtj = Вөt + Пғt ztj , with ztj вҲј N0,I , 1 вүӨ j вүӨ n ,                (15)

                                            P j                        P  j         2
             Learning step:     Вөt+1 = n1                2
                                                 xt , Пғt+1     = nвҲ’1 1
                                                                         xt вҲ’ Вөt+1    .           (16)
                                                        j                     j


 Proposition 1 can be proved using the following lemmas. First, one can obtain a recursive formula
for the variances Пғt2 (Lemma A.1 i)). Then a key component of the proof is to take the expectation of
the standard deviation Пғt (not the variance Пғt2 , which stays constant because we used an unbiased
estimator of the variance), this is done in Lemma A.1 ii). Finally, Lemma A.1 iii) shows how to
upper-bound the expectation of the square root of a ПҮ2 variable.
Lemma A.1.        i) If (Пғt ) and (Вөt ) follow Equations (15) and (16), then, for all Вө0 , Пғ0 ,
                                                    пЈ«                  пЈ¶2
                                  2          1  X
                                                    пЈӯztj вҲ’  1 X
                                 Пғt+1  =                          Z tвҖІ пЈё Пғt2 .                    (17)
                                          nвҲ’1 j             n вҖІ j
                                                                      j


  ii)
                                                  вҲҡ
                                                    St     p
                                  вҲҖt вүҘ 1, Пғt+1 = вҲҡ     Пғt , St вҲј ПҮnвҲ’1 .                           (18)
                                                   nвҲ’1

 iii)
                                                   вҲҖt вүӨ 1, E(Пғt ) = Оұt Пғ0 ,                       (19)
                               q
                          E        ПҮ2nвҲ’1
        with Оұ = Оұ(n) =       вҲҡ                <1.
                                  nвҲ’1

Proof. (Lemma A.1 i)). Let t вүҘ 1.
                                        1X t        1X
                                  Вөt+1 =      Xj =     (Вөt + ztj Пғt )                             (20)
                                        n j        n j
                                             Пғt X t
                                      = Вөt +       z ,                                            (21)
                                             n j j


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hence
                           2        1 X               2
                          Пғt+1 =          Xjt вҲ’ Вөt+1                                                 (22)
                                   nвҲ’1 j
                                         пЈ«                          пЈ¶2
                                    1 XпЈӯ         j           Пғt X t пЈё
                                 =         Вөt + zt Пғt вҲ’ Вөt вҲ’     zвҖІ                                  (23)
                                   nвҲ’1 j                     n вҖІ j
                                                                       j
                                         пЈ«            пЈ¶2
                                    1 XпЈӯ j 1 X t пЈё 2
                                 =        zt вҲ’     zвҖІ    Пғt .                                        (24)
                                   nвҲ’1 j       n вҖІ j
                                                      j



                                                                   пЈ«                   пЈ¶2
                                                             X
                                                                   пЈӯztj вҲ’   1X
Proof. (Lemma A.1 ii)) Cochran theorem states that St :=                             zjtвҖІ пЈё вҲј ПҮ2nвҲ’1 . Com-
                                                                            n
                                                              j                 jвҖІ
bined with Lemma A.1 i), this yields
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                        St
                                      вҲҖt вүҘ 1, Пғt+1 = вҲҡ     Пғt ,                                      (25)
                                                       nвҲ’1
        вҲҡ
where       St вҲј ПҮnвҲ’1 .

Proof. (Lemma A.1 iii)). The independence of the ztj implies independence of the St , which yields
that for all t вүҘ 1
                                  вҲҡ
                                    St
               E(Пғt+1 |Пғt ) = E вҲҡ      |Пғt Пғt                                                 (26)
                                  nвҲ’1
                                  вҲҡ
                                    St
                            =E вҲҡ          Пғt because St вҠҘвҠҘ Пғt ,                               (27)
                                  nвҲ’1
                                  вҲҡ
                                    St
                 E(Пғt+1 ) = E вҲҡ           E(Пғt ) because E(E(Пғt+1 |Пғt )) = E(Пғt+1 ) .         (28)
                                  nвҲ’1
                              |   {z    }
                                    :=Оұ
                             t
The independence of the Z yields independence of the St . Combined with the strict Jensen inequality
applied to the square root, it yields
                                    вҲҡ
                                       St
                         Оұ=E вҲҡ                                                                 (29)
                                      nвҲ’1
                               s
                                       St
                            < E                                                                (30)
                                      nвҲ’1
                             = 1 because E(St ) = n вҲ’ 1 since St вҲј ПҮ2nвҲ’1 .                           (31)
The strict Jensen inequality comes from the fact that the square root function is strictly convex, and
St вҲј ПҮ2nвҲ’1 is not a constant random variable. Note that Оұ is strictly smaller than 1 and is independent
of the number of retraining. However Оұ depends on the number of samples n, and that Оұ(n) вҶ’ 1,
when n вҶ’ вҲһ.



A.2     M ULTI - DIMENSIONAL CASE .
                          n            вҲҡ                  i.i.d.
      Sampling step:        xjt = Вө t + ОЈt zjt , with zjt вҲј N (0, I), 1 вүӨ j вүӨ n ,                     (4)

                                       P j                        P  j                     T
      Learning step:       Вө t+1 = n1    xt , ОЈt+1 = nвҲ’1        1
                                                                    xt вҲ’ Вө t+1 xjt вҲ’ Вө t+1 .          (5)
                                          j                    j



                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The generalization to the multi-dimensional follows the same scheme as the unidimensional case: the
key point is to upper the expectation of the square root of the covariance matrix
Lemma A.2.                         Вөt ) follow Equations (4) and (5), then, for all Вө 0 , ОЈ0 ,
                  i) If (ОЈt ) and (Вө
                                     пЈ®      пЈ«                пЈ¶пЈ«                    пЈ¶вҠӨ пЈ№
                          1 p пЈҜX пЈӯ j 1 X t пЈё пЈӯ j 1 X t пЈё пЈә p
               ОЈt+1 =            ОЈt пЈ°         zt вҲ’       ZвҖІ      zt вҲ’          ZвҖІ        пЈ» ОЈt .            (32)
                         nвҲ’1             j
                                                   n вҖІ j                n вҖІ j
                                                              j                           j
                                      |                                {z                              }
                                                                       :=S


  ii) Let
                                      пЈ«                           пЈ¶пЈ«                          пЈ¶вҠӨ
                                 X
                                      пЈӯzjt вҲ’    1X                           1X
                           S=                            Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈӯzjt вҲ’               Ztj вҖІ пЈё      ,       (33)
                                                n                            n
                                  j                 jвҖІ                           jвҖІ


     then
                                               p              вҲҡ
                                                   E(S) =         n вҲ’ 1Id ,                                (34)

 iii) Then
                                        вҲҡ      вҲҡ         p
                                      E( S) вӘҜ Оұ n вҲ’ 1Id = E(S) ,                                           (35)
                                 вҲҡ
                               E( S)
     with 0 вүӨ Оұ = О»max         вҲҡ
                                 nвҲ’1
                                     < 1.

 iv) Finally
                                               p           p
                                          E     ОЈt+1 вӘҜ ОұE   ОЈt ,                                           (36)

     with 0 вүӨ Оұ < 1.


Proof. (Lemma A.2 i)) Rearranging the learning and the sampling steps (Equations (4) and (5))
yields

                                 xjt = Вө t + ОЈt zjt ,
                                            p
                                                                                         (37)
                                       1  X
                              Вө t+1 =        xj ,                                        (38)
                                       n j t
                                                1p X j
                                      Вө t+1 = Вө t + ОЈt    zt , hence                                       (39)
                                                n       j
                                                пЈ«              пЈ¶
                                                       1  X
                               xjt вҲ’ Вө t+1 = ОЈt пЈӯzjt вҲ’      zj пЈё .
                                            p
                                                                                                           (40)
                                                       n j t

Plugging Equation (40) in the learning step (Equation (5)) yields
                                пЈ®    пЈ«                   пЈ¶пЈ«                 пЈ¶вҠӨ пЈ№
                     1           X
                                     пЈӯzjt вҲ’ 1
                                               X                  1 X
                                                   Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈӯzjt вҲ’
                         p                                                     пЈәp
          ОЈt+1 =            ОЈt пЈ°                                      Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈ» ОЈt .                       (41)
                                пЈҜ
                   nвҲ’1             j
                                             n вҖІ                  n вҖІ
                                                         j                            j


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               iid
Proof. (Lemma A.2 ii)) Since Ztj вҲј N (0, I), then
                           пЈ«     пЈ«                    пЈ¶пЈ«                  пЈ¶вҠӨ пЈ¶
                                 пЈӯzjt вҲ’ 1                      1
                             X              X                    X
               E(S) = E пЈӯ                       Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈӯzjt вҲ’      Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈё ,                       (42)
                           пЈ¬                                                 пЈ·
                              j
                                         n    вҖІ
                                                               n  вҖІ
                                                              j                           j
                                       пЈ«             пЈ¶пЈ«                пЈ¶вҠӨ
                              X             1 X               1 X
                          =        E пЈӯzjt вҲ’     Zt вҖІ пЈё пЈӯzjt вҲ’     Zt вҖІ пЈё ,                            (43)
                               j
                                            n вҖІ j             n вҖІ j
                                                         j                           j
                                       пЈ«                             пЈ¶2
                              X                      1X
                          =        E пЈӯzjt вҲ’                       Ztj вҖІ пЈё В· I ,                       (44)
                                                     n
                               j                         jвҖІ
                                                 пЈ«                пЈ¶2
                                       X
                                                 пЈӯzjt вҲ’  1 X
                          =        E                         Zt вҖІ пЈё               В· I ,               (45)
                                           j
                                                        n вҖІ j
                                                           j
                                   |                   {z          }
                              expectation of a unidimensional ПҮ2nвҲ’1 variable

                          = (n вҲ’ 1) В· I .                                                             (46)


Proof. (Lemma A.2 iii)) The matrix square root operator is strictly concave (Marshall et al., 1979,
Chapter 16, Example E.7.d), in addition, S is not a Dirac, hence the strict Jensen inequality yields
                             вҲҡ       p
                         E( S) вүә E(S) ,                                                           (47)
                                     вҲҡ
                                  вүә n вҲ’ 1 В· Id (by Lemma A.2 ii)) ,                               (48)
                                      вҲҡ
                                  вӘҜ Оұ n вҲ’ 1 В· Id ,                                                (49)
                  вҲҡ
                     S)
with = Оұ = О»max E(
                 вҲҡ
                   nвҲ’1
                          < 1.

Proof. (Lemma A.2 iv))
Taking the matrix square root of Equation (41) yields
                                vпЈ®
                                u
                                u       пЈ«                   пЈ¶пЈ«             пЈ¶вҠӨ пЈ№
                       1      1 u X
                                        пЈӯzjt вҲ’ 1
                                                  X                  1 X t пЈё пЈә 41
                                                      Ztj вҖІ пЈё пЈӯzjt вҲ’
          p
            ОЈt+1 =         ОЈt4 u                                        ZвҖІ    пЈ» ОЈt ,                  (50)
                                  пЈҜ
                     nвҲ’1                        n вҖІ                  n вҖІ j
                                t пЈ°
                                     j                                  j                     j

                                                                             вҲҡ
                                       |                                    {z                    }
                                                                            = S
            p             1    1вҲҡ   1
                ОЈt+1 =       ОЈt4 SОЈt4 .                                                               (51)
                         nвҲ’1
Taking the expectation of Equation (51) conditioned on ОЈt yields

             p              1     1
                                       вҲҡ       1
        E     ОЈt+1 |ОЈt = вҲҡ      ОЈt4 E    S|ОЈt ОЈt4 ,                                                   (52)
                           nвҲ’1
                            1     1
                                       вҲҡ   1
                        =вҲҡ      ОЈt4 E    S ОЈt4 (because S вҠҘвҠҘ ОЈt ) ,                                   (53)
                           nвҲ’1
                            1     1  p        1
                        вӘҜвҲҡ      ОЈt4 Оұ E (S)ОЈt4 (by Lemma A.2 iii)) ,                                  (54)
                           nвҲ’1
                              1     1p           1
                        = ОұвҲҡ     ОЈt4 (n вҲ’ 1)IОЈt4 ,                                                    (55)
                             nвҲ’1
                           p
                        = Оұ ОЈ+1 ,                                                                     (56)
               p             p                   p                    p
            E    ОЈt+1 вӘҜ ОұE      ОЈt (because E E      ОЈt+1 |ОЈt     =E   ОЈt+1 ) .                       (57)


                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
                                                1     вҠӨ вҲ’          p
Proposition 2. Let pОё : x 7вҶ’ NВө ,ОЈ (x) = eвҲ’ 2 (xвҲ’ВөВө) ОЈ 1(xвҲ’ВөВө) / (2ПҖ)d |ОЈ|, with Вө вҲҲ Rd , ОЈ вү» 0,
     Вө, ОЈвҲ’1 ), then ExвҲјpОё (x) [вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x)] вүә 0 and x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is 1-Lipschitz.
Оё = (Вө

(Proof of Proposition 2.) Following the computation of Barfoot (2020), and using the fact that
вҲҮОЈвҲ’1 log det(ОЈ) = ОЈ (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, Sec A.4.1) one has
                           1                    1                    d
          вҲ’ log pОё (x) = вҲ’ log det(ОЈвҲ’1 ) + (x вҲ’ Вө )вҠӨ ОЈвҲ’1 (x вҲ’ Вө ) + log(2ПҖ) , hence (58)
                          2                     2                    2
                                 ОЈвҲ’1 (ВөВө вҲ’ x)
  вҲ’вҲҮ(ВөВө,ОЈ) log pОё (x) = 1                    вҠӨ         , then                             (59)
                           2 (x вҲ’ Вө )(x вҲ’ Вө ) вҲ’ ОЈ
                               ОЈвҲ’1

                                            Вө вҲ’ x) вҠ— Id
                                           (Вө
  вҲ’вҲҮ2(ВөВө,ОЈ) log pОё (x) =                     1              .                             (60)
                           Id вҠ— (Вө
                                 Вө вҲ’ x)      2 (ОЈ вҠ— ОЈ)

Equation (60) shows that x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is 1-Lipschitz. In addition, since ОЈ вү» 0, then
E[вҲ’вҲҮ2(ВөВө,ОЈвҲ’1 ) log pОё (x)] вү» 0.

C    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 3
Proposition 3. (The Local Maximum Likelihood Solution is Unique) Let Оё вӢҶ be a solution of Equa-
tion (7) that satisfies Assumptions 1 and 2. If ПөL < Оұ, then for all О» > 0 and Оё in a small enough
neighborhood U around Оё вӢҶ , there exists a unique local maximizer GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) in U.

(Proof of Proposition 3). Let Оё вӢҶ be a solution of Equation (7). Assume that Оё вӢҶ follows Assumptions 1
and 2. We recall that
                                                    ОёвҖІ)
                                              :=H1 (Оё                                 ОёвҖІ)
                                                                                   Оё ,Оё
                                                                             :=H2 (Оё
                                      z        }|           {    z        }|          {
                      H(ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) := ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] +О» ExМғвҲјpОё [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)] , and                     (61)
                        GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) := argmax H(ОёОё , Оё вҖІ )     .                                                    (62)
                                        ОёвҖІ
Using Proposition 4, since Оё is a solution of Equation (7), then вҲҮОё вҖІ H(ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) = 0. In addition,
                                  Оё вӢҶ

Assumption 2 ensures that Оё вӢҶ вҲҲ local-argmaxОё вҖІ вҲҲОҳ H(ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вҖІ ) and that вҲҮОё2вҖІ H(ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) is invertible.
Hence, by the implicit function theorem (Lang, 1999, Theorem 5.9), for Оё in a neighborhood of
Оё вӢҶ we have that there exists a continuous function g such that g(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = Оё вӢҶ and вҲҮОё вҖІ H(ОёОё , g(ОёОё )) = 0.
Finally, in order to show that g(ОёОё ) is a local maximizer of Оё вҖІ 7вҶ’ H(ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) we just need to show that
вҲҮОё2вҖІ H(ОёОё , Оё вӢҶ ) вүә 0.
     вҲҮОё2вҖІ H(ОёОё , Оё вӢҶ ) = вҲҮОё2вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ ) + О»вҲҮОё2вҖІ H2 (ОёОё , Оё вӢҶ )                                                   (63)
                     = (1 + О»)            вҲҮОё2вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ )         +О»(вҲҮОё2вҖІ H2 (ОёОё , Оё вӢҶ ) вҲ’ вҲҮОё2вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ ))   ,   (64)
                                          |     {z     }
                                   вӘҜвҲ’ОұI (using Assumption 2)

                     вӘҜ вҲ’(1 + О»)ОұI + О» (ExвҲјpОё [вҲҮ2 log pОё вҖІ (x)] вҲ’ ExвҲјpdata [вҲҮ2 log pОё вҖІ (x)]) ,                    (65)
                                      |                         {z                         }
                                                                    вӘҜОөL (using Assumption 1)

                     вӘҜ вҲ’Оұ(1 + О»)Id + О»ОөLId ,                                                                      (66)
                     вүә 0 if Оұ вүҘ ОөL .                                                                              (67)



D     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4
Proposition 4. (The Optimal Parametric Generative Model is a Fixed Point) For a given data
distribution pdata , any Оё вӢҶ solution of Equation (7), and for all О» > 0 we have,
                                            Оё вӢҶ = GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ ) .                       (10)


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We recall the definition of Оё вӢҶ and GО»вҲһ (Equations (7) and (9)):


                                 Оё вӢҶ вҲҲ argmax ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] .                        (7)
                                          Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                               Оё


              GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) вҲҲ local-argmax(ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] +О» ExМғвҲјpОё [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)]) .    (9)
                               Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                    Оё  |        {z           }    |        {z          }
                                                         ОёвҖІ)
                                                   :=H1 (Оё                             ОёвҖІ)
                                                                                    Оё ,Оё
                                                                              :=H2 (Оё

Since Оё вӢҶ is a solution of Equation (7)
                               вҲҖОёОё вҖІ вҲҲ Оҳ, H1 (ОёОё вҖІ ) = ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)]                (68)
                                                     вүӨ ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вӢҶ (x)]                (69)
                                                     вүӨ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ ) .                           (70)
Gibbs inequality yields
                             вҲҖОёОё вҖІ вҲҲ Оҳ, H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вҖІ ) = ExМғвҲјpОё вӢҶ [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)]           (71)
                                                         вүӨ ExМғвҲјpОё вӢҶ [log pОё вӢҶ (xМғ)]           (72)
                                                         вүӨ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) .                 (73)
H1 and H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , В·) are both maximized in Оё вӢҶ hence
                          GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ ) = argmax H1 (ОёОё вҖІ ) + О»H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вҖІ ) = Оё вӢҶ .         (74)
                                           ОёвҖІ


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

                                        Оё вӢҶ вҲҲ argmax ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] .                                       (7)
                                                   Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                                        Оё


                  GО»вҲһ (ОёОё ) вҲҲ local-argmax(ExвҲјpdata [log pОё вҖІ (x)] +О» ExМғвҲјpОё [log pОё вҖІ (xМғ)]) .                      (9)
                                   Оё вҖІ вҲҲОё
                                        Оё  |        {z           }    |        {z          }
                                                            :=H1    ОёвҖІ)
                                                                   (Оё                    :=H2     (Оё  ОёвҖІ)
                                                                                                   Оё ,Оё

Assumption 1.        For Оё close enough to Оё , the mapping x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is L-Lipschitz.
                                                   ОёвӢҶ
Assumption 2. The mapping Оё 7вҶ’ ExвҲјpdata [log pОё (x)] is continuously twice differentiable locally
around Оё вӢҶ and ExвҲјpdata [вҲҮОё2 log pОё вӢҶ (x)] вӘҜ вҲ’ОұId вүә 0.

Theorem 1. (Stability of Iterative Retraining) Given Оё вӢҶ as defined in Equation (7) that follows As-
sumptions 1 and 2, we have that, if О»(1 + LОө Оұ ) < /2, then the operator norm of the Jacobian is
                                                   1
strictly bounded by 1, more precisely,
                                                                О»(Оұ + ОөL)
                                      вҲҘJОё GО»вҲһ (ОёОё вӢҶ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ                   <1 .                                    (11)
                                                              Оұ вҲ’ О»(Оұ + ОөL)
Consequently, there exists a R > 0 such that for all Оё 0 вҲҲ Оё that satisfy вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ R, then starting
at Оё 0 and having Оё t+1 = GО»вҲһ (ОёОё t ) we have that Оё t вҲ’вҶ’ Оё вӢҶ and
                                                                 tвҶ’+вҲһ
                                                                              t                !
                                       вӢҶ                   О»(Оұ + ОөL)                       вӢҶ
                             вҲҘОёОё t вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ = OМғ                                     вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ        .              (12)
                                                         Оұ вҲ’ О»(Оұ + ОөL)

The main goal of Theorem 1 is to show that the operator norm of the Jacobian of the fixed-point
operator G is strictly bounded by one. We prove Theorem 1 with the following steps: using the
Implicit Function Theorem, Schwarz theorem, and analytic manipulations (Lemmas E.1 i) and E.1 ii))
we managed to obtain a simple formula for the Jacobian of G at Оё вӢҶ . Using Kantorovich-Rubenstein
duality, we manage to bound the Jacobian of the fixed-point operator at Оё вӢҶ (Lemma E.1 iii)), and thus
to provide a condition for which вҲҘJ GО» (ОёОё вӢҶ )вҲҘ2 < 1. These steps are detailed formally in Lemma E.1.
      Lemma E.1. With A = вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ ) and B = вҲҮОё2,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ), under the assumptions of
      Theorem 1:
    i) There exists an open set U вҠӮ Оҳ containing Оё вӢҶ such that вҲҖОёОё вҲҲ U,
                                                                                 вҲ’1
               J G(ОёОё ) = вҲ’О» вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H1 (ОёОё ) + О»вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё , G(ОёОё ))     В· вҲҮОё2,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё , G(ОёОё )) .   (75)

    ii)
                                           вҲҮОё вҖІОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) = вҲ’вҲҮОё вҖІОё H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) ,                     (76)
                                 ОёвӢҶ
          and thus Jacobian at Оё can be written
                                                                 вҲ’1
                                        J G(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = Id + О»AвҲ’1 B    В· О»AвҲ’1 B .                                      (77)

 iii) The spectral norm of AвҲ’1 B and B вҲ’ A can be bounded
                                                                             LОө
                                                     вҲҘAвҲ’1 BвҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 +             ,                                   (78)
                                                                             Оұ
          and using Kantorovich-Rubenstein duality theorem
                                               вҲҘB вҲ’ AвҲҘ2 вүӨ LdW (pОё вӢҶ , pdata ) .                                     (79)

Proof. (Lemma E.1 i)) The definition of G yields
                                                   вҲҮОё вҖІ H(ОёОё , G(ОёОё )) = 0 .                                        (80)


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Differentiating Equation (80) using the chain rule yields
                                    вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё H(ОёОё , G(ОёОё )) = вҲ’вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H(ОёОё , G(ОёОё )) В· J G(ОёОё ) ,                          (81)
which implies
                                                                              вҲ’1
                              J G(ОёОё ) = вҲ’ вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H(ОёОё , G(ОёОё ))               вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё H(ОёОё , G(ОёОё )) .                   (82)

Since H1 does not depend on Оё
                                                       вҲҮОё H1 (G(ОёОё )) = 0 .                                                    (83)

Combining Equations (82) and (83) and the fact that G(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = Оё вӢҶ yields
                                                                                            вҲ’1
                J G(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = вҲ’О» (вҲҮОё вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ ) + О»вҲҮОё вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ))           вҲҮОё вҖІ ,ОёОё H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) .   (84)



Proof. (Lemma E.1 ii)) First, letвҖҷs compute вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё H2 (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ):
                                    Z
                              вҖІ
                   H2 (ОёОё , Оё ) =      log pОё вҖІ (x)pОё (x)dx , which yields                                                     (85)
                                    ZX
           вҲҮОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) =       вҲҮОё вҖІ log pОё вҖІ (x)pОё (x)dx , and thus                                                    (86)
                                     X
                                    Z
          вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё H2 (ОёОё , Оё вҖІ ) =    вҲҮОё вҖІ log pОё вҖІ (x)вҲҮОё pОё (x)dx , (using Schwarz theorem).                                 (87)
                                            X

This yields
                                    Z
      вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) =         вҲҮОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)вҲҮОё pОё вӢҶ (x)dx                                                         (88)
                                    ZX                                                Z
                              =         вҲҮОё [pОё вӢҶ (x) вҲҮОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)]dx вҲ’                вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)pОё вӢҶ (x)dx         (89)
                                      X
                                                                                      |X
                                                     |    {z       }
                                                              вҲҮОё pОё вӢҶ (x)                            {z              }
                                                          =    pОё вӢҶ (x)                        =вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (Оё
                                                                                                               Оё вӢҶ ,Оё
                                                                                                                    ОёвӢҶ)
                                    Z
                              =     вҲҮОё2,ОёОё pОё вӢҶ (x)dx вҲ’ вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ )                                            (90)
                                      X
                                    Z
                              = вҲҮОё2      pОё вӢҶ (x)dx вҲ’вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ )                                               (91)
                                    | X {z         }
                                            =1
                                |        {z        }
                                                =0
                              = вҲ’вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) .                                                                 (92)

Consequently, with A = вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) and B = вҲҮОё2,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) we get
                                                                       вҲ’1
                                          J G(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = (A + О»B)              В· О»B                                              (93)
                                                                      вҲ’1
                                                                               вҲ’1
                                                     = Id + О»A              B     В· О»AвҲ’1 B .                                   (94)



Proof. Now, we have that
                                             вҲҘAвҲ’1 BвҲҘ = вҲҘAвҲ’1 (B вҲ’ A) + Id вҲҘ                                                     (95)
                                                                            вҲ’1
                                                          вүӨ 1 + вҲҘA вҲҘ В· вҲҘB вҲ’ AвҲҘ                                                 (96)
                                                                LОө
                                                          вүӨ1+      ,                                                           (97)
                                                                 Оұ


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we used the triangle inequality, the submutliplicativity of the matrix norm and Assumptions 1
and 2 yield
          вҲҘB вҲ’ AвҲҘ = вҲҮОё2,ОёОё вҖІ H2 (ОёОё вӢҶ , Оё вӢҶ ) вҲ’ вҲҮОё2вҖІ ,ОёОё вҖІ H1 (ОёОё вӢҶ )                                     (98)
                    Z                                               Z
                  =      вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)pОё вӢҶ (x)dx вҲ’                вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)pdata (x)dx    (99)
                     X                                                X
                  = ExвҲјpОё вӢҶ вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё вӢҶ (x) вҲ’ ExвҲјpd вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё вӢҶ (x)

                                                                                                         (100)
                      вүӨ LdW (pОё вӢҶ , pdata ) ,                                                            (101)
by Kantorovich-Rubenstein duality theorem, where L is the Lipschitz norm of x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2,ОёОё log pОё (x).


Proof. (Theorem 1) Using Lemma E.1 iii), one has that if О»(1 + ОөL/Оұ) < 1, then вҲҘО»AвҲ’1 BвҲҘ < 1 and
thus
                                                  вҲһ
                                           вҲ’1 X
                            Id + О»AвҲ’1 B       =      (вҲ’О»AвҲ’1 B)k .                         (102)
                                                            k=0
Combining Lemma E.1 ii) and eq. (102) yields
                                                      вҲһ
                                                      X
                                     J G(ОёОё вӢҶ ) = вҲ’       (вҲ’О»AвҲ’1 B)k .                                   (103)
                                                      k=1

Thus, by the triangle inequality and the submutliplicativity of the matrix norm,
                                           вҲһ
                                           X                        вҲҘО»AвҲ’1 BвҲҘ
                          вҲҘJ G(ОёОё вӢҶ )вҲҘ вүӨ         вҲҘО»AвҲ’1 BвҲҘk =                   .                         (104)
                                                                  1 вҲ’ вҲҘО»AвҲ’1 BвҲҘ
                                           k=1
                                                                                        вҲ’1
                                                                     вҲҘО»A BвҲҘ
To conclude, one simply needs to provide a sufficient condition for 1вҲ’вҲҘО»A вҲ’1 BвҲҘ < 1, which is
      LОө

О» 1 + Оұ < 1/2.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Assumption 1. For Оё close enough to Оё вӢҶ , the mapping x 7вҶ’ вҲҮОё2 log pОё (x) is L-Lipschitz.
Assumption 2. The mapping Оё 7вҶ’ ExвҲјpdata [log pОё (x)] is continuously twice differentiable locally
around Оё вӢҶ and ExвҲјpdata [вҲҮОё2 log pОё вӢҶ (x)] вӘҜ вҲ’ОұId вүә 0.
Theorem 2. (Approximate Stability) Under the same assumptions of Theorem 1 and Assumption 3,
we have that there exists 0 < ПҒ < 1 and R > 0 such that if вҲҘОёОё n0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ R then, with probability
1 вҲ’ Оҙ,                                  r       ! t
                                     a        bt X l
               n    вӢҶ
           вҲҘОёОё t вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ         log        ПҒ + ПҒt вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ , вҲҖt вҲҲ NвҲ— .          (14)
                                      n       Оҙ
                                                                    l=0
Assumption 3. There exists a, b, ОөOPT вүҘ 0 and a neighborhood U of Оё вӢҶ such that with probability
1 вҲ’ Оҙ over the samplings, we have5
                                                                      r
                                     n          вҲһ                  a      b
                  вҲҖОёОё вҲҲ U, вҲҖn вҲҲ N, вҲҘGО» (ОёОё ) вҲ’ GО» (ОёОё )вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ    log .               (13)
                                                                    n     Оҙ

Proof. (Theorem 2)
                         Оё nt+1 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вүӨ Оё nt+1 вҲ’ Оё вҲһ                 вҲһ
                                                       t+1 + Оё t+1 вҲ’ Оё
                                                                             вӢҶ
                                                                                                                         (105)
                                            n
                                      вүӨ ||GО»,О¶ (ОёОё nt ) вҲ’ GО» (ОёОё nt )|| + ||G(ОёОё nt ) вҲ’ G(ОёОё вӢҶ )|| .                     (106)
Using Assumption 3, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ we have that
                                                                                      r
                                  n                                      a                       b
                                 GО»,О¶ (ОёОё nt ) вҲ’ GО» (ОёОё nt )   вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ               log        ,                     (107)
                                                                          n                      Оҙ
Moreover Theorem 1 states that there exists a constant ПҒ < 1 such that
                                          вҲҘG(ОёОё nt ) вҲ’ G(ОёОё вӢҶ )|| вүӨ ПҒ||ОёОё nt вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ .                                   (108)
This yields that with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                                                                    r        !
                                                          a              b
                           Оё nt+1 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ     вүӨ     ОөOPT + вҲҡ           log          + ПҒ вҲҘОёОё nt вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ .                   (109)
                                                           n             Оҙ

A recurrence and the conditional independence of the successive samplings yield
                                                    r       ! t                         !
                                                 a        b   X
вҲҖt вҲҲ NвҲ— , Оҙ вҲҲ [0, 1], P вҲҘОёОё nt вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ     log         ПҒi + ПҒt вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүҘ (1вҲ’Оҙ)t .
                                                  n       Оҙ i=0
                                                                                              (110)
As done in Duchi (2009) or in Bubeck et al. (2021, Proof sketch of Prop. 2), the change of variable
Оҙ вҖІ = Оҙ В· t yields
                                                    r        ! t                         !
        вҲ— вҖІ                                      a        bt X i
                             n     вӢҶ
вҲҖt вҲҲ N , Оҙ вҲҲ [0, t], P вҲҘОёОё t вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ вүӨ ОөOPT + вҲҡ          log вҖІ       ПҒ + ПҒ вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ /t)t .
                                                                          t           вӢҶ
                                                  n       Оҙ                           i=0
                                                                                           | {z }
                                                                                                                         вүҘ1вҲ’Оҙ вҖІ
                                                                                                                         (111)
In particular, since t вүҘ 1, Equation (111) implies
                                                                     r            !   t
                                                                                                                !
           вҲ—   вҖІ                                            a                bt       X
вҲҖt вҲҲ N , Оҙ вҲҲ [0, 1], P        вҲҘОёОё nt вҲ’ Оё вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ      ОөOPT + вҲҡ              log вҖІ              i         t   вӢҶ
                                                                                            ПҒ + ПҒ вҲҘОёОё 0 вҲ’ Оё вҲҘ       вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҖІ /t)t .
                                                             n               Оҙ        i=0
                                                                                                                      | {z }
                                                                                                                         вүҘ1вҲ’Оҙ вҖІ
                                                                                                                         (112)


    5
        We could have kept a more general bound as C(n, Оҙ), and this choice comes without loss of generality.


                                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G            A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND D ETAILS



G.1          E IGHT G AUSSIANS вҖ“ DDPM


             Ground Truth    No retraining        #retrain. = 10         #retrain. = 20        #retrain. = 100
Collapsing
Stability


Figure 3: Stability vs. collapsing of iterative retraining of generative models on their own data. Each
modelвҖҷs density is displayed as a function of the number of retraining steps. The first two columns correspond to
the true density and the density of a diffusion model trained on the true data. As observed in Shumailov et al.
(2023); Alemohammad et al. (2023), iteratively retraining the model exclusively on its own generated data (top
row) yields a density that collapses: samples very near the mean of each mode are sampled almost exclusively
after 100 iterations of retraining. Contrastingly, retraining on a mixture of true and generated data (bottom row)
does not yield a collapsing density.


G.2          T WO MOONS вҖ“ F LOW M ATCHING


             Ground Truth   No retraining        #retrain. = 10        #retrain. = 20        #retrain. = 50
 Collapse
 Stability


Figure 4: Stability vs. collapsing of iterative retraining of generative models on their own data. Each
modelвҖҷs density is displayed as a function of the number of retraining steps. The first two columns correspond to
the true density and the density of a diffusion model trained on the true data respectively.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3                      CIFAR-10 вҖ“ DDPM


                    No Synth. Data (О» = 0)          О» = 0.01          О» = 0.2          О» = 0.4        О» = 0.6        О» = 0.8            О»=1
                    О» = 0.001                       О» = 0.1           О» = 0.3          О» = 0.5        О» = 0.7        О» = 0.9            Fully Synthetic

                                          FID                                    Precision                                     Recall
CIFAR-10 вҖ“ DDPM


                  10.0
                                                               0.67
                                                                                                          0.55
                   7.5
                                                               0.66

                                                               0.65                                       0.50
                   5.0

                         0     1      2         3   4     5           0     1      2      3       4   5          0   1         2    3       4       5
                                   # retraining                                 # retraining                             # retraining

Figure 5: FID, precision, and recall of the generative models as a function of the number of retraining for
                                                                                          вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
multiple fractions О» of generated data, D = Dreal вҲӘ {xМғi }i=1 , xМғi вҲј pОё t . Only training on synthetic data
(dashed red line with triangles) yields divergence.


For DDPM, since the optimizer was not provided in the checkpoints, we first train the model from
scratch for 1000 epochs and use it as a pretrained model.


                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.4                          F ULL G RAPHS FOR F ULLY S YNTHETIC CIFAR10-OTCFM, CIFAR10-EDM, AND
                             FFHQ-EDM


                           No Synth. Data (О» = 0)        О» = 0.01              О» = 0.2             О» = 0.4      О» = 0.6        О» = 0.8            О»=1
                           О» = 0.001                     О» = 0.1               О» = 0.3             О» = 0.5      О» = 0.7        О» = 0.9            Fully Synthetic


                   60
                                            FID                     0.75
                                                                                             Precision               0.6
                                                                                                                                         Recall
CIFAR-10 вҖ“ OTCFM


                                                                                                                     0.4
                   30                                               0.70


                                                                                                                     0.2
                       5                                            0.65
                       8
      CIFAR-10 вҖ“ EDM


                                                                    0.65

                       5                                                                                            0.60
                                                                    0.60


                       2                                            0.55                                            0.55
                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                    0.70
FFHQ-64 вҖ“ EDM


                   20


                                                                    0.65                                             0.4
                   10


                       2                                            0.60                                             0.2
                            0        5        10    15       20            0             5        10      15   20          0    5         10       15        20
                                      # retraining                                       # retraining                            # retraining

Figure 6: FID, precision, and recall of the generative models as a function of the number of retraining for
                                                                                                       вҢҠО»В·nвҢӢ
multiple fractions О» of generated data, D = Dreal вҲӘ {xМғi }i=1 , xМғi вҲј pОё t . For all models and datasets, only
training on synthetic data (dashed red line with triangles) yields divergence. For the EDM models on CIFAR-10
(middle row), the iterative retraining is stable for all the proportions of generated data from О» = 0 to О» = 1. For
the EDM on FFHQ-64 (bottom row), the iterative retraining is stable if the proportion of used generated data is
small enough (О» < 0.5).



G.5                          D ETAILS ON THE M ETRICS : P RECISION AND R ECALL

High Level Idea The notion of precision and recall used for generative models is different from the
one used in standard supervised learning. It was first introduced in вҖңAssessing Generative Models via
Precision and RecallвҖқ (Sajjadi et al., 2018) and refined in вҖңImproved precision and recall metric for
assessing generative modelsвҖқ (KynkГӨГӨnniemi et al., 2019), which we use in practice. Intuitively, at
the distribution level, precision and recall measure how the training and the generated distributions
overlap. Precision can be seen as a measure of what proportion of the generated samples are contained
in the вҖңsupportвҖқ of the training distribution. On the other hand, recall measures what proportion
of the training samples are contained in the вҖңsupportвҖқ of the generated distribution. If the training
distribution and the generated distribution are the same, then precision and recall should be perfect.
If there is no overlapвҖ”i.e. disjoint between the training distribution and the generated distribution,
then one should have zero precision and zero recall.


                                                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Implementation Details In order to adapt these metrics for empirical distributions that have
finite samples customary of training deep generative models, multiple numerical tricks are required.
Specifically, for an empirical set of samples, the support of the associated distribution is approximated
by taking the union of balls centered at each point with radius determined by the distance to the k-th
nearest neighbor. This is generally done in some meaningful feature space (here we use Inception V3
network, Heusel et al. 2017). For FID, we follow the standard of comparing 50k generated samples to
the 50k samples in the training set. For precision and recall, with the same sets of samples, we follow
the methodology of (KynkГӨГӨnniemi et al., 2019) with k = 4. We used the FID, precision and recall
implementations of Jiralerspong et al. (2023) (https://github.com/marcojira/fls).


G.6              S AMPLE V ISUALIZATION
Fully Synth.
О»=1
О» = 0.5
О» = 0.1
No synth. data


                 (a) 0 retrain.   (b) 5 retrain.   (c) 10 retrain.   (d) 15 retrain.   (e) 20 retrain.

Figure 7: EDM samples, with generative models iteratively retrained on their own data, only on
the synthetic data (top), and on a mix of synthetic and real data.


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.7                       Q UANTITATIVE S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS


                               Fully Synthetic        О» = 0.0                                    О» = 0.5           О» = 1.0
Wasserstein-1 distance


                                                              Wasserstein-2 distance   0.8
                         0.6

                                                                                       0.6
                         0.4
                                                                                       0.4
                         0.2
                                0           5            10                                  0           5             10
                                       # retraining                                                 # retraining
Figure 8: Stability vs. collapsing of iterative retraining of generative models on their own data. The
Wasserstein-1 and 2 distances between the true data distribution and the generated one is displayed as a function
of the number of retraining. The distances are averaged over 50 runs, the line corresponds to the mean, and the
shaded area to the standard deviation. When the model is fully retrained only on its own data (Fully Synthetic,
dashed red line with triangles), the distance to the true data distribution diverges. When the model is retrained on
a mixture of real and synthetic data (О» = 0, О» = 0.5, О» = 1), then the distance between the generated samples
and the true data distribution stabilizes.


The setting of Figure 8 is the same as for Figure 4: we used the two-moons datasets, and learn
the samples using OT-CFM (Tong et al., 2023), a state-of-the art flow model, which corresponds
to a continuous normalizing flow, which is an exact likelihood. The dataset has 1000 samples,
and all the hyperparameters of the OT-CFM are the default ones from the implementation of
Tong et al. (2023), https://github.com/atong01/conditional-flow-matching/
blob/main/examples/notebooks/SF2M_2D_example.ipynb.


                                                            28
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  G.8           PARAMETER C ONVERGENCE

           Fully Synthetic          О» = 0.1        О» = 0.3        О» = 0.5      О» = 0.7            О» = 0.9    Random Init.
           No Synth. Data (О» = 0)   О» = 0.2        О» = 0.4        О» = 0.6      О» = 0.8            О»=1

              CIFAR-10 вҖ“ OTCFM                          CIFAR-10 вҖ“ EDM                        FFHQ-64 вҖ“ EDM
          10вҲ’1                                                                     10    вҲ’1
kОёtО» вҲ’ Оё0k/ p
           вҲҡ



                                                   вҲ’1
                                              10
                                                                                   10вҲ’2
                                                   вҲ’2
                                              10
                вҲ’2
          10                                                                       10вҲ’3
                                                   вҲ’3
                                              10
                     0       10       20                0        10       20                  0        10       20
                         # retraining                        # retraining                          # retraining
  Figure 9: Convergence in the Parameter Space. The figure displays the Euclidean norm of the difference
  between the current parameters at retraining t Оё О»t , and the parameters Оё t0 of the initial network used to finetune.
  In order to have comparable scales between the models and the dataset, the norm is rescaled by the number of
  parameters p of each network. The dashed black line shows the norm of the difference between the parameter Оё t0
  of the initial network used to finetune, and a random initialization. Each column displays a different combinaison
  of dataset and algorithm. One can that fully retraining on synthetic data yields to a larger distance to the initial
  parameters, than retraining on a mix of synthetic and real data.


  The setting of Figure 9 is the same as for Figure 2, we finetune the EDM (Karras et al., 2022) and
  OTCFM models (Lipman et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2023) for 20 epochs and 20 retraining on CIFAR-10
  and FFHQ.


                                                             29
