Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P USHING B OUNDARIES :
M IXUP ’ S I NFLUENCE ON N EURAL C OLLAPSE
 Quinn LeBlanc Fisher∗, Haoming Meng∗, Vardan Papyan
 University of Toronto



                                                A BSTRACT

             Mixup is a data augmentation strategy that employs convex combinations of train-
             ing instances and their respective labels to improve the robustness and calibration
             of deep neural networks. Despite its widespread adoption, the nuanced mech-
             anisms that underpin its success are not entirely understood. The observed phe-
             nomenon of Neural Collapse, where the last-layer activations and classifier of deep
             networks converge to a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF), provides a com-
             pelling motivation to explore whether mixup induces alternative geometric config-
             urations and whether those could explain its success. In this study, we delve into
             the last-layer activations of training data for deep networks subjected to mixup,
             aiming to uncover insights into its operational efficacy. Our investigation (code),
             spanning various architectures and dataset pairs, reveals that mixup’s last-layer ac-
             tivations predominantly converge to a distinctive configuration different than one
             might expect. In this configuration, activations from mixed-up examples of iden-
             tical classes align with the classifier, while those from different classes delineate
             channels along the decision boundary. These findings are unexpected, as mixed-
             up features are not simple convex combinations of feature class means (as one
             might get, for example, by training mixup with the mean squared error loss). By
             analyzing this distinctive geometric configuration, we elucidate the mechanisms
             by which mixup enhances model calibration. To further validate our empirical
             observations, we conduct a theoretical analysis under the assumption of an uncon-
             strained features model, utilizing the mixup loss. Through this, we characterize
             and derive the optimal last-layer features under the assumption that the classifier
             forms a simplex ETF.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Consider a classification problem characterized by an input space X = RD and an output space
                                                    N
Y := {0, 1}C . Given a training set {(xi , yi )}i=1 , with xi ∈ X denoting the i-th input data point
and yi ∈ Y representing the corresponding label, the goal is to train a model fθ : X 7→ Y by finding
parameters θ that minimize the cross-entropy loss CE(fθ (xi ), yi ) incurred by the model’s prediction
                                                                            PN
fθ (xi ) relative to the true target yi , averaged over the training set, N1 i=1 CE(fθ (xi ), yi ).
Papyan, Han, and Donoho (2020) observed that optimizing this loss leads to a phenomenon called
Neural Collapse, where the last-layer activations and classifiers of the network converge to the ge-
ometric configuration of a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF). This phenomenon reflects the
natural tendency of the networks to organize the representations of different classes such that each
class’s representations and classifiers become aligned, equinorm, and equiangularly spaced, pro-
viding optimal separation in the feature space. Understanding Neural Collapse is challenging due
to the complex structure and inherent non-linearity of neural networks. Motivated by the expres-
sivity of overparametrized models, the unconstrained features model (Mixon et al., 2020) and the
layer-peeled model (Fang et al., 2021) have been introduced to study Neural Collapse theoretically.
These mathematical models treat the last-layer features as free optimization variables along with the
classifier weights, abstracting away the intricacies of the deep neural network.

    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.1   M IXUP

Mixup, a data augmentation strategy proposed by Zhang et al. (2017), generates new training exam-
ples through convex combinations of existing data points and labels:
                       xλii′ = λxi + (1 − λ)xi′ ,        λ
                                                        yii ′ = λyi + (1 − λ)yi′ ,


where λ ∈ [0, 1] is a randomly sampled value from a predetermined distribution Dλ . Conven-
tionally, this distribution is a symmetric Beta(α, α) distribution, with α = 1 frequently set as the
default. The loss associated with mixup can be mathematically represented as:
                                            N N
                                        1 XX
                               Eλ∼Dλ             CE(fθ (xλii′ ), yii
                                                                  λ
                                                                     ′ ).                          (1)
                                       N 2 i=1 ′
                                               i =1


A specific mixup data point, represented as xλii′ , is categorized as a same-class mixup point when
yi = yi′ , and classified as different-class when yi ̸= yi′ .

1.2   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

Despite the widespread use and demonstrated efficacy of the mixup data augmentation strategy in
enhancing the generalization and calibration of deep neural networks, its underlying operational
mechanisms remain not well understood. The emergence of Neural Collapse prompts the following
question:

         Does mixup induce its own distinct configurations in last-layer activations, differ-
         ing from traditional Neural Collapse? If so, does the configuration contribute to
         the method’s success?

This study aims to uncover the potential geometric configurations in the last-layer activations result-
ing from mixup and to determine whether these configurations can offer insights into its success.

1.3   C ONTRIBUTIONS

Our contributions in this paper are twofold.

Empirical Study and Discovery We conduct an extensive empirical study focusing on the last-
layer activations of mixup training data. Our study reveals that mixup induces a geometric configura-
tion of last-layer activations across various datasets and models. This configuration is characterized
by distinct behaviours:

       • Same-Class Activations: These form a simplex ETF, aligning with their respective classi-
         fier.
       • Different-Class Activations: These form channels along the decision boundary of the
         classifiers, exhibiting interesting behaviors: Data points with a mixup coefficient, λ, closer
         to 0.5 are located nearer to the middle of the channels. The density of different-class
         mixup points increases as λ approaches 0.5, indicating a collapsing behaviour towards the
         channels.

We investigate how this configuration varies under different training settings and the layer-wise
trajectory the features take to arrive at the configuration. Additionally, the configuration offers
insight into mixup’s success. Specifically, we measure the calibration induced by mixup and present
an explanation for why the configuration leads to increased calibration.
Motivated by our theoretical analysis, we also examine the configuration of the last-layer activations
obtained through training with mixup while fixing the classifier as a simplex ETF.

Theoretical Analysis We provide a theoretical analysis of the discovered phenomenon, utilizing
an adapted unconstrained features model tailored for the mixup training objective. Assuming the
classifier forms a simplex ETF under optimality, we theoretically characterize the optimal last-layer
activations for all class pairs and for every λ ∈ [0, 1].


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.4   R ESULTS S UMMARY

The results of our extensive empirical investigation are presented in Figures 1, 3, 5, 10, and 12.
These figures collectively illustrate a consistent identification of a unique last-layer configuration
induced by mixup, observed across a diverse range of:
Architectures: Our study incorporated the WideResNet-40-10 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2017)
        and ViT-B (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) architectures;
Datasets: The datasets employed included FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR10, and CI-
        FAR100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009);
Optimizers: We used stochastic gradient descent (SGD), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017), and AdamW
        (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) as optimizers.
The networks trained showed good generalization performance and calibration, as substantiated by
the data presented in Tables 1 and 2. That is, the values are comparable to those found in other
papers (Zhang et al., 2017; Thulasidasan et al., 2020).
Beyond our principal observations, we conducted a counterfactual experiment, the results of which
are depicted in Figures 2 and 8. These reveal a notable divergence in the configuration of the last-
layer features when mixup is not employed. They also show that for MSE loss, the last-layer activa-
tions are convex combinations of the classifiers, which one may expect.
Furthermore, we juxtaposed the findings from our empirical investigation with theoretically optimal
features, which were derived from an unconstrained features model and are showcased in Figure 6.
To complement these results, we
train models using mixup while fix-   Table 1: Test accuracy for experiments in Figures 1 and 8.
ing the classifier as a simplex ETF,
and we plot the last-layer features   Network                    Dataset        Baseline Mixup
in Figure 7. This yields last-layer
features that align more closely                             FashionMNIST        95.10       94.21
with the theoretical features.        WideResNet-40-10          CIFAR10           96.2       97.30
                                                               CIFAR100          80.03       81.42
2 E XPERIMENTS                                               FashionMNIST        93.71       94.24
                                      ViT-B/4                   CIFAR10          86.92       92.56
2.1 M ODEL T RAINING                                           CIFAR100          59.95       69.83

We consider FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton,
2009) datasets. Unless otherwise indicated, for all experiments using mixup augmentation, α=1 was
used, meaning λ was sampled uniformly between 0 and 1. Each dataset is trained on both a Vision
Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), and a wide residual network (Zagoruyko & Komodakis,
2017). For each network and dataset combination, the experiment with the highest test accuracy
is repeated without mixup and is referred to as the “baseline” result. No dropout was used in any
experiments. Hyperparameter details are outlined in Appendix B.1.

2.2   V ISUALIZATIONS OF LAST- LAYER ACTIVATIONS

For each dataset and network pair, we visualize the last-layer activations for a subset of the training
dataset consisting of three randomly selected classes. After obtaining the last-layer activations, they
undergo a two-step projection: first onto the classifier for the subset of three classes, then onto a
two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional simplex ETF. A more detailed explanation
of the projection can be found in Appendix B.2. The results of this experiment can be seen in Figure
1. Notably, activations from mixed-up examples of the same classes closely align with a simplex
ETF structure, whereas those from different classes delineate channels along the decision bound-
ary. Additionally, in certain plots, activations from mixed-up examples of different classes become
increasingly sparse as λ approaches 0 and 1. This suggests a clustering of activations towards the
channels. When generating plots, we keep the network in train mode 1 . Since ViT does not have
batch normalization layers, this difference is not applicable.
   1
     We choose to have the network in evaluation mode for the WideResNet-40-10 CIFAR100 combination
because the batch statistics are highly skewed due to the high number of classes.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: (Visualization of activations outputted by networks trained with mixup). Last-layer
activations of mixup training data for a randomly selected subset of three classes across various
dataset and network architecture combinations trained with mixup. The first row illustrates activa-
tions generated by a WideResNet, while the second row showcases activations from a ViT. Each
column corresponds to a different dataset. Coloration indicates the type of mixup (same or different
class), along with the level of mixup, λ. For each plot, the relevant classifiers are plotted in black.


2.3   C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT LOSS FUNCTIONS

As part of our empirical investigation, we have conducted experiments utilizing Mean Squared Er-
ror (MSE) loss instead of cross-entropy, through which we observed in Figure 2 that features of
mixed up examples are derived from simple convex combinations of same-class features. Initially,
we anticipated a similar uninteresting configuration for cross-entropy; however, our measurements
reveal that the resulting geometric configurations are markedly more interesting and complex. Ad-
ditionally, we compare results in Figure 1 to the baseline (trained without mixup) cross-entropy loss
in Figure 2. For the baseline networks, mixup data is loosely aligned with the classifier, regardless
of same-class or different-class. The area in between classifiers is noisy and filled with examples
where λ is close to 0.5. Additional baseline last-layer activations can be found in Figure 8.


Figure 2: (Visualization of activations outputted by networks trained with various loss func-
tions). Last-layer activations for WideResNet-40-10 trained on the CIFAR10 dataset, subsetted to
three randomly selected classes. Projections are generated using the same method as Figure 1. Left
to right: baseline cross-entropy, MSE mixup, cross-entropy mixup. Colouring indicates mixup type
(same-class or different-class), and the level of mixup, λ. Relevant classifiers plotted in black. Ad-
ditional dataset architecture combinations for baseline cross-entropy are available in appendix D.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.4   L AYER - WISE TRAJECTORY OF CLS TOKEN

Using the same projection method as in Figure 1, we investigate the trajectory of the CLS token for
ViT models. First, we randomly select two CIFAR10 training images. Then, we create a selection
of mixed up examples using the respective images. For each mixed up example, we project the path
of the CLS token at each layer of the ViT-B/4 network.
Figure 3 presents the results for two images of the same class, and two images of a different class.
For different-class mixup, the plot shows that for very small λ, the network first classifies the image
as class 1 and only in deeper layers it realizes the image is also partially class 2. Furthermore,
the different-class activations in preceding layers appear to be convex combinations of the unmixed
activations, akin to their inputs.
The results in Figure 1 suggest that applying mixup to input data enforces a particularly rigid ge-
ometric structure on the last-layer activations. Manifold mixup (Verma et al., 2019), a subsequent
technique, proposes the mixing of features across various layers of a network. The results in Figure
3 suggest that using regular mixup promotes manifold mixup-like behaviour in previous layers.


Figure 3: (Projection of CLS token at each layer). Projections of the CLS token of the mix up
of two randomly selected training images for various values of λ. Trajectories start at the origin.
Colouring indicates mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the level of mixup, λ.


2.5   C ALIBRATION

Thulasidasan et al. (2020) demonstrated that mixup improves calibration for networks. That is,
training with mixup causes the softmax probabilities to be in closer alignment with the true prob-
abilities of misclassification. To measure a network’s calibration, we use the expected calibration
error (ECE) as proposed by Pakdaman Naeini et al. (2015). The exact definition of ECE can be found
in Appendix C. Results for ECE can be found in Table 2. Last-layer activation plots for α = 0.4 are
available in Figure 9 in Appendix D.

                            Table 2: CIFAR10 expected calibration error.

              Network                Baseline    Mixup (α = 1.0)      Mixup (α = 0.4)
              WideResnet-40-10        0.024            0.077               0.013
              ViT-B/4                 0.122            0.014               0.019


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The configuration presented in Figure 1 sheds
light on why mixup improves calibration. Re-
call, mixup promotes alignment of the model’s
softmax probabilities for the training example
xλii′ with its label λyi + (1 − λ)yi′ . Here, λ
acts as a gauge for these softmax probabilities,
essentially reflecting the model’s confidence in                                  hλ
                                                                                   i,i′
its predictions. Turning to Figure 4, it be-
comes therefore evident that as λ nears 0.5, the
model’s certainty in its predictions diminishes.
This reduction in confidence is manifested ge-
ometrically through the spatial distribution of
features along the channel. This, in turn, causes    Figure 4: (Diagram showing the relationship
an increase in misclassification rates, due to a     between calibration and the configuration). As
greater chance of activations erroneously cross-     λ approaches 0.5, the last-layer activation hλi,i′
ing the decision boundary. This simultaneous         (black) traverses the blue line of the configuration,
reduction in confidence and classification accu-     leading to less confident predictions. Simultane-
racy leads to enhanced calibration in the model      ously, the variability of the activation (perforated
and is purely attributed to the geometric struc-     black circle) results in an increase in misclassifi-
ture to which the model converged. The above         cation due to the probability of being on the incor-
logic holds as we traverse the train mixed up        rect side of the decision boundary (green) increas-
features but we expect some test features to be      ing.
noisy perturbations of mixed up train features.

3     U NCONSTRAINED FEATURES MODEL FOR MIXUP

3.1   T HEORETICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF OPTIMAL LAST- LAYER LEATURES

To study the resulting last-layer features under mixup, we consider an adaptation of the uncon-
strained features model to mixup training. Let d ≥ C − 1 be the dimension of the last-layer features,
yi ∈ RC be the one-hot vector in entry i, W ∈ RC×d be the classifier, and hλii′ ∈ Rd be the
last-layer feature associated with target λyi + (1 − λ) yi′ . Then, adapting Equation 1 to the uncon-
strained features setting, we consider the optimization problem given by
                       C   C
                  1 XX                                            λH λ 2            λW
   min Eλ∼Dλ 2                 CE W hλii′ , λyi + (1 − λ) yi′ +         ∥hii′ ∥2 +       ∥W ∥2F , (2)
  W ,hλii′
                 C    i=1 ′
                                                                     2               2
                         i =1

where λW , λH > 0 are the weight decay parameters. It is reasonable to consider decay on the
features hλii′ , a practice that is frequently observed in prior work (Zhu et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2022), due to the implicit decay to the last-layer features from the inclusion of decay in the previous
layers’ parameters.
The following theorem characterizes the optimal last-layer features under the assumption that the
optimal classifier W is a simplex ETF, ie.
                                   r
                                        C         1
                                 m         (IC − 1C 1⊤        ⊤
                                                         C )U ,                               (3)
                                     C −1         C
where IC ∈ RC×C is the identity, 1C ∈ RC is the ones vector, U ∈ Rd×C is a partial orthogonal
matrix (satisfying U⊤ U = IC ), and m ∈ R \ {0} is its multiplier.
Note that we make this assumption as it holds in practice based on our empirical measurements,
illustrated in Figure 5.
Theorem 3.1. Assume that at optimality, W is a simplex ETF with multiplier m, and denote the
i-th row of W by wi . Then, any minimizer of equation 2 satisfies:
1) Same-Class: For all i = 1, . . . , C and λ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                  (1 − C) K
                                         hλii =             wi ,
                                                      m2

                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: (Convergence of classifier to simplex ETF). Measurements on the classifier, W , for each
network architecture and dataset combination. First and third plot: Coefficient of variation of the
classifier norms, Stdi (∥wi ∥2 ) / Avgi (∥wi ∥2 ). Second and fourth plot: Standard deviation of the
cosines between classifiers of distinct classes, Stdi,i′ ̸=i (⟨wi , wi′ ⟩/ (∥wi ∥2 ∥wi′ ∥2 )) with i ̸= i′ . As
training progresses, measurements indicate that W is trending toward a simplex ETF configuration.


where K < 0 is the unique solution to the equation
                                                 Cm2
                                    e−CK −               + C − 1 = 0.
                                             (1 − C)λH K

2) Different-Class: For all i ̸= i′ and λ ∈ [0, 1],
                   (1 − C)
           hλii′ =              Kλ − wi , hλii′ wi + (C − 1)Kλ + wi , hλii′ wi′ ,

                    Cm  2
              λ
where wi , hii′ is of the form

                                                 s                                                 
                                        2
                                                                                      2
                                  Cm         1                           Cm2
   log eKλ 2 − C +                       ±              C −2−                           − 4e−CKλ  ,
                             (1 − C) Kλ λH   2                     (1 − C) Kλ λH

and Kλ < 0 satisfies
                                                                                  !
                                         Cm2               (1 − C)λH wi , hλii′
                   e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ =
                          λ
                                                  eKλ                           +λ .
                                    (1 − C) Kλ λH                 Cm2

The proof of Theorem 3.1 can be found in Appendix A.1
Interpretation of Theorem. Theorem 3.1 establishes that, within the framework of our model’s
assumptions, the optimal same-class features are independent of λ and align with the classifier as
a simplex ETF. In contrast, the optimal features for different classes are linear combinations (de-
pending on λ) of the classifier rows corresponding to the mixed-up targets, governed by the above
equations. This is consistent with the observations in Figure 1, where the same-class features con-
sistently cluster at simplex vertices, regardless of the value of λ, while the different-class features
dynamically flow between these vertices as λ varies.

In Figure 6, we plot the last-layer features obtained from Theorem 3.1, numerically solving for the
values of K and Kλ that satisfy their respective equations.
Similar to the empirical results in Figure 1, the density of different-class mixup points decreases as
λ approaches 0 and 1. However, the theoretically optimal features exhibit channels arranged in a
hexagonal pattern, differing from the empirical configuration observed in the FashionMNIST and
CIFAR10 datasets. In particular, the empirical representations has a more pronounced elongation
of different-class features as the mixup parameter λ approaches 0.5. In attempt to understand these
differences, we introduce an amplification of these same features in the directions of the classifier
rows not corresponding to the mixed-up targets, with increasing amplifications as λ gets closer to
0.5 (details of the amplification function are outlined in Appendix A.2). This results in features that
behave more similarly to the empirical outcomes, while achieving a very close (though marginally
larger) loss when compared to the true optimal configuration (loss values are indicated below each
plot in Figure 6). This demonstrates that the features have some degree of flexibility while remaining
in close proximity to the minimum loss.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (a) Loss = 0.33457               (b) Loss = 0.33465

Figure 6: (Optimal activations from unconstrained features model). On the left are optimal last-
layer activations obtained from our theoretical analysis. We set m = 3, C = 10, d = 100, and
λH = 1 × 10−6 , and randomly sample 5000 different λ values from the Beta(1, 1) distribution
for a randomly selected subset of three classes. Projections are generated using the same method
as depicted in Figure 1. Colouring indicates the mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the
level of mixup, λ.


3.2   T RAINING WITH FIXED SIMPLEX ETF CLASSIFIER

To further understand the differences between
theoretical activations (Figure 6) and em-
pirical activations (Figure 1), we performed
an experiment employing mixup within the
training framework detailed in Section 2, but
fixing the classifier as a simplex ETF. The
resulting last-layer features are visualized in
Figure 7.
Prior work (Zhu et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2022; Pernici et al., 2022) have explored the
effects of fixing the classifier, but not in the
context of mixup. Our observations reveal          Figure 7: (Visualization of activations outputted
that when the classifier is fixed as a simplex     by network trained with mixup fixing the clas-
ETF, the empirical features tend to exhibit a      sifier as a simplex ETF). Last-layer activations of
more hexagonal shape in its different-class        mixup training data are presented here for a ran-
mixup features, aligning more closely with         domly selected subset of three classes. Coloration
the theoretically optimal features. Moreover,      indicates the type of mixup (same-class or different-
slightly higher generalization performance is      class), along with the level of mixup, λ. This model
achieved when compared to training with a          achieves a test accuracy of 97.35%.
learnable classifier under the same settings.
Based on these results, a possible explanation for the variation in configuration is that during train-
ing, the classifier is still being learned and requires several epochs to converge to a simplex ETF,
as depicted in Figure 5. During this period, the features may traverse regions that lead to slightly
suboptimal loss, as there is flexibility in the features’ structures without much degradation to the
loss performance (depicted in Figure 6).

4     R ELATED WORK
The success of mixup has prompted many mixup variants, each successful in their own right (Guo
et al., 2018; Verma et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2020). Additionally, various works have
been devoted to better understanding the effects and success of the method.
Guo et al. (2018) identified manifold intrusion as a potential limitation of mixup, stemming from
discrepancies between the mixed-up label of a mixed-up example and its true label, and they propose
a method for overcoming this.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition to the work by Thulasidasan et al. (2020) on calibration for networks trained with mixup,
Zhang et al. (2022) posits that this improvement in calibration due to mixup is correlated with the
capacity of the network. Zhang et al. (2021) theoretically demonstrates that training with mixup
corresponds to minimizing an upper bound of the adversarial loss.
Chaudhry et al. (2022) delved into the linearity of various representations of a deep network trained
with mixup. They observed that representations nearer to the input and output layer exhibit greater
linearity compared to those situated in the middle.
Carratino et al. (2022) interprets mixup as an empirical risk minimization estimator employing trans-
formed data, leading to a process that notably enhances both model accuracy and calibration. Con-
tinuing on the same path, Park et al. (2022) offers a unified theoretical analysis that integrates various
aspects of mixup methods.
Furthermore, Chidambaram et al. (2021) conducted a detailed examination of the classifier optimal
to mixup, comparing it with the classifier obtained through standard training.
Recent work has also been devoted to studying the benefits of mixup with feature-learning based
analysis by Chidambaram et al. (2023) and Zou et al. (2023). The former considering two features
generated from a symmetric distribution for each class and the latter considering a data model with
two features of different frequencies, feature noise, and random noise.
The discovery of Neural Collapse by Papyan et al. (2020) has spurred investigations of this phe-
nomenon. Recent theoretical inquiries by Mixon et al. (2020); Fang et al. (2021); Lu & Steiner-
berger (2020); E & Wojtowytsch (2020); Poggio & Liao (2020); Zhu et al. (2021); Han et al. (2021);
Tirer & Bruna (2022); Wang et al.; Kothapalli et al. (2022) have delved into the analysis of Neural
Collapse employing both the unconstrained features model (Mixon et al., 2020) and the layer-peeled
model (Fang et al., 2021). Liu et al. (2023) removes the assumption on the feature dimension and
the number of classes in Neural Collapse and presents a Generalized Neural Collapse which is char-
acterized by minimizing intra-class variability and maximizing inter-class separability.
To our knowledge, there has not been any investigation into the geometric configuration induced by
mixup in the last layer.


5    C ONCLUSION


In conclusion, through an extensive empirical investigation across various architectures and datasets,
we have uncovered a distinctive geometric configuration of last-layer activations induced by mixup.
This configuration exhibits intriguing behaviors, such as same-class activations forming a simplex
equiangular tight frame (ETF) aligned with their respective classifiers, and different-class activations
delineating channels along the decision boundary, with varying densities depending on the mixup
coefficient. We also examine the layer-wise trajectory that features follow to reach this configuration
in the last-layer, and measure the calibration induced by mixup to provide an explanation for why
this particular configuration in beneficial for calibration.
Furthermore, we have complemented our empirical findings with a theoretical analysis, adapting
the unconstrained features model to mixup. Theoretical results indicate that the optimal same-class
features are independent of the mixup coefficient and align with the classifier, while different-class
features are dynamic linear combinations of the classifier rows corresponding to mixed-up targets,
influenced by the mixup coefficient. Motivated by our theoretical analysis, we also conduct exper-
iments investigating the configuration of the last-layer activations from training with mixup while
keeping the classifier fixed as a simplex ETF. We observe that they align more closely with the
theoretically optimal features, with slight improvement in test-performance.
These findings collectively shed light on the intricate workings of mixup in training deep networks,
emphasizing its role in organizing last-layer activations for improved calibration. Understanding
these geometric configurations induced by mixup opens up avenues for further research into the
design of data augmentation strategies and their impact on neural network training.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC). This research was enabled in part by support provided by Compute Ontario
(http://www.computeontario.ca/) and Compute Canada (http://www.computecanada.ca/).

R EFERENCES
Luigi Carratino, Moustapha Cissé, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Jean-Philippe Vert. On mixup regular-
  ization, 2022.
Arslan Chaudhry, Aditya Krishna Menon, Andreas Veit, Sadeep Jayasumana, Srikumar Rama-
  lingam, and Sanjiv Kumar. When does mixup promote local linearity in learned representations?,
  2022.
Muthu Chidambaram, Xiang Wang, Yuzheng Hu, Chenwei Wu, and Rong Ge. Towards under-
 standing the data dependency of mixup-style training. CoRR, abs/2110.07647, 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07647.
Muthu Chidambaram, Xiang Wang, Chenwei Wu, and Rong Ge. Provably learning diverse features
 in multi-view data with midpoint mixup, 2023.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale, 2021.
Weinan E and Stephan Wojtowytsch. On the emergence of tetrahedral symmetry in the final and
 penultimate layers of neural network classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05420, 2020.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-
  peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 118(43):e2103091118, 2021.
Hongyu Guo, Yongyi Mao, and Richong Zhang. Mixup as locally linear out-of-manifold regular-
  ization, 2018.
XY Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L Donoho. Neural collapse under mse loss: Proximity to and
 dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jang-Hyun Kim, Wonho Choo, and Hyun Oh Song. Puzzle mix: Exploiting saliency and local
  statistics for optimal mixup, 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017.
Vignesh Kothapalli, Ebrahim Rasromani, and Vasudev Awatramani. Neural collapse: A review on
  modelling principles and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04041, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical Report 0, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 2009. URL https://www.cs.
  toronto.edu/˜kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf.
Weiyang Liu, Longhui Yu, Adrian Weller, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Generalizing and decoupling
 neural collapse via hyperspherical uniformity gap, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam.              CoRR,
   abs/1711.05101, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse with cross-entropy loss. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2012.08465, 2020.
Dustin G Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.11619, 2020.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated prob-
 abilities using bayesian binning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 29(1), Feb. 2015. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v29i1.9602. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.
 php/AAAI/article/view/9602.

Vardan Papyan, X. Y. Han, and David L. Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the ter-
  minal phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117
  (40):24652–24663, sep 2020. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2015509117. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1073%2Fpnas.2015509117.

Chanwoo Park, Sangdoo Yun, and Sanghyuk Chun. A unified analysis of mixed sample data aug-
  mentation: A loss function perspective, 2022.

Federico Pernici, Matteo Bruni, Claudio Baecchi, and Alberto Del Bimbo. Regular polytope net-
  works. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(9):4373–4387, Septem-
  ber 2022. ISSN 2162-2388. doi: 10.1109/tnnls.2021.3056762. URL http://dx.doi.org/
  10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3056762.

Tomaso Poggio and Qianli Liao. Explicit regularization and implicit bias in deep network classifiers
  trained with the square loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00072, 2020.

Sunil Thulasidasan, Gopinath Chennupati, Jeff Bilmes, Tanmoy Bhattacharya, and Sarah Michalak.
  On mixup training: Improved calibration and predictive uncertainty for deep neural networks,
  2020.

Tom Tirer and Joan Bruna. Extended unconstrained features model for exploring deep neural col-
  lapse. In international conference on machine learning (ICML), 2022.

Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Christopher Beckham, Amir Najafi, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Aaron Courville,
  David Lopez-Paz, and Yoshua Bengio. Manifold mixup: Better representations by interpolating
  hidden states, 2019.

Peng Wang, Huikang Liu, Can Yaras, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. Linear convergence analysis of
  neural collapse with unconstrained features. In OPT 2022: Optimization for Machine Learning
  (NeurIPS 2022 Workshop).

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. CoRR, abs/1708.07747, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1708.07747.

Yibo Yang, Shixiang Chen, Xiangtai Li, Liang Xie, Zhouchen Lin, and Dacheng Tao. Inducing
  neural collapse in imbalanced learning: Do we really need a learnable classifier at the end of deep
  neural network?, 2022.

Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features, 2019.

Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks, 2017.

Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cissé, Yann N. Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond em-
  pirical risk minimization. CoRR, abs/1710.09412, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1710.09412.

Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Kenji Kawaguchi, Amirata Ghorbani, and James Zou. How does mixup
  help with robustness and generalization? In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=8yKEo06dKNo.

Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Kenji Kawaguchi, and James Zou. When and how mixup improves
  calibration, 2022.

Jinxin Zhou, Chong You, Xiao Li, Kangning Liu, Sheng Liu, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. Are all
   losses created equal: A neural collapse perspective, 2022.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A
  geometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features, 2021.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Yuanzhi Li, and Quanquan Gu. The benefits of mixup for feature learning,
  2023.


A     T HEORETICAL M ODEL
A.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Our proof uses similar techniques as Yang et al. (2022), but we extend these ideas to the more
intricate last-layer features that arise from mixup.

Proof. Assuming that W is a simplex ETF with multiplier m, our unconstrained features optimiza-
tion problem in equation 2 becomes separable across λ and i, i′ , and so it suffices to minimize
                          ⟨wi ,hλii′ ⟩                             ⟨wi′ ,hλii′ ⟩
                                             !                                         !
                         e                                       e                        1         2
   Lλii′ = −λyi log PC                         − (1 − λ)yi′ log PC                       + λH hλii′ 2
                            e ⟨wk ,hλ  ii′ ⟩                         e ⟨ w k ,h  λ
                                                                                 ii′ ⟩    2
                              k=1                                       k=1


over each hλii′ individually.
              ∂Lλii′
                     = W ⊤ (p − (λyi + (1 − λ)yj )) + λH hλii′

                                                                                 (p = softmax W hλii′ )
              ∂hλii′
                        C
                        X
                    =          wj pj − λwi − (1 − λ) wi′ + λH hλii′                    (pj j-th entry of p)
                        j=1
                         X
                    =             wj pj + (pi − λ) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ)) wi′ + λH hλii′ .
                        j̸=i,i′

        ∂Lλ
Setting ∂hλii′ = 0 gives
           ii′
                    X
                             wj pj + (pi − λ) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ)) wi′ + λH hλii′ = 0.                 (4)
                   j̸=i,i′

Case: i = i′
In this case, equation 4 reduces to
                               X
                                            wj pj + (pi − 1) wi + λH hλii = 0.                         (5)
                                     j̸=i

Taking inner product with wj , j ̸= i in equation 5 gives
                                    m2 X            m2 (pi − 1)
                     0 = m2 pj −               pk −             + λH wj , hλii
                                  C −1                C −1
                                        k̸=i,j
                                                     
                                     2
                                    m     X
                        = m2 pj −               pk − 1 + λH wj , hλii
                                  C −1
                                           k̸=j

                                   C
                        = m2 pj           + λH wj , hλii .
                                  C −1
                 C
Since m2 , pj , C−1 , λH are all positive, it follows that wj , hλii < 0.
For all j, k ̸= i, we have
                                      exp      wj , hλii   p    wj , hλii
                                                      λ
                                                          = j =           .
                                      exp      wk , hii    pk   wk , hλii

                                                         12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since exp(x)
        x    is strictly decreasing on (−∞, 0), in particular it is injective on (−∞, 0), so
                                      wj , hλii = wk , hλii = K,
for some K < 0 and pj = pk = p for all j, k ̸= i, where
                                                     1−C K
                                          p = λH           .
                                                      C m2
          PC                              K
Let S =    k=1 exp   wk , hλii . Then, eS = p and so
                                          eK     C    m2 K
                                     S=      =      ·    e .
                                           p   1 − C KλH
Then,
                                                                 
                                       −1   X
                                hλii =       wj pj + (pi − 1) wi 
                                       λH
                                              j̸=i
                                       −1
                                     =     (−pwi + (pi − 1) wi )
                                       λH
                                       −1
                                     =     (−pwi − (C − 1) pwi )
                                       λH
                                        1
                                     =     Cpwi
                                       λH
                                       (1 − C) K
                                     =           wi .
                                           m2

Taking inner product with wi in equation 5 gives
                         m2 X
                 0=−                pk + m2 (pi − 1) + λH wi , hλii
                        C −1
                               k̸=i

                                 1                     1
                   = m2 pi            + 1 − m2            + 1 + λH wi , hλii
                             C −1                   C −1
                           C
                   = m2          (pi − 1) + λH wi , hλii
                         C −1
                           C
                   = m2          (− (C − 1) p) + λH wi , hλii ,
                         C −1
and so
                                       wi , hλii = (1 − C)K.                                   (6)

By our definition of p as the softmax applied on W hλii , we have

                     e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ = Spi
                            λ



                                     C    m2 K
                                 =      ·    e (1 − (C − 1)p)
                                   1 − C KλH
                                          m2 K       ((C − 1)2 λH K

                                     C
                                 =      ·    e   1+                   .
                                   1 − C KλH              Cm2
ie.
                                                  Cm2
                                  e−CK =                  + 1 − C.
                                              (1 − C)λH K

So, K must satisfy f (K) = 0, where f : (−∞, 0) → R is defined by
                                                    Cm2
                             f (x) = e−Cx −                 − (1 − C),
                                                (1 − C)λH x

                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(note that we only consider the domain (−∞, 0) since we’ve shown that K < 0). We will show that
there exists a unique K satisfying these properties.
                                                         Cm2
                              f ′ (x) = −Ce−Cx +                  < 0,
                                                     (1 − C)λH x2
                                 2
since −Ce−Cx < 0 and (1−C)λ    Cm
                                   Hx
                                      2 < 0 (since all terms in the product are positive except (1−C) <

0) for all x. So f is strictly decreasing, and thus it is injective.
limx→0− f (x) = −∞ and limx→−∞ f (x) = ∞, so by continuity of f , there exists K < 0 such
that f (K) = 0, and K is unique by injectivity of f .
Case: i ̸= i′
Taking inner product with wj , j ̸= i, i′ in equation 4 and using properties of W as a simplex ETF
gives
                    m2      X             m2 (pi − λ) m2 (pi′ − (1 − λ))
      0 = m2 pj −                   pk −               −                      + λH wj , hλii′
                   C −1         ′
                                             C −1               C −1
                          k̸=i,i ,j
                                         
                      2
                    m        X
        = m2 pj −                pk − 1 + λH wj , hλii′
                   C −1
                             k̸=j

                         1
        = m2 pj 1 +               + λH wj , hλii′
                      C −1

                    C
        = m2 pj             + λH wj , hλii′ .
                  C −1

By the same argument as in the previous case, we get that for all j, k ̸= i, i′ ,

                                     wj , hλii′ = wk , hλii′ = Kλ ,
for some Kλ < 0 (we will omit the subscript λ for brevity as we are optimizing over each λ
individually). Thus pj = pk = p for all j, k ̸= i, i′ , where

                                                   1−C K
                                          p = λH         .
                                                    C m2
          PC                              K
Let S =     k=1 exp   wk , hλii′ . Then, eS = p and so
                                       eK       C      m2 K
                                     S=    =        ·      e .                                     (7)
                                        p     1 − C KλH
Taking inner product with wi in equation 4 gives
             −m2 X                             m2
       0=                pj + m2 (pi − λ) −        (pi′ − (1 − λ)) + λH wi , hλii′
            C −1       ′
                                             C −1
                    j̸=i,i

            −m2                                    m2
          =       (1 − pi − pi′ ) + m2 (pi − λ) −       (pi′ − (1 − λ)) + λH ωi , hλii′
            C −1                                  C −1
             m2                         m2
          =       pi + m2 (pi − λ) −         λ + λH wi , hλii′
            C −1                      C −1

                         1                      1
          = m2 pi 1 +            − m2 λ 1 +          + λH wi , hλii′
                       C −1                   C −1

                       1
          = m2 1 +           (pi − λ) + λH wi , hλii′ .
                     C −1

So,
                                 Cm2
                                      (pi − λ) + λH ωi , hλii′ = 0.                                (8)
                                 C −1

                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, taking inner product with wi′ in equation 4 gives us
                −m2 X               m2
               0=            pj −        (pi − λ) + m2 (pi′ − (1 − λ)) + λH wi′ , hλii′
                C −1       ′
                                  C −1
                     j̸=i,i

                 2           1
               =m 1+               (pi′ − (1 − λ)) + λH wi′ , hλii′ ,
                         C −1
and so
                                        Cm2
                                             (pi′ − (1 − λ)) + λH wi′ , hλii′ = 0.                                       (9)
                                        C −1
Summing equation 8 and equation 9 gives
                                  Cm2
                                       (pi + pi′ − 1) + λH wi , hλii′ + wi′ , hλii′

                            0=
                                 C −1
                                  Cm2
                                       (−(C − 2)p) + λH wi , hλii′ + wi′ , hλii′

                               =
                                 C −1
                               = (C − 2)λH K + λH wi , hλii′ + wi′ , hλii′ ,


and so
                                            wi , hλii′ + wi′ , hλii′ = −(C − 2)K.

Then, using equation 7 and the definition of S gives us
                        C    m2 K
                           ·    e =S
                      1 − C KλH
                                    C
                                      e⟨wk ,hii′ ⟩
                                    X        λ
                                  =
                                                     k=1

                                                   = (C − 2)eK + e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ + e−(C−2)K−⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ ,
                                                                               λ                       λ


and thus
                                                                   m2
                                   2
                                                              C
                   e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩                                                    e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ + e−(C−2)K = 0.
                           λ                                                             λ
                                       + eK       C −2−          ·                                                   (10)
                                                            1 − C KλH

We then solve the quadratic equation in e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ to get
                                                               λ



                                             r          2
                                                                                                     2
                                      Cm                                              Cm       2
                       −eK C − 2 − (1−C)Kλ                    ±         eK C − 2 − (1−C)Kλ                 − 4e−(C−2)K
  e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ =
           λ                               H                                               H
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                           2
So, wi , hλii′ is of the form
                                       r                      2              
               K                Cm2         K C −2−    Cm2            −(C−2)K
          −e      C  − 2 −  (1−C)KλH  ±  e         (1−C)KλH     − 4e         
    log                                                                      .
                                            2                                



By our definition of p as the softmax applied on W hλii′ , K must satisfy

                         e⟨wi ,hii′ ⟩ = Spi
                                   λ



                                              eK
                                        =
                                               p
                                                                                               !
                                            C    m2 K                   (1 − C)λH wi , hλii′
                                        =      ·    e                                        +λ .
                                          1 − C KλH                            Cm2


                                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We have
       X
                  wi pj + (pi − λ) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ)) wi′
        j̸=i,i′
                                                                                           PC
        = p (−wi − wi′ ) + (pi − λ) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ)) wi′                      (since    j=1 wj = 0)
        = (pi − λ − p) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ) − p) wi′ .

Substituting this into equation 4, we get
        −1
hλii′ =      ((pi − λ − p) wi + (pi′ − (1 − λ) − p) wi′ )
        λH
          1
      =      ((p − (pi − λ)) wi + (p − (pi′ − (1 − λ))) wi′ )
        λH
        (1 − C)KλH − (1 − C)λH wi , hλii′             (1 − C)KλH − (1 − C)λH wi′ , hλii′
      =                                          wi +                                    wi ′
                         λH Cm2                                         λH Cm2
        (1 − C)
                     K − wi , hλii′ wi + K − wi′ , hλii′ wi′

      =       2
          Cm
        (1 − C)                   λ
                                                                 λ

      =              K  −  w i , hii′   wi + (C − 1)K +   w i , hii′   w i ′ ,
          Cm2



A.2    A MPLIFICATION OF T HEORETICAL FEATURES

In this section we provide additional details of function used to generate the amplified features in
Figure 6.
We define ϵ(λ) = 45 exp(−20(λ − 0.5)4 ) − 25 . Then for the different class features (i ̸= i′ ), define
the amplified features as h̃λii′ = hλii′ − ϵ(λ) j̸=i,i′ wj .
                                               P

The motivation for the function form of ϵ(λ) is to ensure that it is symmetric about λ = 0.5, increas-
ing when λ < 0.5 and decreasing when λ > 0.5 with its maximum at λ = 0.5. These properties
correspond to a larger amplification as λ approaches 0.5, while preserving symmetry in the amplifi-
cations. Note that the exact function ϵ(λ) is not important, but rather that it yields last-layer features
that are closer to the empirical results (with elongations), while resulting in just a minor increase in
loss. As mentioned in the main text, this implies that the features can have some deviation from the
theoretical optimum without much change in the value of the loss.

B     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1   H YPERPARAMETER SETTINGS

For the WideResNet experiments, we minimize the mixup loss using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with momentum 0.9 and weight decay 1×10−4 . All datasets are trained on a WideResNet-
40-10 for 500 epochs with a batch size of 128. We sweep over 10 logarithmically spaced learning
rates between 0.01 and 0.25, picking whichever results in the highest test accuracy. The learning
rate is annealed by a factor of 10 at 30%, 50%, and 90% of the total training time.
For the ViT experiments, we minimize the mixup loss using Adam optimization (Kingma & Ba,
2017). For each dataset we train a ViT-B with a patch size of 4 for 1000 epochs with a batch size of
128. We sweep over 10 logarithmically spaced learning rates from 1×10−4 to 3×10−3 and weight
decay values from 0 to 0.05, selecting whichever yields the highest test accuracy. The learning rate
is warmed up for 10 epochs and is annealed using cosine annealing as a function of total epochs.

B.2   P ROJECTION M ETHOD

For all of the last-layer activation plots, the same projection method is used. First, we randomly
select three classes. We denote the centred last-layer activations for said classes by a matrix H ∈


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rm×n and the classifier of the network for said classes as W ∈ R3×m . The projection method is
then as follows:

      1. Calculate U SV T = SVD(W ∗ ) where W ∗ is the normalized classifier.
      2. Define Q = U V T
      3. Let A ∈ R2×3 be a two dimensional representation of a three dimensional simplex.
      4. Compute X = AQH and plot.

C    E XPECTED CALIBRATION ERROR
To calculate the expected calibration error, first gather the predictions into M bins of equal interval
size. Let Bm be the set of predictions whose confidence is in bin m. We can define the accuracy and
confidence of a given bin as
                                                  1 X
                                 acc(Bm ) =                 1 (ŷi = yi )
                                                |Bm |
                                                      i∈Bm
                                                  1 X
                                conf(Bm ) =                 p̂i
                                                |Bm |
                                                       i∈Bm

where p̂i is the confidence of example i. The expected calibration (ECE) is then calculated as
                                     M
                                     X |Bm |
                            ECE =               |acc (Bm ) − conf (Bm )|
                                     m=1
                                            n

D    A DDITIONAL L AST-L AYER P LOTS
Here we provide additional plots of last-layer activations. Namely, Figure 8 provides additional
baseline last-layer activation plots for mixup data for every architecture and dataset combination
in Figure 1. Figure 9 provides last-layer activations for the additional α value in Table 2. Figure
10 shows the evolution of the last-layer activations throughout training. Figure 11 shows last-layer
activations for multiple random subsets of three classes. Finally, Figure 12 shows the last-layer
activations for a ViT-B/4 trained on CIFAR10 using the AdamW optimizer.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: (Visualization of activations outputted by networks trained without mixup). Last-
layer activations for a randomly selected subset of three classes of mixup training data for various
dataset and network architecture combinations. Projections are generated using the same method
as Figure 1. All networks are trained using empirical risk minimization (no mixup). Colouring
indicates mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the level of mixup, λ.


Figure 9: (Visualization of activations outputted by networks trained with α = 0.4). Last-layer
activations for WideResNet-40-10 and ViT-B/4 trained on the CIFAR10 dataset, subsetted to three
randomly selected classes. Projections are generated using the same method as Figure 1. For both
cases, α = 0.4 is used. Colouring indicates mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the level
of mixup, λ. Relevant classifiers plotted in black.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) Epoch 100               (b) Epoch 300               (c) Epoch 500

Figure 10: (Activation convergence during training with mixup). Evolution of Last-layer ac-
tivations for WideResNet-40-10 trained on CIFAR10 through training. Projections are generated
in the same manner as Figure 1. Coloration indicates the type of mixup (same-class or different-
class), along with the level of mixup, λ. Relevant classifiers plotted in black. As training progresses,
different-class mixup points are pushed towards the decision boundary converging to the configura-
tion depicted in Figure 1.


Figure 11: (Visualization of last-layer activations for multiple subsets of classes). Last-layer
activations for a randomly selected subsets of three classes of mixup training data for WRN-40-
10 trained on CIFAR10. Projections are generated using the same method as Figure 1. Colouring
indicates mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the level of mixup, λ. Black indicates
relevant classifiers.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: (Visualization of activations outputted by ViT-B trained with mixup using AdamW).
Last-layer activations for ViT-B/4 trained following same training regiment as the ViT’s outlined in
section 2 except with the AdamW optimizer. Projection is generated using the same method as
Figure 1. Colouring indicates mixup type (same-class or different-class), and the level of mixup, λ.
Black indicates relevant classifiers.


                                                20
