Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ANGUAGE -I NFORMED V ISUAL C ONCEPT L EARNING
    Sharon Lee∗ Yunzhi Zhang∗               Shangzhe Wu       Jiajun Wu
    Stanford University



                                                      A BSTRACT

             Our understanding of the visual world is centered around various concept axes,
             characterizing different aspects of visual entities. While different concept axes
             can be easily specified by language, e.g., color, the exact visual nuances along
             each axis often exceed the limitations of linguistic articulations, e.g., a particular
             style of painting. In this work, our goal is to learn a language-informed visual con-
             cept representation, by simply distilling large pre-trained vision-language models.
             Specifically, we train a set of concept encoders to encode the information pertinent
             to a set of language-informed concept axes, with an objective of reproducing the
             input image through a pre-trained Text-to-Image (T2I) model. To encourage better
             disentanglement of different concept encoders, we anchor the concept embeddings
             to a set of text embeddings obtained from a pre-trained Visual Question Answering
             (VQA) model. At inference time, the model extracts concept embeddings along
             various axes from new test images, which can be remixed to generate images with
             novel compositions of visual concepts. With a lightweight test-time finetuning
             procedure, it can also generalize to novel concepts unseen at training. Project
             page at https://cs.stanford.edu/˜yzzhang/projects/concept-axes.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In order to make sense of the myriad visual entities in the world, humans develop an abstracted
generative model of them and organize the underlying sources of variation into visual concepts,
such as different colors or different types of objects. Designing systems that can recognize visual
concepts within images as humans do has been a longstanding goal in the fields of computer vision
and artificial intelligence (Russakovsky et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Girshick et al., 2014).
To facilitate efficient reasoning and communication of these concepts, humans created symbolic
depictions that have evolved into natural language. Such natural language grounding of visual data
has been instrumental in the recent proliferation of powerful large vision-language models that are
capable of semantically identifying objects in images (Radford et al., 2021; Kirillov et al., 2023) or
generating photo-realistic images from arbitrary text prompts (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022). While different concept axes can be easily specified
by words, such as category and style, it is much less intuitive to delineate the subtleties of
low-level visual nuances along each axis using language, such as one particular style of a painting.
In this work, our goal is to distill from large pre-trained vision-language models a function that
extracts visual concepts along a set of language-specified concept axes from images. As illustrated in
Figure 1, once these concepts are extracted, we can recompose them across different image instances
at inference time to produce new images with novel concept combinations. To learn this function,
rather than collecting a large-scale dataset of human annotations for each specific visual concept,
we design a language-informed visual concept representation, and simply distill from a pre-trained
Text-to-Image (T2I) generation model. There are three fundamental properties we seek in this visual
concept representation.
First, unlike T2I generation, which relies on generic words as visual concept descriptors, we would
like to capture fine-grained visual nuances using continuous concept embeddings. One common
technique is to invert the text-to-image generation process by optimizing an embedding with the
objective of reproducing a given input image using a pre-trained T2I model, often referred to as
Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022). However, most existing Textual Inversion methods (Gal et al.,
    ∗
        Equal contribution; alphabetically ordered.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             input     <category> <color> <material>                 <category>      <color> <material>    composed


                                                                             input    <color>      <category> <material>



                                                                                     <material>    <category> <color>


    Training Data                             Inference                                 Concept Recomposition
Figure 1: Language-Informed Visual Concept Learning. Our goal is to learn a visual concept
representation grounded on a set of language-informed concept axes, e.g.,category, color, and
material, by simply distilling from pre-trained text-to-image generation models without manual
annotations. After training, the concept encoders extract disentangled axis-specific embeddings
from an image, which can be remixed to generate new images with novel concept compositions.
                    “a photo of red banana”                  <category> <color>      “a photo of <color> <category>”
         Baseline


                                                      Ours


                     Vanilla text prompt                           Source                   Recomposition

Figure 2: Learned Disentangled Concept Embeddings Improve Compositionality. Left: Vanilla
text-to-image model may fail to adhere to text prompts of uncommon combinations of concepts
even with prompt engineering, e.g. “red banana”. Right: With the same backbone T2I generator, our
learned disentangled concept embeddings greatly enhance concept compositionality.

2022) optimize embeddings for individual image instances independently, overlooking the shared
nature of visual concepts across instances. For instance, the concept of “red” is shared between a
“red apple” and a “red dress”. Moreover, the concepts of “red” and “yellow” also are instances of
the property of color.
Hence, the second desired property of the visual concept representation is to preserve such common
concept structures among various visual instances. Instead of optimizing on individual image in-
stances independently, we design a set of concept encoders, where each encoder learns to encode
the visual characteristics of an input image pertaining to one concept axis specified by language.
This ensures that the inverted concept embeddings can be shared across different instances and
remixed to generate new images.
The third crucial aspect of this representation is to ascertain that different concept axes are disentan-
gled, allowing for changes to be made specifically on single concept axis without modifying other
axes. To do so, we reuse the disentangled nature of linguistic concepts and ground the predictions to
a set of discrete text anchors in the concept embeddings space, which can be obtained by querying a
pre-trained generic Visual Question Answering (VQA) model, e.g., BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b). This
soft anchoring constraint significantly improves the disentanglement of concept embeddings across
different axes while still retaining sufficient leeway to capture nuanced visual variations that BLIP-2
struggles to discern, e.g., the style of an art piece in Figure 6.
Putting these ideas together, we design a generic framework for learning disentangled and composi-
tional visual concepts grounded to linguistic structures by exploiting pre-trained text-to-image gen-
eration and visual question answering models. We show that these concept encoders can be trained
purely on synthetic images generated by a pre-trained T2I model, and extract concept embeddings
from real images at test time, which capture the fine-grained visual nuances.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
   1. We propose a generic framework for learning language-informed visual concepts by simply
      distilling pretrained vision-language models.
   2. At inference time, the trained concept encoders extract concept embeddings from a test image,
      which can be remixed to generate images with novel compositions of concepts.
   3. Using a light-weight test-time finetuning procedure, these encoders can also be quickly
      adapted to extract novel concepts unseen during training.


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    4. Experiments show that this visual concept representation achieves better disentanglement and
       compositionality, compared to text-based prompting baselines, as shown in Figures 2 and 6.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   V ISUAL C ONCEPT L EARNING
Designing learning-based systems to discover various visual concepts in natural images has been a
long-standing goal in machine perception and intelligence. Early attempts typically rely on exten-
sive semantic annotations done by humans, such as object classification (Barnard et al., 2003; Fei-
Fei et al., 2006; Fergus et al., 2005), which were later epitomized by the effort of ImageNet (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015). Visual concepts are intrinsically linked to concepts in language, and such
end-to-end supervised learning paradigms can be seen as learning a direct mapping between visual
concepts and discrete linguistic concepts. Other approaches attempt to better exploit this inherent
structure in language by constructing a structured representation of visual concepts such as scene
graphs (Zhong et al., 2021) and symbolic programs (Mao et al., 2019; Han et al., 2019).
More recently, the success of natural language modeling (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020;
Raffel et al., 2020) has paved the way for grounding visual concepts to open vocabularies, unlike
category labels or fixed symbolic programs, by training large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) on
massive image captioning datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022). This has powered recent Text-to-Image
(T2I) generation models to turn linguistic concepts from free-form text prompts into photo-realistic
images (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022). These T2I models have been leveraged by
Personalization methods for extracting individual visual concepts from one or a few images. This is
done by either by optimizing token embeddings (Gal et al., 2022; Vinker et al., 2023; Avrahami et al.,
2023; Chefer et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023), finetuning the backbone denoiser (Ruiz et al., 2023), or
training additional encoders for amortized optimization (Gal et al., 2023; Arar et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023a). We also distill visual concepts from a pre-trained T2I model, but unlike existing works,
we train encoders to adhere to a set of language-specified concept axes, preserving the disentangled
and compositional nature of language. Ranasinghe & Ryoo (2023) also explores language-defined
concepts but focuses on video action recognition tasks while we focus on image generation.
A separate line of work focuses on unsupervised visual concept disentanglement without explicitly
leveraging language, typically by simply imposing information constraints in the latent space of a
generative model, like VAEs and GANs (Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2016; Hsu et al., 2023).
Here, we are interested in learning visual concepts that are explicitly grounded to language.
2.2   C ONTROLLABLE I MAGE G ENERATION
The success of GAN-based image generation (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Brock et al., 2018; Karras
et al., 2019) has spawned a series of works that discover controllable directions in the GAN la-
tent space (Voynov & Babenko, 2020; Härkönen et al., 2020). More recently, the advancements
of diffusion-based T2I models have unlocked new possibilities for controllable image generation,
where photo-realistic images can be generated from free-form text prompts. Recent works pro-
posed to further improve the alignment of image samples and input text conditions by manipulating
attention maps within T2I models (Chefer et al., 2023a; Epstein et al., 2023). Another form of
controllable image generation is compositional generation. Liu et al. (2022) proposes to improve
the quality of T2I diffusion models for composing multiple pre-given concepts, specified via text
prompts, by modifying the inference procedure. In this work, instead of assuming that concepts are
given and are in a text format, we tackle the task of identifying disentangled concepts which can be
used for composition.
Image generation can also be controlled with image analogies (Šubrtová et al., 2023; Hertzmann
et al., 2001), a form of visual prompting. These works typically do not explicitly extracts visual
concepts from inputs unlike ours. In this work, we amalgamate both visual prompts and text queries,
employing them as the editing interface.

3     M ETHOD
Fig. 3 gives an overview of our proposed learning framework. Our goal in this work is to ex-
tract visual concepts from images along a number of concept axes specified by language, such as


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            Concept     < 𝐞! > T2I
                  Category              Color             Material                    (category)
                                                                           Encoders
                  Encoder              Encoder            Encoder
                     𝑓!                   𝑓"                 𝑓#              …
                                                                                       < 𝐞" >    T2I
                                                                                       (color)
              “a < 𝐞! >       in        < 𝐞" > color &       < 𝐞# > material …”
                                                                                       < 𝐞# >    T2I
                                                                                      (material)
Input Image          𝓛!)(&*'$                                           Pretrained
                                            𝓛)(&*'$
                                             "               𝓛)(&*'$
                                                              #        Embedding
                                                                             Space
                                                                                        Text-to-
                                                                                      Image (T2I)
                  A: “Chair”           A: “Yellow”         A: “Wood”         …
              Q: “What object?”     Q: “What color?” Q: “What material?”


                                                                                         ⇒
                                  Visual Question Answering (VQA)                                      Reproduced
                                                                                        𝓛$%&'(           Image

Figure 3: Training Pipeline. During training, an input image is processed by a set of concept
encoders that predict concept embeddings specific to given concept axes. These embeddings are
trained to (1) retain information in order to reproduce visual inputs via a pre-trained Text-to-Image
model given an axis-informed text template, and (2) ensure disentanglement across different axes by
anchoring to text embeddings obtained from a pre-trained Visual Question Answering model.

category, color, and material, so as to enable the flexible composition of concepts into
high-quality image generations.
To achieve this, we train a set of visual concept encoders by distilling concept guidance from pre-
trained vision-language models. Specifically, the encoders are trained to extract concept embeddings
from an image in order to fulfill two objectives. First, they should be recomposed to explain the input
image through a pretrained text-to-image (T2I) generation model, given a concept-axis-informed
text prompt. Second, these visual concept embeddings should be anchored to the corresponding text
embeddings obtained from a pre-trained visual question answering (VQA) model, further exploiting
the disentangled nature of linguistic concepts for better disentanglement of visual concepts.

3.1   V ISUAL C ONCEPT E NCODING BY I NVERTING T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION
Our understanding of the visual world is centered around various concept axes, to which we have of-
ten assigned words due to their significance in communication and reasoning. This vision-language
grounding has fueled recent explosion of text-to-image generation models (Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), allowing them to generate photo-realistic images with
various combinations of concepts defined by words.
Here, we are interested in the reverse direction of text-to-image generation, where the goal is to
extract language-grounded visual concepts present in natural images. Specifically, given K concept
axes of interest defined by language, we would like to learn K concept encoders {fk (·)}Kk=1 , each
of which extracts a concept representation ek = fk (x) along a concept axis from an input image x.
In order to train these concept encoders {fk (·)}, instead of relying on extensive human labeling,
we opt to exploit the vision-language grounding embedded within large pre-trained T2I generation
models. Using the technique of Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), one can optimize a token
embedding <*> to capture a visual entity in a given image, through the objective of regenerating
the image with the T2I model from a text template, such as “a photo of <*>”. Here, we adopt a
similar objective, but instead of inverting a specific embedding capturing the overall “identity” of an
individual image instance, we would like to predict embeddings ek that are grounded to a number
of meaningful concept axes, using an axis-informed text template, such as “a photo of <e1 > with
<e2 > color and <e3 > material”. This allows the extracted concept embeddings to be shared across
different images, encapsulating the common visual characteristics pertinent to one concept axis.
Specifically, given an image x, the concept encoders {fk (·)} extract a set of concept embeddings
{ek ∈ RD }, which have the same dimension D as the text embeddings so that they can be directly
inserted into the text embeddings of the axis-informed text template. To simplify the notations, let
fγ (·) denote the function that takes in the image and produces the final sequence of embeddings


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the template and the predicted concept embeddings, and γ be the parameters of all the encoders
which will be optimized during training. Let cθ be the part of the T2I model’s text encoder that takes
in a sequence of text embeddings and outputs a conditioning vector for the T2I model’s denoising
network ϵ̂θ , where θ denotes network parameters. We use DeepFloyd (StabilityAI; Saharia et al.,
2022) as the backbone T2I model, which utilizes a pre-trained T5 model (Raffel et al., 2020) as the
text encoder, and keep the parameters θ frozen in all experiments. To train the encoders, we reuse
the training objective for the backbone diffusion model:
                 Lrecon (x; γ) = Eϵ∼N (0,I),t∼U ([0,1]) ∥ϵ̂θ (x, t, cθ (fγ (x))) − ϵ∥22 ,

                                                                                                   (1)
where the noise ϵ is sampled from a standardmultivariate Gaussian distribution and the timestep
t is sampled from a uniform distribution in [0, 1]. Minimizing Lrecon amounts to finding concept
embeddings within the space of the pre-trained T2I model that can best reproduce the input image
x, resembling a “reconstrucion” objective.
Compared to per-instance token optimization in vanilla Textual Inversion, the advantages of training
these concept encoders are two-fold. First, the concept embedding space is naturally shared across
different image instances, encapsulating the common understanding of the corresponding concept
axes. Second, it makes training more efficient by amortizing the optimization across all instances,
and more crucially, it allows for test-time inference in a feed-forward pass.

3.2   C ONCEPT D ISENTANGLEMENT USING T EXT A NCHORS
The objective of Lrecon ensures that the extracted concept embeddings can sufficiently reconstruct the
concept of a given image through a pre-trained text-to-image generation model. However, with this
loss alone, there is little guarantee that each embedding encodes only the information pertinent to a
particular concept axis. In practice, we found that this baseline results in poor disentanglement of
different concept axes when remixing the concept embeddings to generate new images, potentially
due to the imprecise vision-language grounding in the pre-trained T2I model. For instance, as shown
in Figure 8, the extracted category embedding <e1 > for “red berries” cannot be remixed with
various color embeddings <e2 > e.g., “orange”, as <e1 > is highly entangled with the concept of a
“red” color due to the bias in natural images.
To encourage better disentanglement of different concept axes, we further incorporate a sparse set
of text anchors into the concept embedding space. Along each concept axis like color, we have
often named some prominent modes, such as “red” or “yellow”, and these text labels entail clearly
disentangled concepts. Therefore, we would like to reuse this disentangled nature of linguistic
concepts to improve the disentanglement of visual concepts. To this end, we make use of the text
predictions from a pre-trained Visual Question Answering (VQA) model, BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b),
as pseudo ground-truth anchors for the concept embeddings.
Specifically, for each training image x and for each concept axis of interest (e.g., color) indexed
by k, we query the BLIP-2 model Ψ with the image x and a question qk in natural language that
is specific to this concept axis, e.g., “what is the color of the object in the image”. Denote the
answer from BLIP-2, also in the form of natural language, as Ψ(x, qk ). We encode this answer with
the pre-trained text encoder cθ to obtain a text embedding ẽk = cθ (Ψ(x, qk )). The prediction of our
concept encoders fk,γ is encouraged to stay close to this anchor text embedding:
                 Lanchor
                  k      (x; γ) = ∥fk,γ (x) − ẽk ∥22 ,   where ẽk = cθ (Ψ(x, qk )).              (2)

It is crucial to highlight that we use these BLIP-2 predictions only as anchors by assigning a small
weight to this anchor loss Lanchor
                                 k    during training. Otherwise, the embeddings predicted by the
concept encoders could easily collapse to a set of discrete text embeddings and fail to capture the
visual nuances in images.

3.3   T RAINING AND I NFERENCE
Training. Given a collection of training images D containing various combinations of concepts
along each axis, the final objective to train the concept encoders consists of the two parts:
                                          "                  K
                                                                                #
                                                             X
                        total                 recon                anchor
                       L (γ) = Ex∼D L               (x; γ) +   λk Lk      (x; γ) .            (3)
                                                            k=1


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Inference. At inference time, given a new test image, the concept encoders extract embeddings
{ek } capturing its characteristics along each concept axis of interest. These embeddings can be
remixed across different images, or be replaced by embeddings converted from explicit words, to
produce images with new compositions of visual concepts through the backbone T2I generator.
Generalization to Unseen Concepts via Test-Time Finetuning. While the encoders can pre-
cisely extract an axis-specific concept that has been seen during training from a new test image, they
tend to be less robust to concepts unseen at training. However, with a lightweight test-time optimiza-
tion procedure, where we use only the reconstruction objective Lrecon to update the parameters for
all encoders, γ, these encoders can generalize to novel concepts unseen during training. Note that
Lanchor is omitted here in order to capture the visual nuances without over-committing to the coarse
text anchors. After training, the encoders have learned to generate outputs within a relatively narrow
region of the embedding space, which allows the model to adapt to the test images shown in Figure 5
within around 600 iterations while maintaining disentanglement and compositional capability.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Training Data Generation. We train the concept encoders only using synthetic images generated
by DeepFloyd from 5 different domains, including fruits, figurines, furniture, art, and clothing.
More details of our dataset can be found in A.2. For each dataset, we consider 2-3 concept axes, such
as category, color, material, style, and season. For example, considering category
and color for the fruits dataset, we generate training images by prompting DeepFloyd with text
prompts describing varying combinations of categories and colors, e.g. “a photo of an apple which
is red in color”. Note that these text prompts are used only for data generation and not for training,
as they may not be reliable (Figure 2). On average, we obtain 669 training images for each dataset.
Implementation Details. Inspired by Gal et al. (2023), we leverage a pre-trained CLIP ViT/L-
14 model for image encoding (Radford et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), which was trained
with a contrastive objective aligning image and text features, and hence well-suited for our task.
We extract image features from CLIP ViT and train K separate concept encoders fk on top of the
features, which share the same architecture but maintains separate weights. Specifically, we take
the [CLS] tokens from each CLIP layer and process each token with a distinct linear layer. This
is different from Gal et al. (2023), which extracts [CLS] tokens from every other layer and uses a
single shared linear layer for all token features. The transformed features are then aggregated with
average pooling followed by a LeakyReLU (Xu et al., 2015) activation, and passed into another
linear layer that produces the final predicted concept embeddings.
To ground the concept embeddings to the concept axes, we adapt the text templates from CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), which were originally used to assemble captions with class categories from Im-
ageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). For training, we use AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017)
optimizer with learning rate 0.02, and randomly flip the images horizontally. For test-time finetun-
ing, we use the AdamW optimizer with learning rate 0.001. We set λk = 0.0001 (Equation (3)) for
the category axis and λ = 0.001 for others. We use IF-I-XL from DeepFloyd as the backbone
model, with training resolution 64 × 64. Training on one dataset takes approximately 12 hours on
one NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. Generated images are upsampled 256 × 256 using IF-II-L
for visualization purpose.

4.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Visual Concept Extraction, Recomposition and Extrapolation. Once trained, the concept en-
coders can extract disentangled concept embeddings specific to each concept axis from different
test images, which can recomposed to generate new images with various concept compositions. As
shown in Figure 4, across various datasets, our method is able to recompose axis-specific visual
concepts from different images and consistently generate new images depicting the recomposed
concepts. More examples can be found in Appendix A.1, where images generated from individual
decomposed concept embeddings are also presented.
This disentangled concept representation also allows us to extrapolate along a particular concept
axis for visual exploration, as shown in Figure 7. For instance, we can ask BLIP-2 “what is the style


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Source <category>                                                                          Source <category>


                                                                        Source <style>
 Source <color>


                         (a) Fruits                                                                     (b) Paintings

                   Source <category>                                  Source <category>                                            Source <material>
                                               Source <material>
 Source <color>


                                                                                                         Source <color>
                                                                   (c) Furniture

Figure 4: Concept Recomposition. At test time, our model extracts visual concepts along various
axes from different images and recompose them to generate new images. We show recomposition
results across different pairs of concept axes in 3 datasets: (a) Fruits, (b) Paintings, and (c) Furniture.
Train Images      <category>                 <category’>                                 Train Images   <category>                      <category’>


 Test Image        <style>               <category’> + <style>                           Test Image      <color>                    <category’> + <color>


Figure 5: Generalization to Unseen Concepts via Finetuning. After test-time fine-tuning on a
single test-time image, encoders can adapt to novel concept. Visual details from the input images
are preserved as can be seen from images visualizing embedding predictions. Importantly, these
embeddings do not overfit to the input images and maintain a good disentanglement, such that they
can be freely recomposed to create new concepts. More results can be found in Figures 9 to 13.
More real-world results can be found in Figures 20 to 24.

of the painting?” in an image, and prompt GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to name a few alternatives. We
can then recompose the text embeddings of these alternative styles with our concept embeddings
and generate images to visualize these variants. Representing concepts as continuous embeddings
further enables concept interpolations. Details and results are shown in Appendix A.6.
Generalization to Unseen Concepts via Test-Time Finetuning. Although the encoders have
only seen a limited range of concepts during training due to the small size of the training dataset,
it can be quickly adapted to unseen concepts with the lightweight test-time finetuning procedure in
Section 3.3, as shown in Figure 5. For instance, after 600 finetuning iterations, the model can extract
the specific style of the dog painting unseen at training and compose it with the content from other
images. It can also capture nuanced colors e.g. yellow-ish-orange and transfer them to other objects.


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Source
   Image
                          <color>                                   <color>                              <style>
Change to    “pineapple” “strawberry” “banana”       “lemon”       “banana”     “apple”      “tree”      “apple”     “face”


 Null-text
Inversion

 Instruct-
   Pix2Pix

 Baseline
w/ BLIP-2


      Ours


Figure 6: Baselines Comparisons. Compared the text-based image editing methods, our method
achieves significantly better compositionality due to the disentangled concept representation, and
captures fine-grained color variations, which the baseline struggles to encode with language.
                                                      CLIP-Score ↑                                    Human Evaluation ↑
                                     Edit Category                            Edit Color              Edit Cat.    Edit Clr.
                             Cat.&Clr.       Cat.      Clr.        Cat.&Clr.       Cat.    Clr.        Score        Score
  Null-text Inversion          0.258        0.249     0.249          0.259        0.265    0.223       0.287        0.316
  InstructPix2Pix              0.267        0.277     0.226          0.270        0.245    0.268       0.233        0.648
  Baseline w/ BLIP-2           0.313        0.294     0.248          0.287        0.271    0.237       0.448        0.379
  Ours                         0.308        0.297     0.238          0.302        0.287    0.236       0.968        0.840
  w/o Lanchor
       k                       0.268        0.276     0.219          0.263        0.257    0.236          -            -
  w/o Encoder & Lanchor
                 k             0.288        0.300     0.214          0.242        0.213    0.265          -            -

Table 1: Quantitative Comparisons on Visual Concept Editing. Compared to existing image
editing baselines (Brooks et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2022), our method achieves better overall
CLIP score when editing either axis, and is particularly effective at retaining category-related
concepts as reflected in human evaluation. ‘Cat’ denotes Category and ‘Clr’ denotes Color.

4.3    C OMPARISON WITH P RIOR W ORKS
Qualitative Comparisons While this task of image generation with disentangled visual concepts
is new, we identified prior work that is capable of text-based image editing and generation, and
establish a side-by-side comparison on the task of visual concept editing. Specifically, given an
image x, for example, of a teal-colored apple in Figure 6, the task is to generate a new image
x̂ek →e′k with one concept axis k (e.g. category) modified by a text prompt, from <ek > to <e′k >,
while preserving other axes {i|i ̸= k} from the input.
We compare to two existing methods. Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) performs concept
editing by first inverting the input image to token embeddings of Stable-Diffusion (Saharia et al.,
2022) and then applying Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022), which modifies cross attention maps
for editing, a process that leads to pixel-aligned editing results. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023)
is a conditional diffusion model for text-based image editing. Since it is trained on data curated with
Prompt-to-Prompt for supervision, it also tends to generate pixel-aligned results. We also design
a naive baseline for this task, where we query BLIP-2 for a text description of the attributes to
be retained from the test image, and combine the answer with a target concept to generate the
final recomposed image. As shown in Figure 6, our method achieves better recomposition results,
whereas baseline methods fail to disentangle the desired axis-specific concepts from input images,
and therefore struggle to faithfully reproduce the desired concepts from the image and the text.

Quantitative Comparisons. We also conduct quantitative evaluations on the task of text-based
visual concept editing and compare with prior work. Specifically, we record the ground-truth text


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Source
    Input                  Extrapolations                        Image
 <category>    “charcoal”     “acrylic” “watercolor”                      <category> <category>   <color>    <color>
                                                                              +          +           +         +
                                                            Change to      “silver”   “orange”    “grapes”   “melon”


                                                                  Ours
 <category>      “red”        “purple”      “blue”

                                                           w/o ℒ𝑘anchor


 <category>     “spring”      “autumn”    “winter”      w/o Encoder
                                                       & w/o ℒ𝑘anchor

                                                              Baseline
                                                             w/ BLIP-2

Figure 7: Visual Concept Extrapolation.
Given an input image, we can extrapolate               Figure 8: Ablations. Both the text anchor loss
along a concept axis by querying BLIP-2                and the encoder design reduce overfitting to in-
and GPT-4 to name a few alternatives to                put images and improve concept disentanglement.
the concept in the input. Our model can                Removing these components significantly deterio-
then generate new variants of the input for            rates the visual concept editing results. Addition-
visual exploration, by mixing them with                ally, we observe that the BLIP-2 baseline has diffi-
the extracted concept embeddings.                      culties transferring unnatural colors.


prompts y that we used to generate each training image x, and manually filter out the inconsistent
pairs. For each concept axis k, we randomly select a target label <e′k > from a set of candidates that
different from the one in the original prompt <ek >. We then measure the alignment score between
the modified image x̂ek →e′k with the modified text prompt yek →e′k using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
following Gal et al. (2022). We also break down the score to each individual axis, by computing the
alignment of the image to a prompt specifying only one axis, e.g. “a photo of <e′k >”. All results
are summarized in Table 1. Our method captures the characteristics of category particularly well
and outperforms others in changing category or preserving category while changing color, which
highlights its ability to extract disentangled concepts allowing for flexible compositions. Instruct-
Pix2Pix is more effective in changing color, but tends to do poorly in preserving the category, as
seen in Figure 6. More details on our quantitative results can be found in A.4.
We further conduct a human evaluation. Each participant is presented the results from all three
methods in a random order together with the editing instruction, and asked to rank them considering
both realism and faithfulness to the instruction (see Appendix A.3 for details). We aggregate the
responses from 20 people and report the average average score normalized to 0-1 in Table 1. More
details of our setup can be found in A.3.

4.4    A BLATIONS

We conduct an ablation study to understand the effects of the proposed encoder (as opposed per-
instance optimization) and the text anchoring loss Lanchor
                                                       k   . We use the same evaluation dataset and
the CLIP-alignment metric as described in Section 4.3. As shown in Fig. 8 and Table 1, removing
Lanchor
  k     and the encoders deteriorates disentanglement of the different concept axes due to severe
overfitting, resulting in poor recomposition results. More results are included in the Appendix.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a framework for learning language-informed visual concepts from
images, by simply distilling from pre-trained vision-language models. After training, the concept en-
coders extract disentangled concept embeddings along various concept axes specified by language,
which can be remixed or edited to generate images with novel concept compositions. We conduct
thorough evaluations both quantitatively and qualitatively, and demonstrate that our approach yields
superior results in visual concept editing compared to prior work.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Kyle Hsu, Joy Hsu, and Stephen Tian for their detailed comments and feedback. This work
is in part supported by NSF RI #2211258 and #2338203, ONR MURI N00014-22-1-2740, ONR
N00014-23-1-2355, AFOSR YIP FA9550-23-1-0127, the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered
AI (HAI), Amazon, J.P. Morgan, and Samsung.

R EFERENCES
Moab Arar, Rinon Gal, Yuval Atzmon, Gal Chechik, Daniel Cohen-Or, Ariel Shamir, and Amit H
 Bermano. Domain-agnostic tuning-encoder for fast personalization of text-to-image models.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06925, 2023.

Omri Avrahami, Kfir Aberman, Ohad Fried, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Break-a-scene:
 Extracting multiple concepts from a single image. SIGGRAPH Asia, 2023.

Kobus Barnard, Pinar Duygulu, David Forsyth, Nando de Freitas, David M. Blei, and Michael I.
  Jordan. Matching words and pictures. JMLR, 2003.

Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.

Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models, 2023a.

Hila Chefer, Oran Lang, Mor Geva, Volodymyr Polosukhin, Assaf Shocher, Michal Irani, In-
  bar Mosseri, and Lior Wolf. The hidden language of diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.00966, 2023b.

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Info-
  gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
  NeurIPS, 29, 2016.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale, 2021.

Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A. Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. NeurIPS, 2023.

Li Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, and P. Perona. One-shot learning of object categories. IEEE TPAMI, 2006.

R. Fergus, L. Fei-Fei, P. Perona, and A. Zisserman. Learning object categories from google’s image
  search. In ICCV, 2005.

Bruce Fraser, Fred Bunting, and Chris Murphy. Real world color management, 2004.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H. Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H. Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Encoder-based domain tuning for fast personalization of text-to-image models. ACM Trans.
  Graph., 2023.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accu-
  rate object detection and semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. NeurIPS, 2014.
Chi Han, Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Josh Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. Visual concept-metaconcept
  learning. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Erik Härkönen, Aaron Hertzmann, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Sylvain Paris. Ganspace: Discovering
  interpretable gan controls. NeurIPS, 2020.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Aaron Hertzmann, Charles E Jacobs, Nuria Oliver, Brian Curless, and David H Salesin. Image
  analogies. In SIGGRAPH, 2001.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In ICLR, 2017.
Kyle Hsu, Will Dorrell, James C. R. Whittington, Jiajun Wu, and Chelsea Finn. Disentanglement
  via latent quantization. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2019.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for
  controllable text-to-image generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14720, 2023a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, 2023b.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In ECCV, 2022.
Nan Liu, Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Unsupervised compo-
  sitional concepts discovery with text-to-image generative models. ICCV, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-
   symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. In
   ICLR, 2019.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09794, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. JMLR, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Kanchana Ranasinghe and Michael Ryoo. Language-based action concept spaces improve video
  self-supervised learning. NeurIPS, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
  recognition challenge. IJCV, 2015.
Donald G Saari. Selecting a voting method: the case for the borda count. Constitutional Political
  Economy, 34(3):357–366, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NeurIPS, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. NeurIPS, 2022.
StabilityAI. DeepFloyd IF. https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF.

Adéla Šubrtová, Michal Lukáč, Jan Čech, David Futschik, Eli Shechtman, and Daniel Sỳkora. Dif-
  fusion image analogies. In SIGGRAPH, pp. 1–10, 2023.
Yael Vinker, Andrey Voynov, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ariel Shamir. Concept decomposition for visual
  exploration and inspiration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18203, 2023.
Andrey Voynov and Artem Babenko. Unsupervised discovery of interpretable directions in the gan
  latent space. In ICML, 2020.
Bing Xu, Naiyan Wang, Tianqi Chen, and Mu Li. Empirical evaluation of rectified activations in
  convolutional network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.00853, 2015.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Yiwu Zhong, Jing Shi, Jianwei Yang, Chenliang Xu, and Yin Li. Learning to generate scene graph
  from natural language supervision. In ICCV, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
More qualitative results for concept extraction and recomposition are shown in Figures 9 to 13.
Across various datasets, our method achieves superior disentanglement and recomposition results.

           <category>      <style>    composed               <category>     <style>    composed



             <style>     <category>                            <style>    <category>


         Figure 9: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Art dataset.

           <category>     <color>     composed               <category>     <color>    composed



             <color>    <category>                             <color>    <category>


           <category>     <color>     composed               <category>     <color>    composed



             <color>    <category>                             <color>    <category>


           <category>     <color>     composed               <category>     <color>    composed



             <color>    <category>                             <color>    <category>


       Figure 10: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Fruits dataset.

A.2   DATASETS
We use 5 training datasets for the experiments. The concept axes in interest, together with ground
truth words used in the text prompt for DeepFloyd to generate the training data, are listed below.
Fruit Dataset.
Category: Cherry, Apple, Banana, Mango, Strawberry, Pineapple, Lemon, Raspberry
Color: Red, Blue, Green, Purple, Black, Yellow, Orange
Art Dataset.
Category: Beach, Tree, Apple, Cat, Dog, Face, City, Hill, Sky, Car, Bike, House, Castle, Chair
Style: Charcoal, Oil, Paint, Acrylic, Crayon, Pastel
Figurine Dataset.
Category: Ball, Block, Statue
Color: Red, Blue, Green, Yellow, White, Cream, Purple, Pink
Material: Plastic, Fur, Wood, Metal, Leather


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>      <category> <material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>      <category> <material>


                            <category>         <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                              <color>      <category> <material>


                            <category>         <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                              <color>      <category> <material>


      Figure 11: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Figurine dataset.


Clothing Dataset.
Category: Shirt, Pants, Shoes, Dress, Cap
Color: Red, Yellow, Green, Purple, White, Cream
Season: Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter
Furniture Dataset.
Category: Chair, Table, Bench


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               <category>       <color> <material>      composed



                                <material>      <color> <category>



                                 <color>      <category> <material>


                               <category>       <color> <material>      composed



                                <material>      <color> <category>



                                  <color>      <category> <material>


                               <category>       <color> <material>      composed



                                <material>      <color> <category>



                                 <color>      <category> <material>


       Figure 12: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Objects dataset.



Color: Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Purple, Black, White
Material: Wood, Metal, Plastic


A.3   H UMAN E VALUATION

In the user study, we create a questionnaire where users are asked to choose the image that matches
our test setting: given an image prompt and text instruction, users rank images that best represents
both the image prompt and text instruction. Here, we randomly sample 12 data points from the
evaluation dataset for color editing and 12 for category editing. We collected the questionnaire
responses from 20 users. Our score follows the Borda point metric (Saari, 2023) where 1st, 2nd, and
3rd would receive 2, 1, and 0 point(s) respectively, allowing us to differentiate rankings of 3, 2, 2
and 2, 1, 1. We then calculate the average scores over both the number of questions and participants,
and subsequently normalize these values to a 0 − 1 scale. Results are shown in 1.
A set of instructions Figure 14 are presented to the respondents before the user study. Then, they
are presented with the 24 questions of color and category editing tasks. Example questions are
shown in Figures 15 and 16.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               <category>       <color>    <season>     composed



                                <season>        <color> <category>



                                 <color>      <category> <season>


                               <category>       <color>    <season>     composed



                                <season>        <color> <category>



                                 <color>      <category> <season>


      Figure 13: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Clothing dataset.


                              Figure 14: Questionnaire Instructions.


A.4   Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS .

Figure 17 analyzes the mean and standard deviation of CLIP scores introduced in Section 4.3. Our
method achieves the best score with a low variance for both the category (left) and the overall (right)
metric, and stays competitive on the color (metric).


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Figure 15: Questionnaire Attribute Modification.


                         Figure 16: Questionnaire Category Modification.


A.5   DATASET L ABELLING WITH BLIP
In our approach, we employ BLIP in order to annotate each image with its respective category and
attributes. To achieve this, we query BLIP for each image, with one question for each attribute or
category. For example, for an image of a red wooden table, we would ask BLIP what is the name of
the item, what material it is made of, and what color it is.
During the pre-training stage, items corresponding to identical prompts and therefore the same place-
holder tokens are aggregated by taking the most commonly occurring BLIP answer for each category
or attribute. For example, if we have 8 images of red wooden tables, and one of them is misclassified
as a red plastic table, we would still label it with ‘red’, ‘wood’, and ‘table’ for color, material, and
category respectively.

A.6   I NTERPOLATION OF C ONCEPT E MBEDDINGS
We further demonstrate concept interpolation results. By interpolating between two concept em-
beddings, our model can generate meaningful images depicting gradual changes from one concept
to another, such as the hybrid fruit of cherries and bananas shown in Figure 18. To interpolate
between two input images, first, we extract CLIP features for both images, giving us two vectors
of size 12 × 1024. We interpolate the two vectors using Spherical interpolation (SLERP). Specif-


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Figure 17: Quantitative Baselines.


ically, given two normalized vectors Anorm and Bnorm of dimensions 12 × 1024, we compute
the dot product to find the cosine of the angle θ between them as cos(θ) = Anorm · Bnorm . For
                                                                       i
12 interpolation points, each point i is calculated using αi = 11         and the interpolated vector is
                    sin((1−αi )θ)          sin(αi θ)
slerp(A, B, αi ) =      sin(θ)    A norm +  sin(θ)   B norm . This ensures the resultant vectors maintain
a constant magnitude.
With a set of trained encoders, each encoder takes in the interpolated CLIP features, and their outputs
are combined with a training-time textual template to generate the interpolation results as shown in
Figures 18 and 19.


        Input                                                   Input
      Images                                                  Images
Interpolation                                           Interpolation
       Points                                                  Points
    <category>                                             <category>
      + <color>                                              + <color>


  <category>                                             <category>



      <color>                                                 <color>



                              Figure 18: Interpolation on Fruit dataset.


        Input                                                   Input
      Images                                                  Images
Interpolation                                           Interpolation
       Points                                                  Points
   <subject> +                                             <subject> +
       <style>                                                 <style>


  <subject>                                               <subject>



      <style>                                                 <style>



                               Figure 19: Interpolation on Art dataset.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B   I NFERENCE ON R EAL -W ORLD I MAGES
Despite being trained on images generated by diffusion-based models, the concept encoders gen-
eralize well to diverse, complex real-world images, including unseen types of object category,
material, and color from casual photo captures (Figures 20 to 23) and unseen types of artwork
style (Figures 5 and 24).

                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


Figure 20: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Real-world Images of various
objects.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              <category>       <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                              <category>       <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                              <category>       <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


Figure 21: Additional Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Real-world Images
of various objects.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                <category>          <color>   composed



                                  <color>       <category>


                                <category>          <color>   composed



                                  <color>       <category>


                                <category>          <color>   composed



                                  <color>       <category>


                                <category>          <color>   composed



                                  <color>       <category>


                                <category>          <color>   composed



                                  <color>       <category>


Figure 22: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Real-world Images of various
fruits.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             <category>         <color> <material>     composed



                              <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                             <category>         <color> <material>     composed



                              <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>         <category> <material>


                             <category>         <color> <material>     composed



                              <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


                             <category>         <color> <material>     composed



                             <material>         <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category> <material>


Figure 23: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Real-world Images of various
pieces of furniture.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 <category>         <style>    composed



                                   <style>      <category>


                                 <category>         <style>    composed



                                   <style>      <category>


                                 <category>         <style>    composed



                                   <style>      <category>


                                 <category>         <style>    composed



                                   <style>      <category>


Figure 24: Visual Concept Extraction and Recomposition Results on Real-world Images of artwork.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    T HE E FFECT OF THE A NCHOR L OSS
During training time, the anchor loss (Equation (2)) encourages the encoder predictions to converge
to a meaningful subspace within the word embedding space Gal et al. (2023). This ensures that
these embeddings can be readily visualized by a pre-trained text-to-image generation model, and
improves the compositionality across different concept axes, as shown in Figure 6.
Empirically, we find that simply setting a small weight on this loss can effectively achieve this
objective, allowing the model to capture nuances along each axis, without collapsing to the word
embeddings. In Figure 25, we empirically show such examples, where we compare the concept
embeddings predicted by the color encoder to the text embedding of the training-time BLIP-2 label,
e.g. “blue” from Figure 25, and the former preserves the specific color of the input image while the
latter does not.

            “blue”        Input     <color>            “white”        Input     <color>


             T2I       Our Concept Encoder               T2I       Our Concept Encoder


           “yellow”       Input     <color>            “purple”       Input     <color>


             T2I       Our Concept Encoder               T2I       Our Concept Encoder

Figure 25: The concept embeddings extracted by our concept encoders capture various shades of
colors instead of generic ‘blue’, ‘white’ etc. directly generated by the T2I model DeepFloyd.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D                    E XTENSION WITH N EW C ONCEPT A XES
We show that we are able to extend to additional concept axes by training new concept encoders
without retraining the existing ones. In the experiments shown in Figures 26 and 27, given two
trained encoders for category and color and the corresponding training dataset, we train the
material encoder while keeping the other two frozen. We show that such procedural training
maintains the disentanglement of the frozen encoders while allowing the framework to extend to a
new concept axis.

                          Frozen                                              Added ‘material’ axis
                           Source <category>                       Source <category>                    Source <material>


                                               Source <material>
    Source <color>


                                                                                       Source <color>
Figure 26: Concept Recomposition after adding a new material axis to the model trained with
category and color axes.


                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category><material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                              <material>       <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category><material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category><material>


                             <category>        <color> <material>   composed



                             <material>        <color> <category>



                               <color>     <category><material>


Figure 27: Test-Time Generalization Results on images of furniture, where the material encoder
is additionally trained on top of the frozen category and color encoders.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    A DDITIONAL BASELINE C OMPARISONS
In Figure 28, we provide additional qualitative examples accompanying the experiments in Table 1.
From these visual examples, we observed that the color nuances captured by ours are more accurate
compared to the BLIP-2 baseline. However, since the CLIP-based metric specified in Section 4.3
cannot fully capture the minute differences, the BLIP-2 baseline still achieves comparable scores to
our method despite this evident gap in visual results.
To quantify such visual differences in colors, we compare the color of a 16 × 16 centered patch
from the input image and the image generated by the method being evaluated, both of resolution
64 × 64, and report the L2 error of the mean color of the two patches. We report the average of
metric across all examples in Figure 28 in Table 2. Results suggest that our method captures colors
more accurately compared to the baselines.


         Source
          Image
                   <category>   <color>   <category>    <color>     <category>      <color>   <category>     <color>
                       +          +           +             +           +             +              +         +
     Change to      “orange”    “peach”     “white”     “melon”       “gold”        “melon”       “silver”   “berry”


           Ours



    w/o ℒ𝑘anchor


  w/o Encoder
 & w/o ℒ𝑘anchor

       Baseline
      w/ BLIP-2


                           Figure 28: More qualitative results for ablations.


                                                                CIELAB ∆E* ↓
                                               Cherry       Mango      Strawberry         Apple
                    Ours                       35.50         4.76           16.12         15.64
                    w/o Lanchor
                          k                    101.34       86.34           85.31         122.01
                    w/o Encoder & Lanchor
                                    k          85.86        82.46           82.07         127.80
                    Baseline w/ BLIP-2         79.90        25.20           47.30          73.62

Table 2: Quantitative Comparisons on Color Editing. To quantify the differences in color seen
in Figure 28, we use CIELAB ∆E*, the color-distance metric recommended by the International
Commision on Illumination (Fraser et al., 2004).


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     D ISCUSSION ON T EXTUAL I NVERSION
As discussed in Section 3.1, compared to directly using text as inputs for image generation, us-
ing techniques like Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), our model is able to capture more nuanced
visual details of a particular image with continuous embeddings, instead of discrete words. This
can be illustrated in the empirical results in Figures 6, 8 and 28, which show that our method pre-
serves the nuances from input images more accurately than the BLIP-2 baseline which uses texts for
conditional generation.

F.1   L IMITATIONS
Given a few concept axes specified by language, the current model is able to learn disentangled
concept embeddings for various concept remixing and editing tasks. However, this requires that the
concept axes are given a priori to the model, which limits the generality of the concept space that
can be captured by the model. Moreover, we train separate encoders for each concept axis, which
does not make full use of the inherent hierarchical structure of these concept axes.


                                                28
