Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ULTI C ONTRIEVERS : A NALYSIS                                            OF      D ENSE R E -
TRIEVAL R EPRESENTATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT
             Dense Retrievers compress source documents into vector representations; the in-
             formation they encode determines what is available to downstream tasks (e.g.,
             QA, summarisation). Yet there is little analysis of the information in retriever rep-
             resentations. We conduct the first analysis comparing the information captured
             in dense retriever representations as compared to language model representations.
             To do this analysis, we present MultiContrievers, 25 contrastive dense retrievers
             initialized from the 25 MultiBerts. We use information theoretic probing to anal-
             yse how well MultiContrievers encode two example pieces of information: topic
             and demographic gender (measured as extractability of these two concepts), and
             we correlate this to performance on 14 retrieval datasets covering seven distinct
             retrieval tasks. We find that: 1) MultiContriever contrastive training increases
             extractability of both topic and gender, but also has a regularisation effect; Mul-
             tiContrievers are more similar to each other than MultiBerts, 2) extractability of
             both topic and gender correlate poorly with benchmark performance, revealing a
             gap between the effect of the training objective on representations, and desirable
             qualities for the benchmark 3) MultiContriever representations show strong po-
             tential for gender bias, and we do find allocational gender bias in retrieval bench-
             marks. However, a causal analysis shows that the source of the gender bias is
             not in the representations, suggesting that despite this potential, current gender
             bias is coming from either the queries or retrieval corpus, and cannot be corrected
             by improvements to modelling alone.We additionally find 4) significant variabil-
             ity across random seeds, suggesting that future work should test across a broad
             spread, which is not currently standard. We release our 25 MultiContrievers (in-
             cluding intermediate checkpoints) and all code to facilitate further analysis.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Dense retrievers (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Izacard et al., 2022; Hofstätter et al., 2021) are the standard
retrieval component of retrieval augmented Question Answering (QA) and other retrieval systems,
such as fact-checking (Thorne et al., 2018), argumentation, and others. Yet there has been no anal-
ysis of the information present in dense retriever representations, nor how it affects retrieval system
behaviour. This lack of analytical work is surprising. Retrievers are widespread, and are used for
many purposes that require trust: to increase factuality and decrease hallucination (Shuster et al.,
2021), and to provide trust and transparency (Lewis et al., 2020) via a source document that has
provenance and can be examined. The information the a representation retains from a source doc-
ument mediates these abilities. Dense retrievers compress inputs documents into N-dimensional
representations, so they necessarily emphasise some pieces of information over others. Yet we still
do not know what information is de- or over-emphasised, and how this affects retrieval behaviour.
For example, a biography of Mary Somerville will contain many details about her: her profession
(astronomy and mathematics), her gender (female), her political influence (women’s suffrage), her
country of origin (Scotland) and others. These will be relevant to different kinds of queries: which
ones will be more and less emphasised after compression?
Some of this type of analysis exists for Masked Language Models (MLMs): Lovering et al. (2021)
look at linguistic information that is retained (such as subject verb agreement, for the task of gram-
    1
        URL withheld for anonymity.


                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


maticality judgments) and when lack of this information results in reliance on spurious heuristics,
and Orgad et al. (2022) look at gender information and the effect on gender bias in profession clas-
sification. But there is no such analysis for retrievers, which optimise a very different objective.
We propose to extend this previous analytical work into the retrieval domain. This leads us to the
following research questions:

RQ1    What information does a retriever represent, and how does this differ from a language model?

RQ2    Do differences in this information correlate with performance on retrieval benchmarks?

RQ3    Is gender information in retrievers predictive of their gender bias?
To answer these questions, we train 25 MultiContrievers initialised from the released MultiBerts
(Sellam et al., 2022). We then use information theoretic probing, also known as minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) probing (Voita & Titov, 2020) to measure the information in MultiContriever
representations. We evaluate the models on 14 retrieval datasets from the BEIR benchmark Thakur
et al. (2021). We find that:
(RQ1) For both MultiBerts and MultiContrievers, gender is more extractable than topic, but there
are noticeable differences in the models. MultiContrievers have both more extractable topic and
more extractable gender, but a lower ratio between the two. MultiContrievers have overall richer
representations for topic and gender, but they still have potential to rely on gender heuristics (which
are a source of gender bias). MultiContrievers also have a smaller range of extractability between
the 25 seeds, showing a regularisation effect of their training.
(RQ2) Despite the increase in extractability of both gender and topic, neither correlates with retrieval
performance on benchmark datasets. This highlights the gap between features encouraged by the
retriever training process, and those tested by the benchmarks, and our findings suggest it is a limi-
tation of the benchmark. When we subsample a set of questions that require gender information to
answer them correctly, we do see a correlation between gender extractability and performance. This
indicates that gender information is used by the model, but that most questions in the benchmark
can be answered without it. Retrieval benchmarks may underspecify some desirable characteristics
of a good model.
(RQ3), despite the evidence that extractability of gender information is helpful to the model, it is not
the cause of allocational gender bias in the Natural Questions (NQ) dataset. We find that when we
do a causal analysis by removing gender from MultiContriever representations, gender bias persists,
indicating that the source of bias is in the queries or corpus.
Our contributions are: 1) the first information theoretic analysis of dense retrievers for performance
and for fairness, 2) the first causal analysis of social bias in dense retrievers, to identify the source
of the bias, 3) a broad analysis of variability in performance and fairness across random retriever
seeds, 4) a suite of 25 MultiContrievers for use in future work, as well as a small gender annotated
subset of Natural Questions, and all training and evaluation code.

2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
2.1   W HAT IS A RETRIEVER ?

Retrievers take an input query and return relevance scores for documents from a corpus. We use the
common dense retrieval approach where documents D and queries Q are encoded separately by the
same model fθ , and relevance is given by the dot product between them. For a given query qi and
document di , the relevance score s is:
                                      s(di , qi ) = fθ (qi ) · fθ (di )                              (1)

Training fθ is a challenge. Language models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), are not good re-
trievers out-of-the-box, but retrieval training resources are limited and expensive to create, since
they involve matching candidate documents to a query from a corpus of potentially millions. So
retrievers are either trained on one of the few corpora available, such as Natural Questions (NQ)
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) or MS MARCO (Campos et al., 2016) as supervision (Hofstätter et al.,


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2021; Karpukhin et al., 2020), or on a self-supervised proxy for the retrieval task (Izacard et al.,
2022). Both approaches results in a domain shift between training and later inference, making re-
trieval a generalisation task. This motivates our analysis, as Lovering et al. (2021)’s work showed
that information theoretic probing was predictive of where a model would generalise and where it
would rely on simple heuristics and dataset artifacts.
In this work, we focus on the self-supervised Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022), initiaised from a
BERT model and then fine-tuned with a contrastive objective. For this objective, all documents in
a large corpus are broken into chunks, where chunks from the same document are positive pairs
and chunks from different documents are negative pairs. This is a loose proxy for ”relevance” in
the retrieval sense, so we are interested in what information this objective encourages contriever to
emphasise, what to retain, and what to lose, and what this means for the eventual retrieval task.

2.2   H OW DO WE FIND OUT WHAT INFORMATION IS IN A RETRIEVER ?

The most common analysis of what information is in a model representation is via probing, also
called ‘diagnostic classifiers’ Belinkov & Glass (2019). Let D = {(di , yi ), ..., dn , yn )} be a dataset,
where d is a document (e.g. a chunk of a Wikipedia biography about Mary Somerville) and y is a
label from a set of k discrete labels yi ∈ Y , Y = {1, ...k} for some information in that document
(e.g. mathematics, astronomy if probing for topic).
In a probing task, we want to measure how well fθ (di ) encodes yi , for all d1:n , y1:n . We use Min-
imum Description Length (MDL) probing (Voita & Titov, 2020), or information theoretic probing,
in our experiments. This measures extractability of Y via compression of information y1:n from
fθ (di:n ) via the ratio of uniform codelength to online codelength.
                                                          Lunif orm
                                      Compression =                                                    (2)
                                                           Lonline
where Lunif orm (y1:n |fθ (di:n ) = n log2 k and Lonline is calculated by training the probe on in-
creasing subsets of the dataset, and thus measures quality of the probe relative to the number of
training examples. Better performance with less examples will result in a shorter online codelength,
and a higher compression, showing that Y is more extractable from fθ (di:n ).
In this work, we probe for binary gender, where Y = {m, f } and topic, where Y =
{lawyer, doctor, ...}

2.3   W HY DOES IT MATTER ?

Extractability, as measured by MDL probing, is predictive of shortcutting (Lovering et al., 2021);
when a model relies on a heuristic feature to solve a task, which has sufficient correlation with the
actual task to have high accuracy on the training set, but is not the true task (Geirhos et al., 2020).
Shortcutting causes failure to generalise; a heuristic that worked on the training set due to a spurious
correlation will not work after a distributional shift (Gururangan et al., 2018). This would severely
affect retriever performance, which depends on generalisation.
Shortcutting is also often the cause of social biases. Extractability of gender information in language
models is predictive of gender bias in coreference resolution and biography classification (Orgad
et al., 2022). So when some information, such as gender, is more extractable than other information,
such as anaphora resolution, the model is risk of using gender as a heuristic, if the data supports this
usage. And thus of both failing to generalise and of propagating biases. For instance, for the case
of Mary Somerville, if gender is easier for a model to extract than profession, then a model might
have actually learnt to identify mathematicians via male, instead of via maths (the true relationship),
since it is both easier to learn and the error penalty on that is small, as there are not many female
mathematicians.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
Our research questions require that we analyse the relationship between information in different
model representations, and their performance and fairness. This requires at minimum a model, a
probing dataset (with labels for information we want to probe for), and a performance dataset. We


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


need some performance datasets to have demographic labels so that we can calculate performance
difference across demographics, also called allocational fairness.
To answer RQ1 (what information is in retriever representations and how does it differ from LMs)
we train 25 MultiContrievers with 25 random seeds. We run information theoretic probing on them
with two datasets with gender and topic labels, and repeat this for the 25 MultiBerts that they were
trained on. We also compare this to the results of some other supervised retrieval models. For RQ2
we evaluate all models on the 14 BEIR benchmark datasets and correlate to the values from RQ1.
For RQ3 we subsample Natural Questions to queries about entities, and annotate those that have
explicit gender as male/female. E.g. an entity query is Who was the first prime minister of Finland?,
a female query is Who was the first female prime minister of Finland? and a male query is Who
was the first male prime minister of Finland?. We measure performance separately on the male and
female query sets, as well as on the general entity sets as a control.


3.1    M ODELS

For the majority of our experiments, we compare our 25 MultiContriever models to the 25 Multi-
Berts models (Sellam et al., 2022). We access the MultiBerts via huggingface2 and train the con-
trievers via modifying the repository released in Izacard et al. (2022). We use the same contrastive
training data as Izacard et al. (2022), to maximise comparability with previous results. This com-
prises a 50/50 mix of Wikipedia and CCNet from 2019. As a result, five of the fourteen perfor-
mance datasets involve temporal generalisation, since they postdate both the MultiContriever and
the MultiBert training data. This most obviously affects the TREC-COVID dataset (QA), though
also four additional datasets: Touché-2020 (argumentation), SCIDOCS (citation prediction), and
Climate-FEVER and Scifact (fact-checking). As in Izacard et al. (2022), we train for 500,000 steps,
saving intermediate checkpoints, sometimes (though rarely) selecting an earlier checkpoint if the
model appeared to converge earlier. Further details on contriever training and infrastructure are in
Appendix A.
We train 25 random seeds as both generalisation and bias vary greatly by random seed initialisation
(McCoy et al., 2020). MultiContrievers have no new parameters, so the random seed affects only
their data shuffle. The MultiBerts each have a different random seed for both weight initialisation
and data shuffle.


3.2    P ROBING DATASETS

We use two datasets for probing, to verify that results are not dataset specific or due to any dataset
artifacts. First the BiasinBios dataset (De-Arteaga et al., 2019), which contains biographies scraped
from the web annotated with labels of the subject’s binary gender (male, female) and biography topic
(lawyer, journalist, etc). We also use the Wikipedia dataset from md gender (Dinan et al., 2020),
which contains Wikipedia pages about people, annotated with binary gender labels.3 For gender
labels, BiasinBios is close to balanced, with 55% male and 45% female labels, but Wikipedia is
very imbalanced, with 85% male and 15% female. For topic labels, BiasinBios has a long-tail zipfian
distribution over 28 professions, with professor and physician together as a third of examples and
rapper and personal trainer as 0.7%. Examples from both datasets can be found in Appendix B.
To verify the quality of each dataset’s labels, we manually annotated 20 random samples and com-
pared to gold labels. BiasinBios agreement with our labels was 100%, and Wikipedia’s was 88%.4
We focus on the higher quality BiasinBios dataset for most of our graphs and analysis, though we
replicate all experiments on Wikipedia.

   2
     e.g. https://huggingface.co/google/MultiBerts-seed_[SEED]
   3
     This dataset does contain non-binary labels, but there are few (0.003%, or 1̃80 examples out of 6 million).
Uniform codelength (dataset size ∗ log2(num classes)) is important to information theoretic probing, so an
additional class with very few examples can significantly affect results. This dataset was also noisier, making
small subsets of data even less trustworthy.
   4
     We investigated other md gender datasets in the hope of replicating these results on a different domain
such as dialogue (e.g. Wizard of Wikipedia), but found the labels to be of insufficiently high agreement to use.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   E VALUATION DATASETS AND M ETRICS

We evaluate on fourteen publicly available datasets in the BEIR benchmark. BEIR covers retrieval
for seven different tasks (fact-checking, citation prediction, duplicate question retrieval, argument
retrieval, question answering, bio-medical information retrieval, and entity retrieval).5 . We initially
analysed all standard metrics used in BEIR and TREC (e.g. NDCG, Recall, MAP, MRR, @10 and
@100). We observed similar trends across all metrics somewhat to our surprise, since many retrieval
papers focus on the superiority of a particular metric (Wang et al., 2013). We thus predominantly
report NDCG@10, as it is standard on the BEIR benchmark benchmark (Thakur et al., 2021).
For allocational fairness evaluation, we create a subset of Natural Questions (NQ) about entities,
annotated with male, female, and neutral (no gender). We subsample Natural Questions to entity
queries by filtering for queries containing any of who, whose, whom, person, name. We
similarly filter this set into gendered entity queries by using a modified subset of gender terms from
Bolukbasi et al. (2016). This automatic process is low precision/high recall6 so we manually filter
these results by annotating with two criteria: gender of the subject (male, female, or neutral/none7 ),
and a binary tag with whether the query actually constrains the gender of the answer. This second
annotation is somewhat subtle. For example, in our dataset there is the query Who was the
actress that played Bee, which contains a gendered word (actress) but it is not necessary
to answer the question; all actors that played Bee are female, and the question could be as easily
answered in the form Who played Bee?. Whereas in another example query, Who plays
the sister in Home Alone 3? the query does constrain the gender of the answer. We
annotated 816 queries with both of these attributes, of which 51% have a gender constraint, with a
gender breakdown of 59% female and 41% male.
We measure allocational fairness by the difference between the female and male query performance.
We use the neutral/no gender entity queries as a control to make sure the system performs normally
on this type of query.


4     R ESULTS

Below we address the three research questions: how does extractability change (RQ1), do the
changes correlate with performance (RQ2), and is this predictive of allocational bias (RQ3). We
also analyse the overall performance and quality of the MultiContrievers, as this is the first study
that includes variability over a large number of retriever initialisations, with some surprising results
from this alone.

4.1   M ULTI C ONTRIEVERS OVERVIEW

We analysed the distribution of performance by dataset for 24 seeds, to ensure that our MultiCon-
trievers have competitive performance, which strengthens both our analysis and their utility to future
researchers.8 Figure 1 shows this data, broken out by dataset, with a dashed line at previous reference
performance (Izacard et al., 2022). Table 1 shows the best and worst individual seed per dataset.
A few things are notable: first, there is a large range of benchmark performance across seeds
with for identical contrastive losses. During training, MultiContrievers converge to the same ac-
curacy (see Appendix A) and (usually) have the same aggregated BEIR performance reported in
Izacard et al. (2022). However, the range of scores per dataset is often quite large, and for some
datasets the original Contriever is in the tail of the distribution: e.g in Climate-Fever (row 1 col-
   5
     The BEIR benchmark itself contains two additional tasks, tweet retrieval, and news retrieval, but these
datasets are not publicly available.
   6
     It captures queries with gendered terms in prepositional phrases, (Who starred in O Brother
Where Art Thou?) which are common false positives in QA datasets, as they are not about brothers.
   7
     In cases where the gender term was actually in a title or other prepositional phrase as in the example
   8
     Seed 13 (ominously) is excluded from our analysis because of extreme outlier behaviour, which was not
reported in Sellam et al. (2022). We investigated this behaviour, and it is fascinating, but orthogonal to this
work, so we have excluded the seed from all analysis. Our investigation can be found in Appendix D and
should be of interest to researchers investigating properties of good representations (e.g. anisotropy) and of
random initialisations.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       12                                                                                             12                                                                                          12                                                                                 12                                                                                                12

                       10                                                                                             10                                                                                          10                                                                                 10                                                                                                10

                       8                                                                                              8                                                                                           8                                                                                  8                                                                                                 8


       # checkpoints


                                                                                                      # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                  # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # checkpoints
                       6                                                                                              6                                                                                           6                                                                                  6                                                                                                 6

                       4                                                                                              4                                                                                           4                                                                                  4                                                                                                 4

                       2                                                                                              2                                                                                           2                                                                                  2                                                                                                 2

                       0                                                                                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                  0                                                                                                 0
                                 32        34        36       38      40    42        44         46                               16          17            18       19        20          21                          65     66        67       68      69       70   71     72                                21          22          23       24    25          26         27                            18.5      19.0        19.5   20.0 20.5 21.0    21.5    22.0        22.5
                                                      trec-covid-v2 NDCG@10                                                                        climate-fever NDCG@10                                                                        fever NDCG@10                                                                             fiqa NDCG@10                                                                                   msmarco NDCG@10


                       12                                                                                             12                                                                                          12                                                                                 12                                                                                                12

                       10                                                                                             10                                                                                          10                                                                                 10                                                                                                10

                       8                                                                                              8                                                                                           8                                                                                  8                                                                                                 8
       # checkpoints


                                                                                                      # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                  # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # checkpoints
                       6                                                                                              6                                                                                           6                                                                                  6                                                                                                 6

                       4                                                                                              4                                                                                           4                                                                                  4                                                                                                 4

                       2                                                                                              2                                                                                           2                                                                                  2                                                                                                 2

                       0                                                                                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                  0                                                                                                 0
                            37        38        39         40      41            42        43                                     25    26            27         28     29     30          31                          35.0   37.5      40.0      42.5    45.0  47.5   50.0   52.5                             28.5        29.0       29.5    30.0   30.5        31.0   31.5                                19        20            21      22     23      24       25            26
                                                       arguana NDCG@10                                                                             dbpedia-entity NDCG@10                                                                      hotpotqa NDCG@10                                                                        nfcorpus NDCG@10                                                                                    nq NDCG@10


                       12                                                                                             12                                                                                          12                                                                                 12                                                                                                12

                       10                                                                                             10                                                                                          10                                                                                 10                                                                                                10

                       8                                                                                              8                                                                                           8                                                                                  8                                                                                                 8
       # checkpoints


                                                                                                      # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                  # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # checkpoints


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # checkpoints
                       6                                                                                              6                                                                                           6                                                                                  6                                                                                                 6

                       4                                                                                              4                                                                                           4                                                                                  4                                                                                                 4

                       2                                                                                              2                                                                                           2                                                                                  2                                                                                                 2

                       0                                                                                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                  0                                                                                                 0
                                 80             81             82           83              84                             14.8        15.0               15.2      15.4            15.6                                           64           65           66         67                                18          20         22        24       26     28     30     32                                      14          15        16       17      18    19          20
                                                        quora NDCG@10                                                                                 scidocs NDCG@10                                                                          scifact NDCG@10                                                                        trec-covid-beir NDCG@10                                                                        webis-touche2020 NDCG@10


Figure 1: Distribution of performance (NDCG@10) for the 24 MultiContrievers, per BEIR dataset.
Dashed line indicates reference performance from previous work. While for some datasets the
reference performance sits at or near the mean of the MultiContriever distribution, for some the
reference performance is an outlier.
                                           arguana                     climate-fever                            fiqa                   nf-corpus                             scidocs            scifact                        trec-covid                         webis-touche                            dbpedia-entity                                        fever              hotpotqa                           msmarco                           nq            quora            all
best seed                                  16                          5                                        1                      6                                     0                  5                              10                                 8                                       17                                                    0                  8                                  23                                4             24               24
worst seed                                 8                           10                                       4                      14                                    5                  10                             19                                 18                                      10                                                    18                 10                                 10                                10            20               10
delta                                      6.1                         3.8                                      6.3                    3.2                                   0.9                4.2                            14.5                               6.6                                     6.5                                                   6.6                16.9                               4                                 6.5           4.5              3.9


                                 Table 1: Best and worst performing seeds per BEIR dataset, with delta in NDCG@10

umn 2) it performs much worse than all 24 models. It is worse than almost all models for Fiqa
and Arguana, for Fiqa 19 models are up to 2.5 points better, for Arguana 20 models are up to 6.3
points better. Nothing changed between the different MultiContrievers except the random seed for
MultiBert initialisation, and the random seed for the data shuffle for contrastive fine-tuning.9
Second, the difference in performance across random seeds can exceed the difference in per-
formance from adding supervision (over unsupervised learning only); we see this effect for half
the datasets in BEIR. The higher performing seeds surpass the performance on all supervised mod-
els from Thakur et al. (2021)10 on three datasets (Fever, Scifact, and Scidocs) and surpass all but
one model (TAS-B) on Climate-fever. These datasets are the fact-checking and citation prediction
datasets in the benchmark, suggesting that even under mild task shifts from supervision data (which
is always QA), random initialisation can have a greater effect than supervision. This effect exists
across diverse non-QA tasks; for four additional datasets the best random seeds are better than all but
one supervised model: this is true for Arguana and Touché (argumentation), HotpotQA (multihop
QA), and Quora (duplicate question retrieval).
Third, Table 1 shows that the best and worst model across the BEIR benchmark datasets is not
consistent; not only is the range large across seeds but the ranking of each seed is very variable.
The best model on average, seed 24, is top-ranked on only one dataset, and the second-best average
model, seed 2, is best on no individual datasets. The best or worst model on any given dataset is
almost always the best or worst on only that dataset and none of the other 14. Sometimes, the best
model on one dataset is worst on another, e.g. seed 4 is best on NQ and worst on FiQA, seed 5 is
best on Scifact and worst on Scidocs.11 . Even seed 10, which is the only model that is worst on
more than 2 datasets (it is worst on 6) is still best on TREC-Covid.12 This is the most clear case of
generalisation, as these models are trained on only pre-Covid data. Our results show that there is
no single best retriever, which both supports the motivation of the BEIR benchmark (to give a more
   9
     There are a few small differences between the original released BERT, which Contriever was trained on,
and the MultiBerts, which we trained on, detailed in Sellam et al. (2022).
  10
     The BEIR benchmark reports performance on all datasets for four dense retrieval systems—
DPR(Karpukhin et al., 2020), ANCE (Xiong et al., 2021), TAS-B (Hofstätter et al., 2021), and GENQ (their
own system)—which all use supervision of some kind. DPR uses NQ and Trivia QA, as well as two others,
ANCE, GENQ, and TAS-B all use MSMARCO. The original contriever underperformed these other models
until supervision was added.
  11
     This best-worst flip exists for seeds 8, 18, and 23 also.
  12
     Analysis on seed 13 revealed that seed 10 was also unusual, that analysis can also be found in D.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (a) Compression (Gender)                                                       (b) Compression (Topic)                                             (c) Compression (gender:topic ratio)

Figure 2: Comparison of Bert and Contriever compression for gender and topic on the BiasinBios
dataset, over all seeds. Contriever has more uniform compression across seeds, and a lower ratio of
gender:topic.
          26
                                                                                  22.5                                                  19.0
          25                                                                      22.0                                                  18.5                                                                     22
          24                                                                      21.5                                                  18.0
                                                                                  21.0                                                  17.5                                                                     21
          23
NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                                       NDCG@10
                                                                        NDCG@10


                                                                                                                              NDCG@10
                                                                                  20.5                                                  17.0
          22
                                                                                  20.0                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                        16.5
          21                                                                      19.5                                                  16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19
          20                                                                      19.0                                                  15.5
          19                                                                      18.5                                                  15.0
               36.50    36.75   37.00     37.25 37.50   37.75   38.00                    7.3    7.4   7.5         7.6   7.7                    36.50   36.75   37.00     37.25 37.50   37.75   38.00                  36.50   36.75   37.00     37.25 37.50   37.75   38.00
                                        compression                                                   compression                                                      compression                                                            compression


                                (a) NQ                                                         (b) MSMARCO                        (c) NQ entities (gendered) (d) NQ entities (control)

Figure 3: Scatterplots of the correlation between x-axis compression (ratio of uniform to online
codelength) and y-axis performance (NDCG@10), for different datasets (NQ, MSMARCO) at left
and entity subsets of NQ at right. Different seed colour is held constant across graphs.
well rounded view on retriever performance via a combination of diverse datasets) and shows the
need for more analysis into this phenomena .

4.2                    RQ1: I NFORMATION E XTRACTABILITY

Figure 2 shows extractability of gender 2a and topic 2b on the BiasinBios dataset, for MultiCon-
triever and MultiBert models. 2c shows the gender:topic ratio. These graphs show a few differences
both between the two types of information and the two models. Both gender and topic are more
extractable in MultiContrievers than MultiBerts. Gender compression ranges for MultiContrievers
are 4-12 points higher, or a 9-47% increase (depending on seed initialisation), than the correspond-
ing MultiBerts. Topic compression ranges are 1.7-2.12 points higher for MultiContrievers; as the
overall compression is much lower this is a 19-38% increase over MultiBerts. Figure 2 also shows
a regularisation effect; MultiBerts have a large range of compression across random seeds, whereas
most MultiContrievers have similar values.
Figure 2c shows that though MultiContrievers have higher extractability for gender and topic, the ra-
tio between them decreases; the contrastive training encourages both topic and gender, but increases
topic at a greater rate. So while MultiContrievers do represent gender far more strongly than topic,
this effect is lessened vs. MultiBerts, which means they should be slightly less likely to shortcut
based on gender (Lovering et al., 2021).

4.3                    RQ2: D OES INFORMATION EXTRACTABILITY CORRELATE WITH PERFORMANCE ?

Figures 3 3a and 3b show correlation between gender compression and performance (NDCG@10)
on NQ and between topic compression and performance on MSMARCO. NQ and MSMARCO are
the most widely used of the BEIR benchmark datasets, and are the datasets that we hypothesised
were most likely to correlate. Both datasets are search engine queries (from Google and Bing,
respectively) and thus contain queries that require topic information (what is cabaret music?, MS-
MARCO) and queries that require gender information (who is the first foreign born first lady?, NQ).
However, as the dispersed points on the scatterplots in Figure 3a and 3b show, neither piece of in-
formation correlates to performance on either dataset. NQ and MSMARCO are representative; we
include plots for all datasets in Appendix C. We tested on the average over all datasets, on each


                                                                                                                              7
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      dataset individually, and on each retrieval metric, and found only a few isolated cases of correlations
      (discussed also in C).
     This result was somewhat surprising; lack of correlation between extractability and performance
     points to a mismatch between the self-supervised contrastive training objective that is a proxy for
     retrieval, and retrieval benchmarks. The contrastive training both regularises and increases ex-
     tractability of gender and topic, but perhaps it is relevant for only that objective, and not for the
     retrieval benchmark. Alternatively, it is possible that this information is important, but only up
     to some threshold that MultiContriever models exceed. Finally, it’s possible that this information
     doesn’t matter for most queries in these datasets, and so there is some correlation but it is lost, as
     these datasets are extremely large. This is somewhat supported by the exception cases with corre-
     lations being smaller, more curated datasets (C), and so we investigate this as the most tractable to
RQ3 Answer:
     implement. Is this predictive RQ3       of allocational
                                                    Answer: Isbias?   this predictive of allocational bias?
(No)                                         (No)


       (a) Performance on the no-gender-constraint NQ en-        (b) Causal analysis of allocational gender bias in the
       tity subset vs. the gendered NQ entity subset that.       NQ gendered entity queries, measured as difference
       Raw representations (blue) vs. INLP representations       in performance between male (blue) and female (or-
       (orange) where gender has been removed. INLP              ange) entity queries. When gender is removed (as in
       performance degrades on only gender constrained           INLP representations), the gap in performance re-
       queries, showing that gender information is used in       mains, showing that bias is not due attributable to
       those queries but not in the control.                     gender in the representations.

      Figures 3c and 3d show correlation on our two subsets of NQ: gendered queries and non-gendered
      queries (§3.3). The gendered entity queries show a correlation, and the non-gendered control shows
      none. If we isolate to a topical dataaset, extractability is predictive of performance, it just is not over
      the whole diversity of a large dataset.
      We strengthen this analysis, testing whether the gender information is necessary, rather than simply
      correlated. We use Iterative Nullspace Projection (INLP) (Ravfogel et al., 2020) to remove gen-
      der information from MultiContriever representations; INLP learns a projection matrix W onto the
      nullspace of a gender classifier, which we apply before computing relevance scores between corpus
      and query. So with INLP, Equation 1 becomes:

                                          s(di , qi ) = Wfθ (qi ) · Wfθ (di )                                        (3)

      Then we calculate performance of retrieval with these genderless representations. If there is no drop
      in performance on either of the sets of queries, then gender information not necessary for it, if there
      is a drop, then it was necessary. If there is a drop in performance on both gender and control queries,
      then the threshold explanation may be true, but the representation was sufficiently degraded by the
      removal of gender that the experiment is difficult to interpret.
      When we perform INLP, the gender information drops to 1.4 (nearly none, as 1 is no compression
      over uniform, see Eq 2). Figure 4a show that performance on non-gendered entity queries is unaf-
      fected, but performance on gendered entity questions drops significantly (5 points). From these two
      experiments we conclude that the increased information extractability from the contrastive training
      was useful for answering specific questions that require that information. But most queries in the
      available benchmarks simply don’t require that information to answer them.


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.4    RQ3: I S G ENDER E XTRACTABILITY PREDICTIVE OF A LLOCATIONAL G ENDER B IAS ?

Orgad et al. (2022) found gender extractability in representations to be predictive of allocational
gender bias for classification tasks; when gender information was reduced or removed, bias also
reduced.13 We found in RQ2 that information is used so now we ask: is it predictive, as it was in
(Orgad et al., 2022)? Figure 4b shows that, at least for our dataset, it is not. It shoes allocational bias
between the female and male queries, and the bias that remains after we remove gender via INLP.
All performance drops, as we saw in RQ2, but by equivalent amounts for female and male entities.
These results are surprising, and suggest that allocational gender bias in this case does not come
from the representations, but instead from the retrieval corpus or the queries, or from a combination.
The corpus could have lower quality or less informative articles about female entities, queries about
women could be structurally harder in some way.


5     D ISCUSSION , F UTURE W ORK , C ONCLUSION

We trained a suite of 25 MultiContrievers, analysed their performance on the BEIR benchmark,
probed them for gender and topic information, and removed gender information from their repre-
sentations to analyse allocational gender bias.
Our experiments showed that performance itself is extremely variable by random seed initialisation,
as is the ranking of different random seeds per dataset, despite all models having equivalent con-
trastive losses during the training. Best seed performances often exceed the performance of more
complex dense retrievers that use explicit supervision. This suggests that future analysis of retriever
loss basins to look for differing generalisation strategies would be valuable (Juneja et al., 2023). Our
results show that this work may be more valuable than developing new models, as random seed ini-
tialisation can lead to greater performance improvements. Our work also highlights the usefulness
of labelled dataset not just for supervision but for analysis. Future work could create these datasets
and then probe for additional targeted information. It could also analyse demographic biases beyond
binary gender, such as race or sexual orientation, or even against different demographic dialects in
argumentation datasets.
We showed that gender and topic extractability is not predictive of performance except in subsets
of queries that clearly require gender information, despite a strong increase in both during Multi-
Contriever training. We showed that though both gender and topic increase, the ratio of gender to
topic decreases. However, since it remains large, these models are likely to shortcut based on gender
(Lovering et al., 2021). Despite this finding, the gender bias we find is not a product of the represen-
tations, as it persists when gender is removed.14 More research should be done on where is best in a
pipeline to correct bias, and how various parts interact. This work also shows the utility of informa-
tion removal (INLP and others) for causality and interpretability, rather than just debiasing. Future
research could construct tests for shortcutting to increase the scope of these preliminary results.
Finally, we have analysed only the retriever component of a retrieval system. In any eventual down-
stream task of retrieval augmented generation, the retrieval representation will have to compete with
language model priors, such that the eventual generation is a composition between text that was un-
conditionally probable and text that is attested by the retrieved data. Future work should investigate
the role of information extractability in the full system, and how this bears on vital questions like
hallucination in retrieval augmented generation. We have done the first information theoretic anal-
ysis of retrieval systems, and the first causal analysis of the reasons for allocational gender bias in
retrievers, and we have raised many new questions for the research community. We release our code
and resources for the community to expand and continue this line of enquiry. This is particularly
important in the current generative NLP landscape, which is increasingly reliant on retrievers and
where understanding of models lags so far behind development.
   13
      Orgad et al. (2022) actually use a lexical method of removing gender, but we chose to use INLP as a more
elegant and extensible solution. We were able to replicate their paper using INLP, showing equivalence.
   14
      These two results are not necessarily conflicting – allocational bias can be caused by shortcutting be-
haviour, as is the case in Zhao et al. (2018) where allocational bias is the result of stereotyping heuristics, but
can also exist for other reasons, such as differences in training data quantity or quality, as in Tatman (2017).
So allocational bias in NQ is the result of another cause, but this may be a property of NQ rather than of
allocational bias in retrievers generally.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. Analysis methods in neural language processing: A survey.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:49–72, 2019. doi: 10.1162/
  tacl a 00254. URL https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1004.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
  Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In
  NIPS, 2016.
Daniel Fernando Campos, Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary,
  Rangan Majumder, Li Deng, and Bhaskar Mitra. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading
  comprehension dataset. NIPS, 2016.
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, H. Wallach, J. Chayes, C. Borgs, A. Chouldechova, S. C.
 Geyik, K. Kenthapadi, and A. Kalai. Bias in bios: A case study of semantic representation
 bias in a high-stakes setting. Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
 Transparency, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason Weston, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. Multi-
  dimensional gender bias classification. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 314–331, Online, November 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.23. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.23.
Kawin Ethayarajh. How contextual are contextualized word representations? Comparing the ge-
  ometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Con-
  ference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 55–65, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1006. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1006.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and
  Noah A. Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. In Proceedings of
  the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp. 107–112, New Orleans,
  Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-2017.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-2017.
Sebastian Hofstätter, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, Jimmy J. Lin, and Allan Hanbury. Ef-
  ficiently teaching an effective dense retriever with balanced topic aware sampling. Proceedings
  of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
  Retrieval, 2021.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
  Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learn-
  ing. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=jKN1pXi7b0.
Jeevesh Juneja, Rachit Bansal, Kyunghyun Cho, João Sedoc, and Naomi Saphra. Linear connec-
  tivity reveals generalization strategies. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hY6M0JHl3uL.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Yu Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2020.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur P. Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc V. Le, and
  Slav Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Charles Lovering, Rohan Jha, Tal Linzen, and Ellie Pavlick. Predicting inductive biases of pre-
  trained models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=mNtmhaDkAr.
R. Thomas McCoy, Junghyun Min, and Tal Linzen. BERTs of a feather do not generalize together:
  Large variability in generalization across models with similar test set performance. In Proceedings
  of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp.
  217–227, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2020.blackboxnlp-1.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.blackboxnlp-1.
  21.
Hadas Orgad, Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, and Yonatan Belinkov. How gender debiasing affects
  internal model representations, and why it matters. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pp. 2602–2628, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.188. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.naacl-main.188.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, Hila Gonen, Michael Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. Null it out:
  Guarding protected attributes by iterative nullspace projection. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7237–7256, Online, July
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.647. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.647.
Thibault Sellam, Steve Yadlowsky, Ian Tenney, Jason Wei, Naomi Saphra, Alexander Nicholas
  D’Amour, Tal Linzen, Jasmijn Bastings, Iulia Raluca Turc, Jacob Eisenstein, Dipanjan Das, and
  Ellie Pavlick (eds.). The MultiBERTs: BERT Reproductions for Robustness Analysis, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.16163.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmenta-
  tion reduces hallucination in conversation. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 3784–3803, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.320. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.320.
Rachael Tatman. Gender and dialect bias in YouTube’s automatic captions. In Proceedings of the
  First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pp. 53–59, Valencia, Spain, April
  2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-1606. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/W17-1606.
Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Andreas Rücklé, Abhishek Srivastava, and Iryna Gurevych. BEIR: A
  heterogeneous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. In Thirty-fifth
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round
  2), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wCu6T5xFjeJ.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. Fever: a large-scale
  dataset for fact extraction and verification. 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing (EMNLP), pp. 183–196, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.14. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  emnlp-main.14.
Yining Wang, Liwei Wang, Yuanzhi Li, Di He, and Tie-Yan Liu. A theoretical analysis of
  ndcg type ranking measures. In Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Ingo Steinwart (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 26th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 30 of Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, pp. 25–54, Princeton, NJ, USA, 12–14 Jun 2013. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v30/Wang13.html.
Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul N. Bennett, Junaid Ahmed,
  and Arnold Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense
  text retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=zeFrfgyZln.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Gender bias in
   coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
   ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
   man Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp. 15–20, New Orleans, Louisiana,
   June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-2003. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/N18-2003.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    C ONTRIEVER T RAINING
Each MultiContriever model was initialised from a MultiBert checkpoint for each of the 25 seeds
from 0 - 24, accessed at https://huggingface.co/google/multiberts-seed_X
where X is an integer from 0 - 24. NB: MultiBerts released many checkpoints to enable study
of training dynamics, we use only the final complete checkpoint.
Hyperparameters and training regime is exactly matched to the original Contriever work of (Izacard
et al., 2022). Hyperparams can be found in Table 2. Data used was identical to in (Izacard et al.,
2022) (from 2019) and was a 50/50 CCNet Wikipedia split.
Each MultiContriever was trained across 4 nodes with 8 GPUs per node (32 GPUs total) for on
average 2.5 days. Each MultiContriever was trained for the full 500,000 steps, and checkpointed
often; but in all cases the best performing checkpoint was the final one, save seed 13, which was
anomalous in many other ways (see D).
All MultiContrievers have similar loss and accuracy curves, with seeds 12 and 13 excerpted in
Figure 5. All models steeply increase accuracy/decrease loss within 10,000 steps, and then asymp-
totically approach 69% accuracy by 50,000 steps.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             sampling coefficient         0
                             pooling                      average
                             augmentation                 delete
                             probability augmentation     0.1
                             momentum                     0.9995
                             temperature                  0.05
                             queue size                   131072
                             chunk length                 256
                             warmup steps                 20000
                             total steps                  500000
                             learning rate                0.00005
                             scheduler                    linear
                             optimizer                    adamw
                             batch size (per gpu)         64

                Table 2: Hyperparameters used for training all MultiContrievers.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             70                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                   70
80
                                             60                                                    60                                                    60
60                                                                                                 50
                                             50                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                   40
40
                                             40                                                    30                                                    40

                                                                                                   20
20                                                                                                                                                       30
                                             30
                                                                                                   10
0                                                                                                  0                                                     20
     0   100000   200000   300000   400000        0   100000   200000   300000   400000   500000        0   100000   200000   300000   400000   500000        0   100000   200000   300000   400000


          (a) Loss (12)                           (b) Train Accuracy (12)                                     (c) Loss (13)                                   (d) Train Accuracy (13)

     Figure 5: Loss and accuracy for seeds 12 and 13, steps on x-axis and loss or accuracy on y-axis.


                                                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    P ROBING DATASETS
We rely on two datasets. The first is BiasinBios (De-Arteaga et al., 2019), which is a dataset of
web biographies labelled with binary gender, and biography profession. We use De-Arteaga et al.
(2019)’s train/dev/test splits of 65:10:25, yielding 255,710 train 39,369 dev, and 98,344 test data-
points. Second is the Wikipedia slice of the md gender dataset (Dinan et al., 2020). This has only
labels for gender, which we restrict to be binary since non-binary gender is so small and would ad-
versely affect this analysis. We filter out texts below 10 words (words, not tokens) leaving a dataset
of size 10,681,700, split 65:10:25 into 6,943,105 train, 934,649 dev, 2,803,946 test. For practical
reasons, we shard it to 9 shards (650,000 train examples each) and then check the results on each
shard. All shards behaved consistently. As noted in the text, BiasinBios is nearly balanced with
regard to gender labels, but Wikipedia is severely imbalanced.
For both datasets, we use the train set for probing, and the test set for measuring accuracy on the
final probe. We investigated using other datasets, but none were of sufficient quality that they were
usable. We tested usability very simply: each of the authors labelled a different random sample of
20 examples by hand, and we measured accuracy of dataset labels against our labels, and only took
datasets with over 80% accuracy, since our probing task is sensitive to errors in labelling. No other
subsets of md gender nor external datasets that we surveyed passed this bar. We didn’t multiply
annotate as we found no examples to be at ambiguous.

C    F ULL SET OF RESULTS FOR CORRELATION BETWEEN EXTRACTABILITY
     AND PERFORMANCE

Full set of correlations between gender compression and performance in Figure 6 and between pro-
fession compression and performance in Figure 7. The latter (profession correlation) have mislead-
ing regression lines as only three of 24 models had large differences in compression, such that the
line is based off insufficient datapoints. It is included for completeness but left out of analysis for
that reason. Gender compression numbers (Figure 6) are distributed more evenly. There are four
statistically significant correlations (referred to as by row 1-4, and column a-d, such that the upper
left cell is 1a and the lower right cell is 4d). Arguana (1a), Scifact (2b), Webis-Touche (3a), and
NQ (4b). All have middling correlation coefficients: Arguana -0.41, Scifact 0.41, Webis-Touche
0.31, NQ 0.42. There is also little in common between these datasets, Arguana and Webis-Touche
are argumentation, Scifact is fact-checking, and NQ is google-search style questions. As this leaves
most datasets with no correlations, we consider the correlation overall to be weak. We do note that
the temporal generalisation datasets are overrepresented in this set (Webis-Touche and Scifact), but
leave an investigation of that for future work.
Arguana in particular is unique in having a significant negative correlation. We have no answers
as to why this might be. It may be a fluke due to peculiarities of this dataset: the dataset is small
(less thank 2k datapoints), and is not structured in the same way with query (input) and passage
(retrieved) but instead uses a full document passage as the query. It is unclear why this might cause
a deterioration in performance from better gender or profession encoding (as we observe the same
in profession compression). The Arguana task should match the unsupervised training much more
closely since they both are matching the relevance of to document chunks. We leave an investigation
into the peculiarities of that dataset also to future work.

D    S EED 13
MultiContrievers were trained with seeds 0-24 based on respective MultiBerts 0-24. Seed 13 was
excluded from all analysis as it displayed repeatedly anomalous behaviour. During the course of
contriever training it appeared indistinguishable from other seeds, loss curves looked normal, there
were no signs of overfitting. Performance converged to the same level as other MultiContrievers.
However, when applied to the datasets of the BEIR benchmark it did not perform at all, with NDCG
of between 2 and 20 on each dataset. We retrained once to replicate the behaviour, and then twice
more with different seeds for data shuffle, with identical results. We thus exclude it from all analysis.
To aid in future investigations we include our initial analysis of seed 13 irregularities here. We follow
the method of analysis of representation spaces from Ethayarajh (2019). We measure the L2 norm


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                dataset = arguana                                          dataset = climate-fever                                          dataset = fiqa                                              dataset = nfcorpus
                                                                        21.0                                                                                                                      31.5
             45
                                                                                                                                       27
                                                                        20.5
             44                                                                                                                                                                                   31.0
                                                                                                                                       26
                                                                        20.0
             43
                                                                                                                                                                                                  30.5
                                                                        19.5                                                           25
             42
   NDCG@10


                                                              NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                        NDCG@10
                                                                        19.0                                                           24                                                         30.0
             41
                                                                        18.5                                                                                                                      29.5
             40                                                                                                                        23
                                                                        18.0
             39                                                                                                                        22                                                         29.0
                                                                        17.5
             38                                                                                                                                                                                   28.5
                                                                                                                                       21
                                                                        17.0
             37
                                dataset = scidocs                                             dataset = scifact                                        dataset = trec-covid-beir                                      dataset = trec-covid-v2
          15.8                                                                                                                                                                                       46
                                                                                                                                       32
                                                                           67                                                                                                                        44
          15.6                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                     42
                                                                           66                                                          28
          15.4                                                                                                                                                                                       40
NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                           NDCG@10
                                                                                                                                       26                                                            38
                                                                           65
          15.2                                                                                                                         24                                                            36

                                                                                                                                       22                                                            34
          15.0                                                             64
                                                                                                                                       20                                                            32

          14.8                                                             63                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                       18
                            dataset = webis-touche2020                                     dataset = dbpedia-entity                                        dataset = fever                                             dataset = hotpotqa
                                                                           31                                                          72                                                         52.5
             20
                                                                                                                                       71                                                         50.0
                                                                           30
             19
                                                                                                                                       70                                                         47.5
                                                                           29
             18
                                                                                                                                       69                                                         45.0
   NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                        NDCG@10
                                                                           28
             17
                                                                                                                                       68                                                         42.5
                                                                           27
             16
                                                                                                                                       67                                                         40.0
                                                                           26
             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                  37.5
                                                                                                                                       66
                                                                           25
             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                  35.0
                                                                                                                                       65
                                dataset = msmarco                                               dataset = nq                                               dataset = quora                                                 dataset = all
          22.5                                                             26                                                                                                                     38.5
                                                                                                                                       84
          22.0                                                             25                                                                                                                     38.0

          21.5                                                                                                                         83                                                         37.5
                                                                           24
          21.0                                                                                                                                                                                    37.0
                                                                           23
NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                        NDCG@10



          20.5                                                                                                                         82
                                                                                                                                                                                                  36.5
                                                                           22
          20.0                                                                                                                                                                                    36.0
                                                                           21                                                          81
          19.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  35.5
          19.0                                                             20
                                                                                                                                       80                                                         35.0
          18.5
                                                                           19                                                                                                                     34.5
                  36.50 36.75 37.00 37.25 37.50 37.75 38.00                     36.50 36.75 37.00 37.25 37.50 37.75 38.00                   36.50 36.75 37.00 37.25 37.50 37.75 38.00                     36.50 36.75 37.00 37.25 37.50 37.75 38.00
                                   compression                                                   compression                                                 compression                                                   compression



Figure 6: Full set of scatterplots of the correlation between x-axis gender compression (ratio of
uniform to online codelength) and y-axis performance (NDCG@10), for all datasets individually,
and for the average of all BEIR datasets (lower-right). Shaded region is 95% confidence interval.

of all representations in the BiasinBios dataset (272k) as well as average self-similarity of 1000
randomly sampled representations of those bigraphies, as measured by cosine similarity and by dot
product. The former answers the question of how much volume the representations occupy, the latter
describes the vector space via how conical (anisotropic) or spherical it is.
In Figure 8, we observe that the vector space of MultiContriever 13 is both larger volume and more
obtusely anisotropic (i.e. it occupies a wider cone) than other MultiContrievers. The more obtuse
anisotropy originates from MultiBert 13, as can be seen in the high variances for both seeds in cosine
similarity. But the larger relative volume happens during the training of the MultiContriever and is
unique to it. For MultiBert 13, L2 norm is within normal range, and the anomalous seeds are seeds
10 and 23, which both have larger norms and 5x the variance of other seeds. MultiContriever 13,
however, has 1.5x the average norms of all other seeds (which have regularised and become closer
in values) and 6x the variance of others. Both MultiBert 13 and MultiContriever 13 have very high
variance to average cosine similarity, where the effective range of MultiContriever 13 is -0.03 to
0.53, and MultiBert 13 is 0.02 to 0.58, as compared to other models have a range of 0.28-0.32, for
both types of models.
We hypothesise that this reveals a limitation of reliance on the dot product for retrieval, any operation
reliant on the dot product loses information when there is a chance of a cosine similarity of zero.


                                                                                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  dataset = arguana                                         dataset = climate-fever                                          dataset = fiqa                                            dataset = nfcorpus
             48                                                            21
                                                                                                                                       27                                                           33

             46                                                            20                                                          26
                                                                                                                                                                                                    32
                                                                                                                                       25
             44
                                                                           19                                                                                                                       31
   NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                          NDCG@10
                                                                                                                                       24
             42
                                                                           18                                                          23                                                           30
             40
                                                                                                                                       22
                                                                           17                                                                                                                       29
             38                                                                                                                        21
                                                                           16
                                  dataset = scidocs                                            dataset = scifact                                        dataset = trec-covid-beir                                    dataset = trec-covid-v2

                                                                                                                                       32                                                           45
          16.2

          16.0                                                             66                                                          30                                                           40

          15.8                                                                                                                         28                                                           35
                                                                           64
NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                          NDCG@10
          15.6                                                                                                                         26
                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
          15.4                                                                                                                         24
                                                                           62                                                                                                                       25
          15.2                                                                                                                         22
                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
          15.0                                                             60                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
          14.8                                                                                                                         18
                              dataset = webis-touche2020                                    dataset = dbpedia-entity                                        dataset = fever                                           dataset = hotpotqa
             24                                                            36                                                          72
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                       71
                                                                           34
             22
                                                                                                                                       70                                                           55
                                                                           32
             20                                                                                                                        69
                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
   NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                          NDCG@10
                                                                           30                                                          68
             18
                                                                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                                                                                                       67
                                                                           28
             16                                                                                                                        66                                                           40
                                                                           26
                                                                                                                                       65
             14                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                           24
                                  dataset = msmarco                                              dataset = nq                                               dataset = quora                                               dataset = all
                                                                           26                                                          86                                                           39
             24
                                                                           25                                                          85
             23                                                                                                                                                                                     38
                                                                           24
                                                                                                                                       84
             22
                                                                           23
   NDCG@10


                                                                 NDCG@10


                                                                                                                             NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                                                                          NDCG@10


                                                                                                                                       83                                                           37
             21                                                            22
                                                                                                                                       82
                                                                                                                                                                                                    36
             20                                                            21
                                                                                                                                       81
                                                                           20
             19                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                           19
                  7.3   7.4          7.5         7.6       7.7                  7.3   7.4        7.5         7.6       7.7                  7.3   7.4         7.5         7.6       7.7                  7.3   7.4        7.5         7.6      7.7
                                     compression                                                 compression                                                  compression                                                 compression



Figure 7: Full set of scatterplots of the correlation between x-axis profession compression (ratio of
uniform to online codelength) and y-axis performance (NDCG@10), for all datasets individually,
and for the average of all BEIR datasets (lower-right). Shaded region is 95% confidence interval.

We leave other investigation – such as why this would persist from a difference of only random
seed initialisation, or why this issue would appear in retrieval, but not in any tasks in the MultiBerts
paper, or in the contrastive training process – to future work.
We also note that seed 10 was anomalous in performance compared to the other seeds on the BEIR
benchmark; not so anomalous as to be excluded, but it was reliably performing poorly. We can see
the higher variance in L2 norms for 10 and 23 in MultiBerts, and then for 10 still in MultiContriever
(though nothing noticeable in cosine similarity). Seeds 10 and 13 were not found to be anomalous
by Sellam et al. (2022), but they did find seed 23 to display strange behaviour and be extremely
unbiased (or even anti-biased) on the Winogender benchmark.
We hope that future work will use our models and continue this line of analysis.


                                                                                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) MultiBerts (mean)   (b) MultiBerts (var)    (c) MultiContriever (mean) (d) MultiContriever (var)


 (e) MultiBerts (mean)    (f) MultiBerts (var)   (g) MultiContriever (mean) (h) MultiContriever (var)

Figure 8: Top row: mean and var of L2 norms of the full BiasinBios dataset for all MultiBert
and MultiContriever seeds. Bottom row: mean and var cosine similarity between 1000 random
biographies.


                                                 19
