Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I N S T R U C T 2A C T : M APPING M ULTI - MODALITY I N -
STRUCTIONS TO ROBOTIC A RM ACTIONS WITH L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODEL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Foundation models have significantly advanced in various applications, including
         text-to-image generation, open-vocabulary segmentation, and natural language
         processing. This paper presents Instruct2Act, a framework that leverages
         Large Language Models (LLMs) to convert multi-modal instructions to sequen-
         tial actions for robotic manipulation tasks. Specifically, Instruct2Act uses
         LLMs to generate Python programs that form a comprehensive perception, plan-
         ning, and action loop for robotic tasks. It uses pre-defined APIs to access mul-
         tiple foundation models, with the Segment Anything Model (SAM) identifying
         potential objects and CLIP semantically classifying them. This approach com-
         bines the strengths of foundation models and robotic actions to transform com-
         plex high-level instructions into precise policy codes. Our approach is adaptable
         and versatile, capable of handling various instruction modalities and input types,
         and meeting specific task requirements. We validated the practicality and effi-
         ciency of our approach on robotic tasks including different tabletop and 6 De-
         gree of Freedom(DoF) manipulation scenarios in both simulation and real-world
         environments. Furthermore, our zero-shot method surpasses many state-of-the-
         art learning-based policies in several tasks. The code for our proposed approach
         is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Instruct2Act, providing a solid
         benchmark for high-level robotic instruction tasks with diverse modality inputs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023),
and ChatGPT have made unprecedented progress in generating human-like text and understanding
natural language instructions. These models exhibit impressive zero-shot generalization abilities,
having been trained on extensive corpora and refined through human feedback. Subsequent work,
such as Visual ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023a), incorporates a various visual foundation models to
enable visual drawing and editing through a prompt manager. Similarly, VISPROG (Gupta & Kem-
bhavi, 2022) introduces a neuro-symbolic approach for intricate visual tasks, including image un-
derstanding, manipulation, and knowledge retrieval. Inspired by the immense potential of merging
LLMs with multi-modality foundation models, we aim to develop comprehensive robotic manipu-
lation systems. The question we pose is: Can we construct robotic systems akin to ChatGPT that
support robotic manipulation, visual goal achievement, and visual reasoning?
Developing a versatile robotic system that can perform complex tasks in dynamic environments is a
significant challenge in robotics research. Such a system needs to perceive its environments, choose
appropriate robotic skills, and sequence them accordingly to accomplish long-term objectives. This
requires the integration of various technologies, including perception, planning, and control, to allow
the robot to function autonomously in unstructured environments. Inspired by the LLMs’ impres-
sive ability to generate simple Python programs from docstrings, CaP (Liang et al., 2022) directly
generates the robot-centric policy code based on several in-context example language commands.
However, its capabilities are limited to what the perception APIs can provide, and it struggles with
interpreting longer and more complex commands due to the high precision requirements of the code.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach that utilizes multi-modality foundation
models and LLMs to simultaneously execute perceptual recognition, task planning, and low-level


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       : Put the polka dot block into the green container.
                                                                           GetObsImage( )
                                                                 File IO   SaveFailureImage( )


                                                                                        SAM( )
                                                                           Perception   CLIPRetrieval( )
                      1                        2                                        GetObjMatch( )
                                                                  Core
                                                                 Modules
                               3                                                        Pixel2Loc( )
                                                                             Action     PickPlace( )
                                                                                        RearrangeActions( )


                                                                 Robotic
                                                                           RobotExecution( )     SpeedSet( )
                                                                   API

 (a) Robots are able to execute instructions that are (b) Module examples utilized in Instruct2Act.
 provided as input in natural language.               The modules’ definitions are hierarchical and aligned
                                                      with the robotic system design.

Figure 1: A robotic task (a) is executed through the invocation of several modules (b) in
Instruct2Act.
control modules. Unlike existing methods such as CaP (Liang et al., 2022), which directly generates
policy codes, our approach generates decision-making actions that can help reduce the error rate
when performing complex tasks. Specifically, we use various foundation models, including SAM
and CLIP, to accurately identify and classify objects in the environment. We then integrate this
information with robotic skills to generate decision-making actions using LLMs.
We evaluate our proposed method across various domains and scenarios, encompassing simple ob-
ject manipulation, visual goal achievement, and visual reasoning. Our framework offers a user-
friendly, general-purpose robotic system and demonstrates robust performance on six representative
meta-tasks from VIMABench (Jiang et al., 2022). Our proposed approach could serve as a solid
baseline in the field of robotics research, contributing to the advancement of more intelligent and
capable robots.
The contributions of our papers can be summarized as follows:
       • General-purpose robotic system. We present a versatile robotic system, named
         Instruct2Act, which utilizes the in-context learning capabilities of LLMs and multi-
         modal instructions to generate mid-level decision-making actions from both natural lan-
         guage and visual instructions.
       • Flexible modality inputs. This paper explores the use of unified modality instruction
         inputs in robotic tasks, including manipulation and reasoning, and introduces a flexible
         retrieval architecture capable of managing different types of instructions.
       • Strong zero-shot performance with minimal code overhead.                     The proposed
         Instrcut2Act has demonstrated superior performance compared to current state-of-
         the-art learning-based policies, even without the need for fine-tuning. Moreover, the impact
         of using foundational models is relatively minor compared to methods that involve training
         from scratch.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   L ANGUAGE - DRIVEN ROBOTICS
Language in robotics offers not only a user-friendly interface but also the potential for cross-task
skill generalization and long-horizon task reasoning. As a result, instruction-based policies have
been a popular area of research in robotics (Brohan et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2021; Shridhar & Hsu,
2018). Recently, with the emergence of multi-modality models, CLIPORT (Shridhar et al., 2022) has
given Transporter (Zeng et al., 2021) the ability to understand semantics and manipulate objects by
encoding text input through CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). Perceiver (Shridhar et al., 2023) extended
the CLIPORT to the 3D domain by employing voxelized observation and action spaces in their
Perceiver-Actor model. SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023) employed the 540B PaLM (Chowdhery et al.,
2022) to accomplish zero-shot concept grounding. Language-planner (Huang et al., 2022a) utilized


                                                             2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


two LLMs in their approach, where one was used for zero-shot planning generation and the other one
was used for admissible action mapping. Inner monologue- (Huang et al., 2022b) enhanced their
method by integrating closed-loop feedback, such as scene descriptors and success detectors, for
performing robotic tasks. VIMA (Jiang et al., 2022) developed a large-scale benchmarking dataset
by designing a multimodal prompts-conditioned framework. CaP (Liang et al., 2022) directly gen-
erates policy codes with detailed comments and context-specific examples to guide LLM output.
LILAC (Cui et al., 2023) conducted a further investigation of the shared autonomy regime. Their
approach involves a fusion of the correction signal from human instruction and the static controller
with the original policy during inference. PaLM-E(Driess et al., 2023) built a large vision-language
model for embodied agents by integrating the power of 540B PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) and
22B ViT (Dehghani et al., 2023). Text2Motion (Lin et al., 2023) predicted the goal state and selected
feasible actions using LLMs while considering geometric constraints. Socratic Models (Zeng et al.,
2022) generated prompts in their approach by incorporating perceptual information into LLMs using
vision-language models. TidyBot (Wu et al., 2023b) used LLMs to summarize the human’s prefer-
ences given a few examples. Recently, VoxPoser (Huang et al., 2023) constructed a 3D value map
to reflect the workspace and then used LLM interacting with a visual language model to update it,
based on which robotic trajectories are generated with an additional planner. Our Instruct2Act
framework achieves great flexibility while retaining expert domain knowledge by combining robotic
primitive skills represented in API-style with the reasoning ability of LLMs.

2.2   F OUNDATION M ODELS ON C OMPUTER V ISION TASKS
Several studies (Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021) have utilized frozen pre-trained image en-
coders to improve the visual features extracted from images. And InternImage (Wang et al., 2022)
adopted deformable convolutions in their large-scale visual foundation models for better image anal-
ysis. In addition, leveraging self-training and a massive dataset of 27M image-text pairs, GLIP (Li
et al., 2022a)achieved strong zero-shot transfer ability. Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov
et al., 2023), a segmentation foundation model trained on more than one billion mask samples, al-
lows for zero-shot transfer to diverse tasks through prompt engineering. MaskCLIP+ (Liang et al.,
2023) (Zhou et al., 2022) also discussed the zero-shot grounding ability of the visual foundation
models. Furthermore, pre-trained LLMs have shown significant progress in text understanding and
generation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Such
breakthrough in LLMs also benefits the VL tasks (Fu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). Recently, there
have been explorations to combine the reasoning capacity of LLMs with the visual understanding
ability of visual foundation models. VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022) utilizes in-context learn-
ing in GPT-3 to generate a program for new instruction and demonstrates the system’s compositional
visual reasoning ability. ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023) leverages code-generation models to produce
the results of language queries by means of composing foundation models into subroutines. Vi-
sual ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023a) incorporates multiple visual foundation models and allows users
to interact with ChatGPT through the proposed prompt manager, which allows multiple AI mod-
els reasoning ability with multi-steps. Similarly, the proposed Instruct2Act aims at endowing
robotics the perception ability by incorporating advanced foundation models through the reasoning
ability of LLMs.

2.3   F OUNDATION M ODELS IN ROBOTICS
In addition to language-conditioned robotic manipulation, the use of foundation models has also
led to significant advancements in robotics. LID (Li et al., 2022b) proposes a general approach
to sequential decision-making that uses a pre-trained language model (LM) to initialize a policy
network where goals and observations are embedded. R3M (Nair et al., 2022) explores how visual
representations obtained by training on diverse human video data (Grauman et al., 2022) can enable
data-efficient learning of downstream robotic manipulation tasks. Meanwhile, CACTI (Mandi et al.,
2022) suggests a scalable framework for visual imitation learning that utilizes pre-trained models to
map pixel values to low-dimensional latent embeddings for improved generalization ability. DALL-
E-Bot (Kapelyukh et al., 2022) uses Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) to generate goal scene
images that function as guides for robot actions, providing a distinct approach compared to the
aforementioned works. Recently, a few works (Wang et al., 2023; Kalithasan et al., 2022) proposed
neuro-symbolic representations for robotic manipulation. However, they are limited to the close-set
instructions and are not training-free. In contrast, our Instruct2Act framework employs visual
foundation models as modular tools that can be invoked with APIs without the need for fine-tuning,
thereby eliminating the need for data collection and training costs.

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024                                                                              def main() -> dict:
                                                                                                                                image = GetObsImage()
                                                                                                                                masks = SAM(image=image)
                                                                                                                                objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
                                                                                                                                block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")
                                                                                                                                green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the green container")
                                                                                                                                block_loc = Pixel2Loc(block, masks)
                                                                                                                                container_loc = Pixel2Loc(green_container, masks)
                                                                                                                                # Pick the block and place it in the container
                                                                                                                                action = PickPlace(pick=block_loc, place=container_loc,
                                                                                                                                    bounds=BOUNDS)
                                                                                                                                info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                                                                                                                return info
                       LLM Generated Policy                                                                                     Generated Policy
                                                                                                                             def main() -> dict:
                                                                                                                                image = GetObsImage()
                            Instruction                                                                                         masks = SAM(image=image)
                                                                                                                                objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)

                     Put the green and purple polka dot block into the green container.                                        # Retrieve the polka dot block, with the pure text modal
                                                                                                                               block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")

                     Put <dragged_obj>              into <base_obj>           .                                                # Retrieve the polka dot block, with the visual modal
                                                                                                                               block = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                                                                                                                               ...
                     Put the first clicked object                                                                              info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                                        into the second one       .                                            return info


                                                                                                                             # Instruction: Rotate the {dragged_obj} 150 degrees.
          Python Interpreter                                                                                                 def main_2() -> dict:                                        Robotic Executor
                                                                                                                                  """Execute the given instructions of rotating the {dragged_obj} 150
      Input Image                                         CLIPRetrieval(…)                                                                     Pixel2Loc(…)
                                                                                                                                       degrees"""
                                                                                                                                  image = GetObsImage()
                                                                                                                                  masks = SAM(image=image)                                            Low-level
                                                                                         Uni-Model Instrcution Retrievalobjs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)                             Controller
                                                                                                                                  obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                                                                                                                                  loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
                                                        "green and purple              Text                                       action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_0,
                                                                                                                                                                       Coord. bounds=BOUNDS,
                                                                                                    𝐹!                                 yaw_angle_degree=150)
                                                        polka dot block "             Encoder                                     info = RobotExecution(action=action) Mapping
                                                                                                                                  return info
                                                                                                   𝐹!" ∙ 𝐹" 𝐹!# ∙ 𝐹" 𝐹!% ∙ 𝐹" 𝐹!$ ∙ 𝐹"

                                                                                                                               def GetObsImage()PickPlace(…)
                                                                                                                                                  -> Image.Image:
                                                                                                                                   """Get the current image to start the system."""
      SAM(...)                                                                                         𝐹!"       𝐹!#   𝐹!%       𝐹!pass
                                                                                                                                   $            Skill Primitive:
                                                                                                                               def SAM(image: Image.Image) -> dict:
                                                                                                                                   """Get segmentation results with SAM"""
                                                                                       Image                                                    Pick Place
                                                                                                      𝐹!" ∙ 𝐹! 𝐹!#∙ 𝐹! 𝐹!%∙ 𝐹! 𝐹!$∙pass
                                                                                                                                     𝐹!
                                                                                      Encoder                                  def ImageCrop(image:  Image.Image, masks: dict):
                                                                                                                                                Rotate            Action
                                                                                                                                   """Crop image with given masks."""
                                                                                                                                   pass         …                 Construction
                                                                                                        𝐹!

                                                                                                                             import numpy as np
                                                                                                                                             RobotSetting(…)
                                                                               Env                                                                          1
                                                                                                      <dragged_obj>                         Parameter Setting:
      ImageCrop(…)                                                            Cache
                                                                                                                                            Speed
                                                                                                                  Cursor Click              Action Space
                                                                                                                                            …
                                                                                            Multi-Model Instrcution Retrieval


Figure 2: The paradigm of our proposed Instruct2Act framework. The framework employs an
LLM to generate executable code that calls upon visual foundation models using APIs to recognize
the environment. Once the object’s semantic information is recognized, we generate plausible ac-
tions that are then sent to the low-level controller to execute the task. The instructions highlighted
in green and blue represent pure-language and multimodal instructions, respectively.

3     M ETHODS
In general, Instruct2Act enables a robot arm to perform a series of actions based on user in-
structions and an image captured by a top-view camera. It is a language-based robotic system that
generates perception-to-action codes using a large language model (LLM). The goal is to modify the
state of objects in the environment to match the configuration described in the instructions. First, we
explain how to control a robotic arm by LLM. Task-related variables, such as image crops from the
task instruction and image-to-robot coordinate transformations, are stored in an environment cache
C that can be accessed through an API. Next, we present the prompt design of Instruct2Act,
including API definitions and in-context examples. Finally, we introduce the perception modules in
detail.

3.1     H OW TO D RIVE ROBOTIC A RM BY LLM
To facilitate LLMs in completing robotic manipulation tasks, a designed prompt that guides the
LLMs’ generation is provided together with specific task instructions. The prompt includes applica-
tion programming interfaces (APIs) and in-context examples to demonstrate their usage, which are
introduced in the following section. The LLM’s final input is a series of code APIs, usage examples,
and task instructions. The LLM’s output is a Python function in string format that can be executed
by the Python interpreter to drive the robot’s action.
Certain sections of the generated code lines invoke visual foundation models to extract pertinent
visual information from the environment. This visual information, including the location and se-
mantics of the target object, is then formulated as parameters used in the policy codes. After that,
a mapping between the image space and the action space is established with a pre-defined transfor-
mation matrix. We also apply boundary clamping to avoid unintended actions.
Using LLM as the robotic driver offers several benefits. Firstly, the robotic policies generated by
the LLM’s API are highly adaptable and versatile, as in-context examples can be modified to guide
LLM’s behavior and adjust to new tasks. Secondly, by directly using visual foundation models,
there’s no need for data collection or training processes, and any enhancements in foundation models
can improve action accuracy without additional costs. Lastly, the straightforward API naming and
readable Python code make the generated policy code highly interpretable.


                                                                                                             4
                               info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                      RobotExecution(action=action)
                               return info


                            def
                            #   GetObsImage()
                              Instruction:    -> Image.Image:
                                           Rotate the {dragged_obj} 150 degrees.
           """Get
       defmain()  ->the
            main_2()      current
                            dict: image to start the system."""
       def
Under review
           pass = as
           """Execute
          image       a ->conference
                     dict:
                                         paper at
                          the given instructions
                  GetObsImage()                  of ICLR
                                                    rotating2024
                                                             the {dragged_obj} 150
                            defmasks  =degrees"""
                                         SAM(image=image)
                                 SAM(image:       Image.Image) -> dict:
                               objs,
                                """Get
                                image masks  = ImageCrop(image=image,
                                          =segmentation
                                            GetObsImage()              masks=masks)
                                                             results with    SAM"""
                               block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")
                                pass
                                masks = SAM(image=image)
                               green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the green container")
                                objs,
                            defblock_loc  masks
                                 ImageCrop(image: =  ImageCrop(image=image,
                                                          Image.Image,
                                           = Pixel2Loc(block, masks)       masks:  masks=masks)
                                                                                    dict):
                                obj_0 = image
                                """Crop
                               container_locCLIPRetrieval(objs=objs,
                                                     with given masks."""
                                               = Pixel2Loc(green_container,  query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                                                                             masks)
                                loc_0
                               #pass
                                 Pick the = block
                                            Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0,        masks=masks)
                                                   and place it in the container
                                action
                               action      = PickPlace(pick=loc_0,
                                        = PickPlace(pick=block_loc,        place=loc_0, bounds=BOUNDS,
                                                                     place=container_loc,
                                    bounds=BOUNDS)
                                       yaw_angle_degree=150)
                               info
                                info
                            import   = numpy
                                        RobotExecution(action=action)
                                        = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                               as np


       Libraries
                               return info
                                return     info
                                                                                                  Instruction: Place the polka dot block into the green container.
                            import     cv2,   scipy
                            import math
                                                                                                                                                    Task Instruction
                           def main() -> dict:
                           defimage
                                 GetObsImage()
                                     = GetObsImage()-> Image.Image:
                               """Get
                              masks      the current image to start the system."""
                                     = SAM(image=image)
    API Definition            objs,                                      1
                               passmasks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
                           def# Retrieve  the polka
                                 SAM(image:          dot block, with
                                               Image.Image)      -> the pure text modal
                                                                     dict:
                              block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")
                               """Get segmentation results with SAM"""
                              # Retrieve the polka dot block, with the visual modal
                               pass= CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                              block
                           def...ImageCrop(image: Image.Image, masks: dict):
                                                                                                                                 LLM
                               """Crop
                              info        image with given masks."""
                                    = RobotExecution(action=action)
                               pass info
                              return


                           # Instruction: Rotate the {dragged_obj} 150 degrees.
                           import numpy as np
                                                                                                                                             Generated Policy Code
                           def main_2() -> dict:                                                   def main() -> dict:
    In-Context Examples


                           import   cv2, scipy
                              """Execute the given instructions of rotating the {dragged_obj} 150     image = GetObsImage()
                           importdegrees"""
                                    math                                                              masks = SAM(image=image)
                              image = GetObsImage()                                                   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
                              masks = SAM(image=image)                                                block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")
                              objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)                       green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the green container")
                                                                         1
                              obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))    block_loc = Pixel2Loc(block, masks)
                              loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)                               container_loc = Pixel2Loc(green_container, masks)
                              action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_0, bounds=BOUNDS,              # Pick the block and place it in the container
                                  yaw_angle_degree=150)                                               action = PickPlace(pick=block_loc, place=container_loc,
                              info = RobotExecution(action=action)                                        bounds=BOUNDS)
                              return info                                                             info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                                                                                      return info

                           def GetObsImage() -> Image.Image:
                                                                                                    def main() -> dict:
                              """Get the current image to start the system."""
                                                                   image = GetObsImage()
Figure 3:defpass
            Robotic       program generation process. The complete
             SAM(image: Image.Image) -> dict:
                                                                                prompt consists of third-party import
                                                                   masks = SAM(image=image)
                                                                   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
libraries, API     definitions,
            """Get segmentation
            pass
                                resultsand    in-context
                                        with SAM"""      examples. # Retrieve the polka dot block, with the pure text modal
                                                                                                      block = CLIPRetrieval(objs, "the polka dot block")
                           def ImageCrop(image: Image.Image, masks: dict):                            # Retrieve the polka dot block, with the visual modal
                              """Crop image with given masks."""                                      block = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                              pass
3.2                       P ROMPTS FOR I N S T R U C T 2A C T                                         ...
                                                                                                      info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                                                                                      return info
                           import numpy as np
Fig 3 illustrates       that a complete prompt should include essential information about third-party li-
         import cv2, scipy
         import math                                     # Instruction: Rotate the {dragged_obj} 150 degrees.
braries, API definitions, and in-context examples. def   Importing         third-party libraries allows the LLM
                                                             main_2() -> dict:
                                                            """Execute the given instructions of rotating the {dragged_obj} 150
to understand how APIs use 1parameter types definedimage      by     these
                                                                 degrees"""   libraries for calculations and even
                                                                   = GetObsImage()
creating new functions. We showcase its effectivenessmasks     in =Section      4.4. We also provide API defini-
                                                                     SAM(image=image)
                                                            objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
tions and descriptions, along with a few in-context examples              to  demonstrate
                                                            obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs,     their usage, similar to
                                                                                              query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
                                                            loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022). However, in our                 approach,        we  distribute      and organize APIs
                                                            action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_0, bounds=BOUNDS,
                                                                 yaw_angle_degree=150)
based on robotic system information, as shown in Fig 1(b).           Specifically, these APIs are classified ac-
                                                            info = RobotExecution(action=action)
                                                            return info
cording to their functionality within the robot system hierarchy, and this categorized information is
                                                         def GetObsImage() -> Image.Image:
provided in the prompt. For example, the SAM() function              belongs
                                                            """Get the            to Perception
                                                                        current image to start the system.""" module which
                                                            pass
is the second level core module in the robotic system.               SoImage.Image)
                                                         def SAM(image:    we add->#dict:   Second Level:Core
                                                            """Get segmentation results with SAM"""
Modules and ## Perception Modules beforepassintroducing the SAM() API in the prompt.
                                                         def ImageCrop(image: Image.Image, masks: dict):
Moreover, unlike ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023), which           only
                                                            """Crop
                                                            pass
                                                                     imageoffers   function-level
                                                                           with given masks."""           usage examples,
we provide full-logical code examples invoking different modules similar to the approach of VIS-
PROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022). This choice is based                onasthe
                                                         import numpy
                                                         import cv2, scipy
                                                                          np notion that robotic tasks tend to be

complex yet organized. In contrast to VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022), we design a prompt
                                                         import math


that provides coverage for all tasks and has fewer in-context examples. 1To encourage chain-of-
thought reasoning, as done in (Kojima et al., 2022), we add the prompt Think step by step
to carry out the instruction before the inserted specific task instruction. To avoid the
LLM from generating too many redundant lines, we explicitly instruct it to only implement the
main() function. Examples of complete prompts are available in Appendix A.8.

3.3                       P ERCEPTION WITH OFF - THE - SHELF F OUNDATION M ODELS
Instruct2Act utilizes off-the-shelf visual foundation models, specifically, the Segment Any-
thing Model (SAM) and CLIP models. These are accessed by the LLM via two designated APIs:
SAM() and CLIPRetrieval(). These Python functions load and call the models to conduct
the visual analysis. SAM outputs masks for all potential objects in the input image, based on these
masks, object crops Ii are extracted correspondingly. These crops are then encoded into FIi using
the CLIP image encoder and later utilized for the classification task. However, pre-trained visual
models used directly on downstream tasks without any fine-tuning often suffer from incompleteness
or incorrectness. To address these issues caused by the zero-shot paradigm, we insert processing
modules between the output of the large model and the downstream tasks. To mitigate the effect of
shadows, we apply a gray threshold filter followed by a morphological closing operation to fill up
small holes before sending the image to the SAM. After SAM’s segmentation operation, we perform
a morphological opening operation to eliminate overly small holes or unconnected gaps. We also
filter out masks with unreasonable sizes and reduce redundant mask output using Non-Maximum
Suppression (NMS). For detailed discussions and visualizations of the processing steps, please refer
to Appendix A.3.


                                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4   F LEXIBLE I NSTRUCTION M ODALITY M ANAGER

Instruct2Act is flexible and can handle inputs of multiple modalities, such as pure language
and language-visual instructions, as depicted in Fig 2. We design a unified retrieval system that
utilizes different types of queries to ensure the use of a unified architecture for both types of inputs.
Pure-Language Instruction. For pure language inputs, descriptive sentences are utilized to specify
the target object and action. For example, a sentence such as Put the green and purple
polka dot block into the green container can be employed. Instruct2Act
utilizes the LLM to deduce that the robot needs to fetch the polka dot block from the environment.
Therefore, the phrase the green and purple polka dot block acts as the query and is
inputted into the CLIP text encoder to obtain the feature vector FT . Finally, the similarity between
the query embedding FT and the image crop features FIi can localize the intended object precisely.
Language-Visual Instruction. For the multimodal inputs, the instruction uses an image to de-
scribe the target object or the target state. An example instruction is Put <dragged obj> into
<base obj>. The placeholders in curly braces represent the corresponding images of individual
objects, aligning with the LLM model’s input format. Given the instruction, the LLM determines
the placeholder strings to complete the query which is used to fetch the corresponding object image
crop I from the cache C. Then the image crop I is sent to the CLIP image encoder to obtain the
feature vector FI . We use FI to calculate the similarity with observation image feature vectors FIi .
Certain tasks require scene-level understanding, as demonstrated by the task of Rearrange to
this <scene>. To fulfill this instruction, we first obtain every possible object and its corre-
sponding feature vectors in the target scene image. We then use the Hungarian algorithm to deter-
mine the correspondences between the target scene image and the currently observed images.
Pointing-Language Enhanced Instruction. Pointing-language instructions are an effective alter-
native when the target object cannot be described using pure language instructions and providing
image crops is impractical. Specifically, we adopt the cursor movement method from (Liu et al.,
2023) and use cursor clicks to generate point prompts that guide the SAM’s segmentation. Addi-
tional details can be found in Appendix A.4.


       Put        into              .          Rotate           30 degrees.         Put       into     then      .Restore      Rearrange to                    .         Rearrange then restore.
                                                                                                                 .
                                        (a)                                   (b)                                       (c)                                        (d)                              (e)


             Close the gray jar.               Open the middle drawer.                       Push the buttons.                 Slide the block to blue target.           Stack two oliver blocks.

                                         (f)                                  (g)                                        (h)                                       (i)                               (j)


        Put the blue block on the               Put the orange block on the               Put the green block into the             Put the cola can into the
                                                                                                                                                                             Stack the blocks.
              brown bowl.                             top-right corner.                              bowl.                               green basket.

                                        (k)                                   (l)                                        (m)                                       (n)                              (o)


Figure 4: Instruction-Conditioned Manipulation Tasks: We conduct experiments on 17 tabletop
manipulation tasks in VIMABench (Jiang et al., 2022)(a-e; only 5 shown), 5 six DoF manipulation
tasks in RLBench (James et al., 2020)(f-i), and 5 tabtop manipulation tasks as done in CaP (Liang
et al., 2022)(k-l; only 2 shown). We also demonstrate our approach with a Franka Panda on 5
real-world tasks(m-n; only 3 shown). The instructions in green and blue boxes are uni-modal and
multi-modal instructions for the same task respectively.

                                                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E VALUATION TASK

Multimodal Prompts Benchmark of Robot Manipulation. We conducted multi-modality prompt
manipulation tasks on VIMABench (Jiang et al., 2022), spanning from simple object manipula-
tion to visual reasoning in the tabletop manipulation domain. These tasks are illustrated in Fig 4.
VIMABench incorporates a 4-level generalization ability evaluation protocol, consisting of L1
placement, L2 combinatorial, L3 novel object, and L4 novel task generalization. Each level pro-
gressively deviates more from the training dataset distribution. For more detailed information about
the evaluation setting, please refer to (Jiang et al., 2022).
Textual Prompts Benchmark of Robot Manipulation. VIMABench is currently the only avail-
able benchmark for multi-modality prompt manipulation tasks. To demonstrate the robustness and
generalization ability of our versatile framework, we conducted experiments on additional textual
prompt benchmarks. These benchmarks included 6-DoF manipulation tasks in RLBench (James
et al., 2020) and 5 tabletop manipulation tasks similar to those in CaP (Liang et al., 2022), as shown
in Fig 4. To make a fair comparison, we implemented an Instruct2Act-Oracle version,
where we assume the object detection module returns the ground truth information. Additionally,
we evaluated the performance of our approach on 5 real-world tasks using a Franka Panda robot.

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In our experiments, we utilized two different types of Language Models (LLMs) to validate that the
effectiveness of Instruct2Act is not significantly dependent on the choice of LLM. The first
type is the text-davinci-003 language model, accessed through the OpenAI API. This model is a
fine-tuned variant of the InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) language model, optimized using human
feedback. The second type is the LLaMA-Adapter (Gao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b), which we
accessed through the user interface. This adapter is a lightweight adaptation of the original LLaMA
models (Touvron et al., 2023). Our approach involved providing limited prompts to influence the
output behavior of the language models, without any training or fine-tuning. Although the language
models may occasionally generate incomplete or incorrect code, such as missing brackets, punctua-
tion, or mismatched cases, the Python Interpreter can detect these errors and prompt us to generate
new code.
For open-vocabulary segmentation, we used open-sourced models such as SAM ViT-H and CLIP
ViT-H-14 for classification. To evaluate task success rates, we conducted experiments on 150 in-
stances for each representative meta-task. For each meta-task, we selected three random seeds to
calculate average success rates. The VIMABench simulator determined task success by compar-
ing the final states with the configurations specified in the instructions. These experiments were
conducted on an NVIDIA 3090Ti GPU. Additionally, we directly utilized the experiment result of
different baselines (20M parameter version) in VIMABench from (Jiang et al., 2022).
To extend the original tabletop manipulation skills and evaluate the agent with 6 DoF tasks, we
used the RGB-D camera as the input sensor following PerAct (Shridhar et al., 2023) and made the
following medications. For simple 3D tasks, such as stacking objects, we introduced an additional
parameter to indicate the current occupancy. For more complex tasks, such as opening a drawer,
we added some heuristic movements to ease the execution. Further details regarding the 6 DoF
manipulations and real-world experiments can be found in Appendix A.5.

4.3   R ESULTS
Results on Multimodal Prompts Bench-                                     80
                                                                              Gato
                                                                              Flamingo
                                                                              DT
mark.     We demonstrate the effectiveness                               70
                                                                              Vima-20
                                                                              Vima-200
                                                                              Ours
of our proposed method through experiments                               60

on various generalization tasks, including L1,                           50
                                                       Success Rate(%)


L2, L3, and L4 levels of VIMABench.                                      40


Fig. 5 displays the results of these meth-                               30

                                                                         20
ods. Compared with Gato (Reed et al., 2022),
                                                                         10
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), and Deci-                               0
                                                                                         L1   L2   L3   L4   Avg
sion Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021),
our method consistently yielded positive results                Figure 5: Evaluation results on VIMABench.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


across all levels and tasks. In the case of VIMA, our framework achieves comparable performance
without the necessity of training, further showcasing its versatility and effectiveness. In contrast,
VIMA requires about 650K training trajectories and multiple GPUs for its training process.
Results on Other Textual Prompts Benchmarks. Besides the multimodal prompts benchmark, we
evaluate our proposed approach on several textual prompts benchmarks to confirm its generalization
ability. Table 1 shows that we achieve a 3.8% SR gain compared to the PerAct (Shridhar et al.,
2023) method. For the CaP benchmark, we obtain a 1.2% SR gain using significantly fewer tokens
compared to CaP (Liang et al., 2022).

      Benchmark        Method        SR(%)     Benchmark       Method          SR(%)         Token
                       PerAct         59.2                     CaP              84.8          3919
      RLBench                                  CaP
                       Ours            63                      Ours-Oracle       86           1600
                     Table 1: Evaluation results on textual prompts benchmarks.
4.4 A BLATION S TUDIES
Effectiveness of Prompt Components. We conducted an investigation into the effectiveness of each
prompt component in generating policy code. To thoroughly validate this effectiveness, we created
two additional task sets: the Reformatted Instruction set (where instructions such as representing
angles in degrees were replaced with radians) and the Unseen Tasks set (where information about
RR was removed from the prompts). Table 2 shows that when all prompt components are provided to
the LLM, the agent achieves the best performance. Due to the absence of full-logic code examples,
as in ViperGPT, the agent experiences a significant decline in performance, e.g. SR drop from 83%
to 28%. We attribute this to the complexity of robotic tasks, which often involve multiple steps
and variables during execution. The lack of demonstrations using complete policy codes poses
challenges for the LLM in generating accurate codes. Additionally, we discovered that information
on Libraries and APIs proves advantageous when dealing with both novel task instructions and tasks
that have not been previously encountered.

   Library    API    Full Examples   Normal Tasks    Reformated Instruction   Unseen Tasks    Average
      ✓        ✓                         33                   30                   20           28
      ✓                   ✓              80                   75                   60           72
              ✓           ✓              85                   75                   80           80
      ✓       ✓           ✓              85                   80                   85           83
                   Table 2: Ablation on the effectiveness of prompt components.
Different Foundational Models. We conducted experiments using different visual foundation
models to assess their impact on performance. Specifically, we replaced the original models with
SAM-Base and SAM-Large for the semantic segmentation module, and Base-16 and Large-14 for
the CLIP model. Considering the deployment in the robotic domain, we further provided the re-
sults with FastSAM (Zhao et al., 2023) and MobileSAM (Zhang et al., 2023a). The results, dis-
played in Table 3, consistently indicate that larger foundation models improve the performance of
Instruct2Act. This finding suggests that our approach could benefit from even more powerful
foundation models in the future. Moreover, since the visual models are accessed via APIs, they
can be easily substituted with other visual foundation models. We provide a task-level result in
Appendix A.6.

             CLIP      H-14    H-14     H-14      H-14          H-14          B-16     L-14
             SAM       Base    Large    Huge    FastSAM       MobileSAM       Huge     Huge
             SR(%)     75.3     83      84.4      83.2           76.2         70.4     76.5

                         Table 3: Ablation on the visual foundation models.

Effectiveness of Processing Modules. Table 4 presents ablation studies that validate the effective-
ness of the proposed processing modules, including image pre-processing and mask post-processing.
The absence of any processing methods leads to significant performance degradation, with only 51%
SR, in line with the findings of the analysis in Section 3.3. Mask post-processing directly boosts the
success rate to 83.0%, while further incorporation of image pre-processing achieves the peak suc-
cess rate of 84.1%. It is worth noting that using only image pre-processing leads to no improvement
in performance and may even cause degradation in some tasks. This could be attributed to the fact
that the current heuristic method would inevitably destroy some features on target objects since


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


some tested objects also have parts with a color similar to the background. In other words, image
pre-processing offers potentially better segmentation results at the cost of losing some visual parts.

             Process Method
                                 VM      SU      RT     RA      RR     POR     Average
             Image Mask
                                 70.4   34.6    88.6    41.7   15.9    54.7      51.0
               ✓                 69.7   33.9    87.7    40.9   14.9    52.9      50.0
                         ✓       91.7   78.2    97.4    72.9   69.5    88.3      83.0
               ✓         ✓       91.6   80.8    97.8    78.4   69.1    87.2      84.1

Table 4: Ablation studies on the effectiveness of the proposed processing modules. The success rates
were calculated as the average of performance across three generalized levels. The tasks included
Visual Manipulation (VM), Scene Understanding (SU), Rotation (RT), Rearrange (RA), Rotate and
Restore (RR), and Pick in Order then Restore (POR).
Comparison between Different LLMs.
We     demonstrate     that    our      proposed         VM       Direct More Trail Filtering
Instruct2Act is potentially effective                   SR(%)      72.5       77.5       85.5
with open-source LLM, in addition to the
                                                         Table 5: Results with LLaMA-Adapter.
commercial ChatGPT. Specifically, we use the
LLaMA-Adapter (Gao et al., 2023) and choose Visual Manipulation(VM), reporting the success
rate on 40 instances in Table 5. Remarkably, our Instruct2Act already achieves plausible
performance with the LLaMA-Adapter’s original output. Furthermore, our performance improves
to 77.5% when we increase the number of generation trials when the Python interpreter raises an
exception. And comparable results can be achieved by using basic filtering, such as re-generating
when the environment cache usage is missed in the code.
Flexibility and Robustness of Instruct2Act. We demonstrate the flexibility and robustness
of Instruct2Act on the Out-of-distribution (OOD) instructions. Specifically, we evaluate our
approach in three scenarios: Human Intervention(HI), Missing Characteristics(MC), Synonym Re-
placement(SR), and Instruction Reformat(IR). We conducted the experiments on the Task Rotation
and reported a success rate of 20 runs. As shown in Table 6, VIMA failed to handle HI and SR.
In contrast, Instruct2Act can ground the instruction correctly. Furthermore, it can use the im-
ported 3-rd library such as numpy to convert the radians to degrees before passing to the action
function.
 OOD Instruction             Examples                                              Ours      VIMA
 Human Intervention          ”Cancel the task, stop!”                              100%       0%
 Missing Characteristic      Drop one characteristic from ”Rotate” randomly.       100%      100%
 Synomym Replacement         Replace ”Rotate” with ”Spin”.                         100%       95%
 Reform Task                 Represent the angle degrees with radians.             95%        0%

                   Table 6: Flexibility of Instruct2Act with OOD instructions.

Further Analysis. We further conducted the error analysis across different tasks and defined five
error types accordingly. The detailed error analysis can be found in Appendix A.1. Besides, we pro-
vide a further discussion on the prompt designs within the LLM-based API-tool domain, which can
be found in Appendix A.2. Deeper analyses with full evaluation results tables are in Appendix A.7.
Limitations. Our method is presently limited by the basic action primitives, such as Pick and Place.
However, we intend to expand our approach by incorporating more complex actions through API
extensions in future work. Additionally, we have only tested our method with simple real-world
manipulation tasks, and will investigate more complex real-world applications in the future.
5 C ONCLUSION
We proposed a Instruct2Act framework to utilize LLM to map multi-modality instructions to
sequential actions in the robotics domain. With the LLM-generated policy codes, various visual
foundation models are invoked with APIs to gain a visual understanding of the task sets. To mitigate
the gaps in the zero-shot setting, some processing modules are plugged in. Extensive experiments in
the simulation and real-world setting verify that Instruct2Act is effective and flexible in robotic
manipulation tasks.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In Computer Vision–ECCV
  2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXX,
  pp. 104–120. Springer, 2020.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Yuchen Cui, Siddharth Karamcheti, Raj Palleti, Nidhya Shivakumar, Percy Liang, and Dorsa Sadigh.
  ” no, to the right”–online language corrections for robotic manipulation via shared autonomy.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02555, 2023.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Scaling vision
 transformers to 22 billion parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05442, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Tsu-Jui Fu, Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Kevin Lin, William Yang Wang, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu. Vi-
  olet: End-to-end video-language transformers with masked visual-token modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.12681, 2021.
Peng Gao, Jiaming Han, Renrui Zhang, Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Aojun Zhou, Wei Zhang, Pan Lu,
  Conghui He, Xiangyu Yue, et al. Llama-adapter v2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15010, 2023.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11559, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–
  3026, 2020.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-
  Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with
  multimodal prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03094, 2022.
Namasivayam Kalithasan, Himanshu Singh, Vishal Bindal, Arnav Tuli, Vishwajeet Agrawal, Rahul
  Jain, Parag Singla, and Rohan Paul. Learning neuro-symbolic programs for language guided robot
  manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06652, 2022.
Ivan Kapelyukh, Vitalis Vosylius, and Edward Johns. Dall-e-bot: Introducing web-scale diffusion
  models to robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02438, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916, 2022.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong, Li-
  juan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-training.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10965–10975, 2022a.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-
  making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31199–31212, 2022b.
Feng Liang, Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Kunpeng Li, Yinan Zhao, Hang Zhang, Peizhao Zhang,
  Peter Vajda, and Diana Marculescu. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted
  clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 7061–7070, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion:
  From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
Zhaoyang Liu, Yinan He, Wenhai Wang, Weiyun Wang, Yi Wang, Shoufa Chen, Qinglong Zhang,
  Yang Yang, Qingyun Li, Jiashuo Yu, Kunchang Li, Zhe Chen, Xue Yang, Xizhou Zhu, Yali
  Wang, Limin Wang, Ping Luo, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. Interngpt: Solving vision-centric tasks
  by interacting with chatgpt beyond language. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.05662,
  2023.
Zhao Mandi, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Vincent Moens, Shuran Song, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Vikash
  Kumar. Cacti: A framework for scalable multi-task multi-scene visual imitation learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.05711, 2022.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2robot: Learn-
  ing manipulation concepts from instructions and human demonstrations. The International Jour-
  nal of Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1419–1434, 2021.
Mohit Shridhar and David Hsu. Interactive visual grounding of referring expressions for human-
 robot interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03831, 2018.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for
 robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 785–799. PMLR, 2023.
Dı́dac Surı́s, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
   reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08128, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Renhao Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Joy Hsu, Hang Zhao, Jiajun Wu, and Yang Gao. Programmatically
  grounded, compositionally generalizable robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13826,
  2023.
Wenhai Wang, Jifeng Dai, Zhe Chen, Zhenhang Huang, Zhiqi Li, Xizhou Zhu, Xiaowei Hu, Tong
 Lu, Lewei Lu, Hongsheng Li, et al. Internimage: Exploring large-scale vision foundation models
 with deformable convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05778, 2022.
Chenfei Wu, Shengming Yin, Weizhen Qi, Xiaodong Wang, Zecheng Tang, and Nan Duan. Vi-
  sual chatgpt: Talking, drawing and editing with visual foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04671, 2023a.
Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg,
  Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05658, 2023b.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Re-
  arranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 726–
  747. PMLR, 2021.
Andy Zeng, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek Puro-
  hit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Socratic models:
  Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598,
  2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chaoning Zhang, Dongshen Han, Yu Qiao, Jung Uk Kim, Sung-Ho Bae, Seungkyu Lee, and
  Choong Seon Hong. Faster segment anything: Towards lightweight sam for mobile applications.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14289, 2023a.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiujun Li, Xiaowei Hu, Jianwei Yang, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and
  Jianfeng Gao. Vinvl: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5579–5588, 2021.
Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Han, Aojun Zhou, Xiangfei Hu, Shilin Yan, Pan Lu, Hongsheng Li, Peng
  Gao, and Yu Qiao. Llama-adapter: Efficient fine-tuning of language models with zero-init atten-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16199, 2023b.
Xu Zhao, Wenchao Ding, Yongqi An, Yinglong Du, Tao Yu, Min Li, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang.
  Fast segment anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12156, 2023.
Chong Zhou, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Extract free dense labels from clip. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 696–712. Springer, 2022.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   TASK E RROR A NALYSIS

We conducted an error analysis on the generated policy codes. The code-style policy in
Instruct2Act provides a robust mechanism for pinpointing error/failure sources. We manu-
ally go over 100 examples on the first 10 tasks of VIMABench, where each task has 10 different
policy codes. Using criteria inspired by VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022), we categorized
errors as API misuse; Attributes hallucination (using the attributes that do not exist); Syntax er-
ror(including referring the inaccessible parameters); Inaccurate Perception(detection and segmenta-
tion); Limited API’s ability (correct logic codes while wrong execution results except the perception
reason). Among these factors, API misuse, attributes hallucination and syntax error can be taken
as policy generation errors while the other two are inherent in the API implementation. As shown
in Table 7, the policy generation error rate in Instruct2Act is much lower than in ViperGPT,
indicating the effectiveness of in-context full policy code examples which help the LLM understand
the usage of different APIs and construct a complete policy code.

 Type of Error                Description of Error                             Ours     ViperGPT
 API misuse                   Use the incorrect API during execution            4%         16%
 Attributes hallucination     Use the nonexistent attribute                     2%          4%
 Syntax error                 Program syntax error rasing from interpreter      3%         14%
 Inaccurate Perception        Inaccurate detection or segmentation result       6%          5%
 Limited API’s ability        Inaccuracy during the API’s execution             5%          6%
 Correct                      Execute successfully                             76%         55%

                 Table 7: Error distribution across 100 task runs on VIMABench.

Since the tasks on VIMABench are diverse and focus on different robotic abilities, we conduct
further error analysis on the task-specific level. We chose three representative tasks from the
VIMABench: Visual Manipulation (VM, one of the simplest tasks), Rearrange then Restore (RR,
requiring multi-steps), and Twist (TW, requiring stronger reasoning ability on instructions).
As shown in Table 8, the task Visual Manipulation has the least errors in code generation since it
requires few task understanding and almost no new function generation ability. For Task Rearrange
then Restore, the predominant source of error is ’Inaccurate Perceotion’. This can largely be at-
tributed to the scene in that the task often encompasses multiple objects, some of which possess
analogous textures, posing challenges for CLIP’s differentiation capabilities. Meanwhile, for Task
Twist, ’Limited API’s ability’ emerges as the primary error cause. This task necessitates the policy
to first deduce the intended rotation angle from template images prior to task execution. With current
heuristic methods, obtaining a precise and reliable value proves challenging.

                            Type of Error              VM     RR      TW
                            API misuse                 2%     8%       6%
                            Attributes hallucination   2%     4%       4%
                            Syntax error               0%     4%       4%
                            Inaccurate Perception      6%     12%      8%
                            Limited API’s ability      0%     2%      24%
                            Correct                    90%    70%     54%

                  Table 8: Error distribution across 3 meta tasks on VIMABench.


A.2   F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON P ROMPT D ESIGN

Based on the evaluation results and error analysis, we further elucidate our findings regarding the
prompt design in API usage with LLM. Current methodologies can be categorized into three primary
groups:
Pure Text Prompt with Online Low-level Code Generation: This approach instructs the LLM
to autonomously produce the requisite codes. Notably, while this method offers tremendous flexi-


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bility, it consumes a significant amount of tokens. Additionally, the LLM’s inherent limitations in
spatial reasoning render it ineffective for certain tasks. The representative work in this category is
CaP (Liang et al., 2022).
API-Only Information: Here, the LLM is granted a high degree of latitude in selecting the API
tools. Nonetheless, it occasionally struggles with crafting multi-step tool utilization for intricate
tasks. Furthermore, inherent randomness in the LLM can lead to variable naming inconsistencies.
ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023) exemplifies this category.
Logic-Only Codes: This approach solely offers logic codes, potentially restricting the LLM’s ca-
pacity to architect new code logic. Consequently, this might curtail its adaptability to novel tasks.
VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2022) epitomizes this group.
In conclusion, the selection of prompt design should be tailored to the specific requirements of
the task at hand. Instruct2Act amalgamates both API information and complete logical code
samples, ensuring it caters to structured robotic task settings while preserving the flexibility to adapt
to new tasks.

A.3   P ROCESSING M ODULE IN I N S T R U C T 2A C T

When pre-trained models are utilized directly on downstream tasks without any fine-tuning, they
inevitably suffer from problems like incompleteness or incorrectness. In light of this, it is advisable
to insert processing modules or adapters between the output of the large model and the downstream
tasks which can effectively tackle the issues caused by this zero-shot paradigm. The entire loop of
execution for robot tasks comprises three modules, namely, perception, planning, and execution. We
have curated various processing programs for each of these modules designed for tabletop manipu-
lation domains.
Image Pre-Processing In the case of zero-shot SAM outputs, a significant challenge is distinguish-
ing the target object from shadow regions that might appear within the image. As object shadows
cannot be grasped, their presence poses additional difficulty for robot grasping tasks. Furthermore,
tabletop manipulation domains typically involve camera placement above the robotic arm, leading
to large shadows cast onto the operating table. To account for this, we adopted a simple yet efficient
image preprocessing methodology: to mitigate the effect of shadows, we employed the gray thresh-
old filter followed by the close morphological operation to fill in small gaps that the filter might
produce.
Mask Post-Processing In the zero-shot setting, it is observed that the SAM produces multiple seg-
ments (e.g. masks) that may be discontinuous or discrete. There may also be detected objects with
missing parts, or holes inside, as shown in Fig 6-C. These misleading semantic mask outputs will
inevitably confuse the subsequent modules and greatly challenge the robot grasping task. In order
to address the given problem, we have developed a set of processing modules to work with the SAM
output. The modules include the following methods:

       • We apply a filtering process on the output based on the mask’s size. This process removes
         any output that is clearly not part of the target object. Such output may include objects that
         cannot be moved, like tables or patterns on the target object.
       • A dilation operation is used to effectively eliminate unrealistic small holes or unconnected
         gaps. To avoid significant changes to the mask’s size due to dilation, we then use an ero-
         sion operation. These two procedures combine to create what is known as the opening
         morphological operation.
       • In some instances where there are multiple segmentation outputs for a single object, we
         employ the Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) operator to reduce redundant mask output.


A.4   F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON I NSTRUCTION M ODALITIES ON VIMAB ENCH

Pure-Language Instruction In addition to the original multimodal prompt instruction in the
VIMABench, we extract object descriptions from the simulator and create a task prompt utilizing
natural language that is more commonly used by actual users in their day-to-day lives.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              A. Input image                 C. SAM results-1                 E. SAM results-3


          B. Pre-processed Image             D. SAM results-2                 F. SAM results-4

Figure 6: The segmentation outputs w / wo the processing methods. Fig A is the original image
which is produced by a top-down camera. Fig B is the image with the proposed image pre-processing
pipeline. Fig- {C, D, E, F } are the SAM results directly on the original image, only with the mask
post-processing, only with image pre-processing, and with both processing modules respectively.
The portion highlighted by the red circle demonstrates the redundant output of the SAM without
additional processing applied to a texture object.

Pointing-Language Enhanced Instruction When utilizing the pointing-language mode of
Instruct2Act, the system will display the initial task instruction and observation image. Next,
the user will select the target objects by clicking on them with the cursor. These click points will
then act as point prompts to guide the SAM’s segmentation process. We evaluated this mode on
Visual Manipulation (VM), Rotate(RT), and Pick in Order the Restore (POR), averaging the results
over 100 instances with one seed.

                    Instruction Modal                           VM      RT      POR
                    Original (Visual-Language Instruction)      91.3   98.2     85.2
                    Pure-Language Instruction                   86.7   94.6     63.0
                    Pointing-Language Enhanced Instruction      90.7   98.0     97.5
                     Table 9: Results with pointing-language enhanced instruction.

As shown in Table 9, the performance of multimodal instructions is generally better than that of
single-modal instructions. We believe that this is because the former provides a more comprehensive
range of information to the model, thereby reducing difficulties for the robot when attempting to
reason about the current execution scenario. Moreover, it achieves better results with the pointing-
language enhanced mode than with the pure-language instruction mode. This could be due to the
stronger prior information provided by the user’s click operations.

A.5     E VALUATION TASK D ESCRIPTION

A.5.1    TASKS ON VIMAB ENCH
VIMABench (Jiang et al., 2022) presents a 4-level evaluation protocol that progressively increases in
difficulty for trained agents. Level 1 (L1) placement generalization randomly arranges the placement
of target objects, whereas L2 combinatorial generalization generates new combinations of target ma-
terials and object descriptions. L3 novel object generalization tests our agents’ ability to generalize
to novel materials and objects. L4 novel task generalization needs the agent to ground and execute
tasks that are previously unseen. We describe the tasks in the order of their corresponding task index
which is identical to the VIMABench.

        • Visual Manipulation. The agent is required to pick a specific object and place it into a
          specified container. The agent needs to first recognize the target objects aligning with the
          task instruction specified by the natural language description or by the image pattern.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • Scene Understanding. The agent must first identify the target object with the described
          texture by grounding the natural language description and the scene image simultaneously
          and then put the target object into the container with a specific color.
        • Rotation. The agent is required to rotate a specific object by certain degrees along the
          z-axis.
        • Rearrange. The agent is required to rearrange the target objects to reach the goal configu-
          ration. The agent needs to identify the possible existing distractors and move them away to
          avoid position conflicts.
        • Rearrange then restore. The agent is required to restore the object placements after the
          rearrangement operations.
        • Novel adjectives understanding. The agent needs to ground new adjectives by comparing
          the size or the textural of objects at first.
        • Novel nouns. Similar to the above but with novel nouns.
        • Novel nouns and adjectives. The combination of Novel adjectives understanding and novel
          nouns understanding.
        • Novel concept understanding. The agent needs to infer what is the exact angle to rotate
          from the prompt.
        • Follow the motion. The agent is required to place the target object to match the pose in the
          corresponding video frame.
        • Stack the blocks. Similar to the above.
        • Sweep without exceeding. The agent needs to sweep target objects inside the specified
          region without exceeding the constraint.
        • Sweep without touching. Similar to the above except that the agent needs to not touch the
          red line.
        • Same texture. The agent needs to pick objects with the same texture as the descriptor in the
          prompt and place them in the container.
        • Same shape. All objects with the same shape as the container should be placed in the
          container.
        • Manipulate the old neighbor. The agent should first place the target object into the con-
          tainer, then put one of its old neighbors into the same container.
        • Pick in order then restore. The agent is required to pick and place the target object sequen-
          tially into different containers and finally restore it to the initial container.

A.5.2    TASKS ON RLB ENCH
RLBench James et al. (2020) is one of the most popular vision-guided manipulation benchmarks.
Following the PerAct (Shridhar et al., 2023), we evaluated our methods on the subset of the RL-
Bench. Similarly, we also use the RGB-D camera mounted at the robot’s wrist as our input sensor.

        • Close jar. The robot needs to put the lid on the jar with a specific color. We use the depth
          information to distinguish the lid and the jar.
        • Push buttons. The agent is required to push the colored buttons in the specified sequence.
          The depth difference is used to estimate the button size and we heuristically set the button-
          pressing action.
        • Slide blocks. The agent needs to slide the block to one of the colored square targets. And
          we used similar methods as the task PushButtons.
        • Stack blocks. The agent needs to stack N blocks of the specified color on the green plat-
          form. We maintain an addition parameter to indicate the current occupancy, e.g. below 1.5
          cm is occupied for Position A due to the existence of Block 1.
        • Open drawer. The agent is required to open one of the three drawers: top, middle, and
          bottom. We first heuristically move the robotic arm and let the camera on the wrist face the
          drawer. Then we use the image from the wrist camera as the main input.


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5.3      TASKS ON C A P B ENCHMARKS

To compare with CaP (Liang et al., 2022), we also evaluate our method on the tasks provided in
their open-source projects. To mark a fair comparison, we use the ground truth information of the
objects’ existence from the simulator as done in CaP.

         • Pick and place. Pick up the object and place it on the receptacle bowl.
         • Put in corner. Put all the blocks on the corner/side.
         • Directional corner. Pick up the block to the defined direction of the specific receptacle bowl
           and place it on the defined corner/side.
         • Stack blocks. Stack all the blocks.
         • Put in line. Put all blocks in a specific line.

A.5.4      TASKS ON REAL - WORLD SETTING

The real-world experiments use a Franka Panda manipulator with a parallel gripper. or perception,
we use a RealSense camera mounted on the gripper. The extrinsic calibration between the camera
and the robot base frame is computed through ARUCO ROS1 in previous. We use the Python con-
troller provided by Deoxys2 . In real-world experiments, we conducted five tasks. And we provide
real-world demos in the supplementary material.

         • Rotate. Rotate a specific object with the given angle.
         • Place the block. Place the block with the given color into the receptacle.
         • Stack blocks.
         • Stack blocks then restore. First stack the blocks, then restore the moved one to its original
           position.
         • Place the can. Place a cola can into the receptacle. This is used for testing the open-
           vocabulary ability of our method.

A.6     TASK - LEVEL E VALUATION R ESULTS WITH D IFFERENT V ISUAL F OUNDATION M ODELS

As we can see from Table 10, with a stronger off-the-shelf perception model, the overall performance
could get better. However, we also noticed that with about 10% percent parameters, the FastSAM
could have a comparable performance. This could partly be due to the fact that the tested environ-
ment is relatively structured and with fewer visual reasoning challenges. In such a case, FastSAM
could be a better choice since the computation cost is much lower.

                   Method                          FastSAM         MobileSAM     SAM
                   Parameters                      68M             10M           641M
                   Visual manipulation             89.2            83.2          91.3
                   Scene understanding             82.0            76.3          81.4
                   Rotate                          97.9            95.3          98.2
                   Rearrange                       76.7            70.6          78.5
                   Rearrange then restore          70.2            65.5          72.0
                   Pick in order then restore      83.2            66.4          85.2
                   Average                         83.2            76.2          84.4

Table 10: Task-level ablation on the visual foundation models. The ViT-H is chosen as the default
CLIP model.

   1
       https://github.com/pal-robotics/aruco_ros
   2
       https://github.com/UT-Austin-RPL/deoxys_control


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   F ULL E VALUATION R ESULT TABLES

This section contains more detailed tables corresponding to the results shown in Figure 5 and Table 1.
Based on the evaluation results, several conclusions can be drawn:

       • Nero-symbolic representation demonstrates a clear advantage in long-horizon tasks. This
         is attributed to the utilization of a more compact representation of action sequences, where
         multiple-step actions can be represented by API calls. The superiority of this approach is
         validated through the evaluation of VIMABench Task 05 RearrangethenRestore and Task
         17 PickInOrderthenRestore, where our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art mod-
         els significantly.
       • The utilization of Python code for implicit memory module and position reasoning simpli-
         fies task execution. Memory (such as tracking manipulated objects) and position reasoning
         (such as determining the relative position of objects), are typically challenging to model in
         the field of robot learning. However, we find that these difficulties can be overcome with
         the incorporation of Python code invoked by LLM. This is demonstrated by the success-
         ful completion of Task 16 ManipulateOldNeighbours. Moreover, the deterministic usage
         of Python code helps prevent the occurrence of hallucination phenomena in LLM, as evi-
         denced by Task directional corner on CaP.
       • The integration of LLM in Instruct2Act serves as an effective task reasoner. Through
         the use of our designed prompts, our method exhibits the ability to synthesize new task
         skills for novel tasks, as indicated by the L4 evaluation results on VIMABench 14. Addi-
         tionally, by leveraging visual foundation models, the system is capable of extracting visual
         information efficiently. This, combined with the reasoning abilities of LLM, enables the
         agent to comprehend novel and complex tasks, as exemplified by Task 09 Twist.

 Method           01     02     03     04     05      06     07     09    11      12     15     16     17
 Gato-20M        61.5    62    32.5    49     38      46     60      5    68      83     47    46.5     2
 Flamingo-20M     63    61.5    55     50    42.5    41.5    58      6    62      83     44    38.5     1
 DT-20M          60.5    64    50.5    44     41      48    61.5     7    85      84    44.5    39     2.5
 VIMA-20M        100    100    100    100    59.5    100    100    13.5   74     72.5   96.5   39.5   47.5
 VIMA-200M       100    100    99.5   100    56.5    100    100     18    77      93     97    76.5    43
 Ours            91.3   81.4   98.2   78.5    72      82     88     42    72      68     78     64    85.2

Table 11: VIMABench L1 level generalization results. The number in the method column indi-
cates the controller parameter count. Integers in the first row refer to the order described in Ap-
pendix A.5.1.


 Method           01     02     03     04     05      06     07     09     11     12     15     16     17
 Gato-20M          44   51.5     39     51   38.5    47.5   52.5      6   65.5    84    52.5   40.5      1
 Flamingo-20M    48.5     49   55.5     48   42.5    46.5     52      6     66    82    47.5     37    0.5
 DT-20M          50.5   49.5     53   44.5   43.5      47     46      8   83.5    80    46.5     41    2.5
 VIMA-20M         100   100     100    100     61    100     100   16.5   75.5    75      96   37.5   47.5
 VIMA-200M        100   100    99.5    100   54.5    100     100   17.5     77    93    98.5     75     45
 Ours            91.7   80.8   97.8   74.9   69.5      81     86     44   70.5    65      80     66     84

Table 12: VIMABench L2 level generalization results. The number in the method column indi-
cates the controller parameter count. Integers in the first row refer to the order described in Ap-
pendix A.5.1.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Method              01     02       03     04     05         06     07      09        11     15     16        17
 Gato-20M           46.5     55     44.5     57   31.5       47.5    51.5    2.5      72.5   30.5     44      0
 Flamingo-20M         47   54.5       53     55     36       42.5      48    6.5        70     33   41.5      0
 DT-20M               50   60.5     56.5     48   33.5         51      46    6.5      92.5   32.5   43.5       1.5
 VIMA-20M             98   100       100   98.5   55.5       100     99.5     15      88.5   99.5     44      29.5
 VIMA-200M            99   100       100     97   54.5       100       99   17.5      90.5   97.5     46      43.5
 Ours               91.8   80.2     97.4   81.8   65.8         79      89     38        71     78     62       82

Table 13: VIMABench L3 level generalization results. The number in the method column indi-
cates the controller parameter count. Integers in the first row refer to the order described in Ap-
pendix A.5.1.


                            Method                  08         10      13      14
                            Gato-20M               20.5         0       0      29
                            Flamingo-20M            21          0       0     27.5
                            DT-20M                 20.5        0.5      0      36
                            VIMA-20M               100          0       0     95.5
                            VIMA-200M              100          0       0     94.5
                            Ours                    84         35       0      80
Table 14: VIMABench L4 level generalization results. The number in the method column indi-
cates the controller parameter count. Integers in the first row refer to the order described in Ap-
pendix A.5.1.


           Model      close jar     open drawer    push buttons        slide blocks     stack blocks
           PerAct        60              80             48                  72               36
           Ours          55              60             70                  75               55

                                  Table 15: Evaluation results on RLBench.


      Model          pick and place     put in corner    directional corner    stack blocks     put in line
      CaP                  88                 92                 72                 82              90
      Ours-Oracle         100                 95                 90                 90              55

                                    Table 16: Evaluation results on CaP.


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   F ULL P ROMPTS IN I N S T R U C T 2A C T

                   Listing 1: An example of a full prompt in Instruct2Act
THIRD-PARTY TOOLS:
------
You have access to the following tools:

# Libraries
from PIL import Image
import numpy as np
import scipy
import torch
import cv2
import math
from typing import Union

IMPLEMENTED TOOLS:
------
You have access to the following tools:

# First Level: File IO
templates = {} # dictionary to store and cache the multi-modality
    instruction
# possible keys in templates: "scene", "dragged_obj", "base_obj"
# NOTE: the word in one instruction inside {} stands for the visual part
    of the instruction and will be obtained with get operation
# Example: {scene} -> templates.get(’scene’)
BOUNDS = {} # dictionary to store action space boundary

def GetObsImage(obs) -> Image.Image:
   """Get the current image to start the system.
   Examples:
       image = GetObsImage(obs)
   """
   pass

def SaveFailureImage() -> str:
   """Save images when execution fails
   Examples:
       info = SaveFailureImage()
   """
   pass

# Second Level: Core Modules
## Perception Modules
def SAM(image: Image.Image) -> dict:
   """Get segmentation results with SAM
   Examples:
       masks = SAM(image=image)
   """
   pass

def ImageCrop(image: Image.Image, masks: dict):
   """Crop image with given masks
   Examples:
       objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
   """
   pass

def CLIPRetrieval(objs: list, query: str | Image.Image , pre_obj1: int =
    None, pre_obj2: int = None) -> np.ndarray:
   """Retrieve the desired object(s) with CLIP, the query could be
       string or an image
   Examples:


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the yellow and purple
           polka dot pan’) # the query is a string
       obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates[’dragged_obj’]) #
           the query is image, stored in templates
   """
   pass

def get_objs_match(objs_list1: list, objs_list2: list) -> tuple:
   """Get correspondences of objects between two lists using the
       Hungarian Algorithm"""
   return (list, list)

## Action Modules
def Pixel2Loc(obj: np.ndarray, masks: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
   """Map masks to specific locations"""
   pass

def PickPlace(pick: np.ndarray, place: np.ndarray, bounds: np.ndarray,
    yaw_angle_degree: float = None, tool: str = "suction") -> str:
   """Pick and place the object based on given locations and bounds"""
   pass

def DistractorActions(mask_obs: list, obj_list: list, tool: str =
    "suction") -> list:
   """Remove observed objects that conflict with the goal object list"""
   pass

def RearrangeActions(pick_masks: list, place_masks: list, pick_ind:
    list, place_ind: list, bounds: np.ndarray, tool: str = "suction") ->
    list:
   """Composite multiple pick and place actions"""
   pass

# Third Level: Connect to Robotic Hardware
def RobotExecution(action) -> dict
   """Execute the robot, then return the execution result as a dict """
   pass

Examples:
------
Use the following examples to understand tools:
## Example 1
# Instruction: Put the checkerboard round into the yellow and purple
    polka dot pan.
def main_1() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of placing the checkerboard round
       into the yellow and purple polka dot pan"""
   image = GetObsImage(obs)
   masks = SAM(image=image)
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
   obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the yellow and purple polka
       dot pan’)
   loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
   obj_1 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the checkerboard round’,
       pre_obj1=obj_0)
   loc_1 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_1, masks=masks)
   action = PickPlace(pick=loc_1, place=loc_0, bounds=BOUNDS)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info

## Example 2:
# Instruction: Rotate the {dragged_obj} 150 degrees.
def main_2() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of rotating the {dragged_obj} 150
       degrees"""


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   image = GetObsImage(obs)
   masks = SAM(image=image)
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
   obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=templates.get("dragged_obj"))
   loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
   action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_0, bounds=BOUNDS,
       yaw_angle_degree=150)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info

## Example 3
# Instruction: Rearrange to this {scene} then restore.
# Note: for RESTORE operation, direct conduct an inverse operation
def main_3() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of rearranging the objects to match
       the objects in the given scene"""
   image_obs = GetObsImage(obs)
   image_goal = templates.get("scene")
   masks_obs = SAM(image=image_obs)
   objs_obs, masks_obs = ImageCrop(image=image_obs, masks=masks_obs)
   masks_goal = SAM(image=image_goal)
   objs_goal, masks_goal = ImageCrop(image=image_goal, masks=masks_goal)
   row, col = get_objs_match(objs_list1=objs_goal, objs_list2=objs_obs)
   action_1 = DistractorActions(mask_obs=masks_obs, obj_list=col)
   action_2 = RearrangeActions(pick_masks=masks_obs,
       place_masks=masks_goal, pick_ind=col, place_ind=row,
       bounds=BOUNDS)
   action_3 = RearrangeActions(pick_masks=masks_goal,
       place_masks=masks_obs, pick_ind=row, place_ind=col, bounds=BOUNDS)
   actions = []
   actions.extend(action_1).extend(action_2).extend(action_3)
   info = RobotExecution(action=actions)
   return info


## Example 4
# Instruction: Put the yellow and blue stripe object in {scene} into the
    orange object.
def main_4() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of placing the yellow and blue
       stripe object in scene into the orange object"""
   image = GetObsImage(obs)
   masks_obs = SAM(image=image)
   objs_goal, masks_goal = ImageCrop(image=templates[’scene’],
       masks=SAM(image=templates[’scene’]))
   goal = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs_goal, query=’the yellow and blue
       stripe object’)
   target = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs_obs, query=objs_goal[goal])
   loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=target, masks=masks_obs)
   obj_1 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs_obs, query=’the orange object’,
       pre_obj1=target)
   loc_1 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_1, masks=masks_obs)
   action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_1, bounds=BOUNDS)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info

## Example 5
# Instruction: Put the {dragged_obj} into the {base_obj_1} then
    {base_obj_2}. Finally restore it into its original container.
def mian_5() -> dict:
   masks = SAM(obs_image)
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(obs_image, masks)
   base_obj_1 = CLIPRetrieval(objs, templates[’base_obj_1’])
   base_obj_2 = CLIPRetrieval(objs, templates[’base_obj_2’],
       pre_obj1=base_obj_1)


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      dragged_obj = CLIPRetrieval(objs, templates[’dragged_obj’],
          pre_obj1=base_obj_1, pre_obj2=base_obj_2)
      loc_base_obj_1 = Pixel2Loc(base_obj_1, masks)
      loc_base_obj_2 = Pixel2Loc(base_obj_2, masks)
      loc_dragged_obj = Pixel2Loc(dragged_obj, masks)

      action_1 = PickPlace(pick=loc_dragged_obj, place=loc_base_obj_1,
          bounds=BOUNDS)
      action_2 = PickPlace(pick=loc_base_obj_1, place=loc_base_obj_2,
          bounds=BOUNDS)
      action_3 = PickPlace(pick=loc_base_obj_2, place=loc_dragged_obj,
          bounds=BOUNDS)
      actions = [action_1, action_2, action_3]

      info = RobotExecution(action=actions)
      return info

Begin to execute the task:
------
Please solve the following instruction step-by-step. You should
    implement the main() function and output in the Python-code style.

Instruction: INSERT INSTRUCTION HERE.



A.9    Q UANTATIVE A BLATION S TUDIES ON P ROMPT E LEMENT

We use the same task instruction Put the polka dot block into the green
container. for all experiments here. Because the outputs of LLMs are somewhat random,
we will display the results of three consecutive outputs.

          Listing 2: Generation with Only API Definition provided in Prompt. First Trial
def main():
   # Step 1: Get the current observation image
   image = GetObsImage(obs)

      # Step 2: Segment the image to get masks
      masks = SAM(image=image)

      # Step 3: Crop the image based on masks
      objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)

      # Step 4: Retrieve the object(s) of interest using CLIP
      query = ’polka dot block’ # define the query
      polka_dot_block = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=query)

      # Step 5: Map masks to specific object locations
      obj_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=polka_dot_block, masks=masks)

      # Step 6: Get the pick and place locations and action boundaries
      pick_loc = obj_loc # we want to pick up the polka dot block
      place_loc = BOUNDS[’green_container’] # the green container is the
          place location
      bounds = BOUNDS[’PickPlace_bounds’] # limits of the pick and place
          action

      # Step 7: Perform any necessary distracting actions
      obj_list = [’polka dot block’] # define the goal object list
      masks_obs = np.delete(masks, polka_dot_block, axis=0) # remove the
          polka dot block from the observation masks
      DistractorActions = DistractorActions(mask_obs=masks_obs,
          obj_list=obj_list)



                                               24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   # Step 8: Plan and execute the pick and place action
   pick_masks = masks[polka_dot_block]
   pick_ind = [0] # We only want to pick up one object
   place_masks = np.expand_dims(place_loc, axis=0) # expand dims to
       match the pick loc array
   place_ind = [0] # We only have one object to place
   action_seq = RearrangeActions(pick_masks=pick_masks,
       place_masks=place_masks, pick_ind=pick_ind, place_ind=place_ind,
       bounds=bounds)
   action_seq = DistractorActions + action_seq # combine distractor
       actions with pick and place actions
   for action in action_seq:
      result = RobotExecution(action)
      time.sleep(result[’time_elapsed’]) # wait for the robot to finish
          the action
   return result


        Listing 3: Generation with Only API Definition provided in Prompt. Second Trial
def main():
   # Step 1: Get the current observation image
   obs_image = GetObsImage(obs)

   # Step 2: Use SAM to get segmentation results
   masks = SAM(image=obs_image)

   # Step 3: Crop the image to get object bounding boxes
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=obs_image, masks=masks)

   # Step 4: Use CLIP to retrieve the polka dot block
   polka_dot = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’polka dot block’)

   # Step 5: Use CLIP to retrieve the green container
   green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’green container’)

   # Step 6: Map masks to specific locations
   polka_dot_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=polka_dot, masks=masks)
   green_container_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=green_container, masks=masks)

   # Step 7: Pick and place the polka dot into the green container
   action = PickPlace(pick=polka_dot_loc, place=green_container_loc,
       bounds=BOUNDS)

   # Step 8: Execute the action using the robotic hardware
   result = RobotExecution(action)

   # Step 9: Save images if execution fails
   if not result[’success’]:
      SaveFailureImage()

   # Step 10: return the result
   return result


         Listing 4: Generation with Only API Definition provided in Prompt. Third Trial
def main():
   # Step 1: Get the current observation image
   obs_image = GetObsImage(obs)

   # Step 2: Use SAM to get segmentation results
   masks = SAM(image=obs_image)

   # Step 3: Crop the image to get object bounding boxes


                                              25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=obs_image, masks=masks)

   # Step 4: Use CLIP to retrieve the polka dot block
   polka_dot = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’polka dot block’)

   # Step 5: Use CLIP to retrieve the green container
   green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’green container’)

   # Step 6: Map masks to specific locations
   polka_dot_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=polka_dot, masks=masks)
   green_container_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=green_container, masks=masks)

   # Step 7: Pick and place the polka dot into the green container
   action = PickPlace(pick=polka_dot_loc, place=green_container_loc,
       bounds=BOUNDS)

   # Step 8: Execute the action using the robotic hardware
   result = RobotExecution(action)

   # Step 9: Save images if execution fails
   if not result[’success’]:
      SaveFailureImage()

   # Step 10: Print the result
   print(result)



      Listing 5: Generation with Only In-Context Examples provided in Prompt. First Trial
def main() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of placing the polka dot block into
       the green container"""
   image = GetObsImage(obs)
   masks = SAM(image=image)
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
   obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query="the polka dot block")
   loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
   obj_1 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query="the green container")
   loc_1 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_1, masks=masks)
   action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_1, bounds=BOUNDS)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info



     Listing 6: Generation with Only In-Context Examples provided in Prompt. Second Trial
def main() -> dict:
   # Use object detection to get the object and container locations from
       the RGB image.
   image = GetObsImage(obs)
   masks = SAM(image=image)
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)
   block_obj = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the polka dot block’)
   container_obj = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the green container’)

   # Convert the pixel locations of the objects into robot reference
       frame (in meters).
   block_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=block_obj, masks=masks)
   container_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=container_obj, masks=masks)

   # Move the robot’s arm to pick and place the block into the container.
   action = PickPlace(pick=block_loc, place=container_loc, bounds=BOUNDS)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info


                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Listing 7: Generation with Only In-Context Examples provided in Prompt. Third Trial
def main() -> dict:
   """Execute the given instructions of placing the polka dot block into
       the green container"""
   # Obtain the image of the scene
   image = GetObsImage(obs)

   # Segment the image using Semantic Affinity Module (SAM)
   masks = SAM(image=image)

   # Crop image to obtain individual objects and their masks
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)

   # Retrieve the polka dot block object using OpenAI’s CLIP model
   obj_0 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the polka dot block’)

   # Get the location of the green container
   obj_1 = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query=’the green container’)
   loc_1 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_1, masks=masks)

   # Move the polka dot block from its current location to the green
       container
   loc_0 = Pixel2Loc(obj=obj_0, masks=masks)
   action = PickPlace(pick=loc_0, place=loc_1, bounds=BOUNDS)
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)

   # Return the execution information
   return info


Listing 8: Generation with both API Definition and In-context Examples provided in Prompt. First
Trial
def main() -> dict:
   # first, capture an image of the current scene
   image = GetObsImage(obs)

   # generate object masks using the SAM module
   masks = SAM(image=image)

   # identify the objects in the scene using the masks
   objs, masks = ImageCrop(image=image, masks=masks)

   # use CLIPRetrieval to find the polka dot block and the green
       container
   polka_dot_block = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query="the polka dot
       block")
   green_container = CLIPRetrieval(objs=objs, query="the green
       container")

   # convert the object masks to location coordinates
   polka_dot_block_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=polka_dot_block, masks=masks)
   green_container_loc = Pixel2Loc(obj=green_container, masks=masks)

   # use the PickPlace function to pick up the polka dot block and place
       it in the green container
   action = PickPlace(pick=polka_dot_block_loc,
       place=green_container_loc, bounds=BOUNDS)

   # execute the action on the robot using the RobotExecution function
       and return the result
   info = RobotExecution(action=action)
   return info


                                              27
