Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T O S IMULATE N EURAL O RGANOID : A F RAMEWORK
AND A B ENCHMARK BASED ON AI

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Neural organoids hold significant value for AI modeling, cognitive exploration,
         and medical discovery in academic research. However, the current research on
         neural organoids primarily relies on trial-and-error experimental design methods
         that are time-consuming and expensive. Moreover, due to the intrinsic unknowa-
         bility of complex biological systems, purely rational deduction through mathe-
         matical and physical modeling is nearly impossible. As a result, the design of
         organoid experiments is constrained by the above limitations. With AI models
         being applied to address diverse biological challenges, the demand for novel ex-
         perimental paths for neural organoids has become urgent. In response to the
         above issues, we propose the first neural organoid simulation framework to re-
         alistically reconstruct various details of interaction experiments using real-world
         mature organoids. This framework employs advanced neural computing models
         as elements, harnessing AI methods to enable stimulation, response, and learning
         functionalities. The significant consumption can be mitigated through the com-
         bination of the framework with real-world experiments. An intelligent expansion
         platform is also established based on spiking neural network to facilitate the ex-
         ploration of organoid-machine collaborative intelligence. In addition, we intro-
         duce a benchmark for evaluating our framework, including a set of real-world
         organoid experimental data and a series of evaluation metrics. The experimen-
         tal results show that our simulation framework features outstanding simulation
         capabilities and reflects similarity with real-world organoid experiments in many
         aspects. With the intelligent expansion platform, the performance of the combi-
         nation is comparable to pure AI algorithms in a basic classification task.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Organoids refer to in vitro cultured cell tissues with structure and functions. They are generated
through the application of stem cell-directed differentiation techonology. So far, various organs
have been successfully cultured in vitro, including the heart (Voges et al., 2017), liver (Huch et al.,
2013), lung (Wilkinson et al., 2017), gut (Spence et al., 2011), brain (Paşca et al., 2015; Qian et al.,
2016), and etc. Among them, neural organoids are essential for disease intervention (Marotta et al.,
2020), cognitive and intelligence formation (Goddard et al., 2023). Some research focuses on the
intelligence performance of organoids themselves (Smirnova et al., 2023; Kagan et al., 2022) and
start to investigate the organoid-machine collaborative intelligence. Furthermore, the third genera-
tion of neural network, Spiking Neural Network (SNN) (Maass, 1997), is regarded as a promising
method for interacting with biological tissues by their highly biomimetic design and low power
consumption.
Due to the intricate nature of biological mechanisms, neural organoids experiments often rely on
heuristics, lacking a rational design approach. Pure rational design based on mathematical models
for neural organoids is unfeasible. Consequently, researchers attempt to conduct numerous trial-and-
error experiments to derive some patterns. However, conducting pure heuristic experiments imposes
a huge finance and consumable load with low success rates. Pure rational design and pure exper-
imentation are opposing extremes that both fall short of ideal research methodologies. Recently,
AI for science modeling exhibited substantial effectiveness across diverse domains (Senior et al.,
2020; Bi et al., 2023). Leveraging AI methods to simulate the structure and learning mechanisms of
organoids fulfills the pressing need within the field for novel research methodologies.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Organoid With MEA                                             Simulation Framework
                                                  Parameter


                                                     Data
                                                              Biomimetic         Biomimetic      Observation/sti
          Neuron   Synapse     Electrode
                                                              Neuron Model       Synapse Model   mulation Node


 Rationality                               Organoid-Simulation Loop                                Experimentation
                       Figure 1: An illustration of Organoid-Simulation Loop.
In this work, we propose the first neural organoid simulation framework(NOSF) based on AI
method, which is a novel tool for organoid research. The framework focuses on reconstructing
the interaction process between mature organoid and machines without invoving culture and pro-
liferation of neuron. We employ advanced computational neural modeling results as elements to
establish an Observation/Stimulation (O/S) array, O/S information transmission mechanism and
simulation organoid network that resemble real-world organoid experiments closely. To meet the
requirements of exploring collaborative intelligence, our framework is equipped with an intelligent
expansion platform based on SNN. We collect some data in a real-world neural organoid experi-
ment and present a series of evaluation metrics to measure the level of simulation, which forms
the first benchmark of neural organoid simulation. A comprehensive evaluation of the framework is
conducted through substantial experiments, resulting in remarkable simulation results and intelligent
expansion effects. In addition, the simulation framework can be used by organoid researchers to con-
duct pre-experiments, saving the expensive trial-and-error costs of repeating real-world experiments.
Framework can be employed to perform pre-experiments, formulating the results as ”Parameters”
to guide real-world experiments and minimize the need for trial-and-error. After real-world experi-
ments, the recorded data will also be fed back into the simulation framework as ”Data” to improve
the performance of simulation. As depicted in Fig.1, the ”Parameters” and ”Data” form an exper-
imental loop, which strikes a balance between rationality and experimentation and demonstrates a
novel methodology for organoid research.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) The first neural organoid simulation framework
is proposed to reconstruct most of the details in real-world organoid interaction experiments while
alleviating the enormous cost of repeated real-world experiments. (2) An organoid intelligence ex-
pansion platform is developed using the SNN algorithm to explore organoids-machine collaborative
intelligence in a novel way. (3) The first benchmark is proposed for organoid simulation framework,
including evaluation metrics and real-world organoid experiment data. We conduct abundant ex-
periments to evaluate the simulation similarity and the performance of intelligence expansion and
ultimately achieve remarkable experimental results.


2    R ELATED WORK

Neural organoids culture and intelligence. Due to ethical concerns, previous research methods
generally focused on the sliced neural tissues from post-mortem corpse brain specimens. The de-
velopment of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSCs) (Thomson et al., 1998) technology enabled the
culture of neural organoids in vitro. Earlier works had successful culture of multiple types of neu-
ral organoids, including the cerebellum (Muguruma et al., 2015), hippocampus (Sakaguchi et al.,
2015), pituitary gland (Ozone et al., 2016), retina (Eiraku et al., 2011), and etc. Some in vitro neu-
rons generated through iPSCs adhere closely to microelectrode array (MEA) and then proliferate
until form the organoid. MEA has the capacity to monitor the electrical signal activity of neurons
and can also apply stimulation to neurons regions. The utilization of neural organoids provides re-
searchers in neuroscience and cognitive science with innovative methods to investigate the origin of
intelligence. Generated from the human and rodent stem cells, Kagan et al. (2022) constructed an in
vitro biological neural network, which facilitated real-time interaction and stimulus-based learning
between computers and neurons within the ”Pong” game. Similarly, Cai et al. (2023) propose the
concept of ”Brainoware”, which considers neural organoids as a hardware alongside silicon-based


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     External
                                                        1           2            AMPA
                     stimulus                                                                  glutamic acid
                                                   10                   3
                                     GIF
                                               9                            4
                                                                                AMPA
                                   Other
                                distribution
                                   modes           8                    5


                                                        7       6
                                                                                         Spikes
                                                            Small-World                recording


Figure 2: From left to right, including GIF neurons, small-world connections, and AMPA synapses.
chips. They found that in vitro neural networks exhibit nonlinear dynamics and fading memory
properties, representing a concrete manifestatio of intelligence.
SNN and SNN for biological signal. SNN algorithms are renowned for their robustness, biological
interpretability, and energy efficiency in the Artificial Intelligence community. SNN adopts binary
spikes as the carriers of information transmission with inherent suitability and advantages in bio-
logical neuron information processing. Some SNN models’ architecture and training algorithms
are inspired by traditional Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) (Kim et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2022), resulting in comparable performance in computer vision, computational speech,
and other domains. SEW ResNet (Fang et al., 2021) proposed a novel SNN design pattern called
Spike-Element-Wise (SEW) and established a deep residual network architecture based on SNN.
Transformer was incorporated into the SNN in (Yao et al., 2023) known as Spike-driven Trans-
former. Some studies applied SNN to electroencephalogram (EEG) and electromyogram (EMG)
signals, leading the way in exploring the potential use of SNN for neural information processing.
Gong et al. (2023) observed that SNN can effectively capture the complex dynamic characteristics
of biological neurons. They introduced an SNN network combined with LSTM for EEG analysis
and yielded outstanding performance in emotion recognition. Xu et al. (2023) developed a hybrid
SNN architecture called SCNN combining a convolutional neural network for electromyographic
pattern recognition, which improved 50.69% accuracy compared to the baseline.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   G ENERALIZED I NTEGRATE - AND -F IRE N EURON

Numerous bionic computational neurons models were proposed, including the Hodgkin-Huxley(H-
H) (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952), Izhikevich (Izhikevich, 2004) and others. In our work, neurons with
precise spikes and adaptation to various spiking modes (e.g., burst, bistability, etc.) are selected,
rather than specific ion channels. For this reason, we opt for the Generalized Integrate-and-Fire
(GIF) model as the neuron component within the framework. Specifically, we use the scheme of
Mihalaş & Niebur (2009) and Teeter et al. (2018), which can be described as:
                         dV (t)    1           X
                                = (RI + R           Ij (t) − (V (t) − Vrest ))                    (1)
                           dt      τ
where V is membrane potential, Vrest is resting potential, R is membrane resistance, Ij are an
arbitrary number of internal currents and I is external current. Once V exceeds the threshold, a
spike will be fired. Meanwhile, V will be reset to the resting potential Vreset .

3.2   AMPA SYNAPSES

Chemical synapse serves as the core element in our simulation framework due to its plasticity, which
is responsible for generating learning and memory functions. We select the AMPA receptor model as
the foundational synaptic model for the framework, because of its characteristic of quick response.
Specifically, we adopt the approach employed by Vijayan & Kopell (2012):
                                      dg
                                         = α[Glu](1 − g) − βg                                    (2)
                                      dt
where g represents the concentration of AMPA receptors, α signifies the binding rate constant be-
tween AMPA receptors and glutamic acid, while β represents the dissociation rate constant. [Glu]
represents the concentration of the external neurotransmitter.


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   S MALL - WORLD NETWORK

Small-world network (Watts & Strogatz, 1998) is a distinctive type of complex network that is
prevalent in reality and holds substantial practical significance. Specifically, after extensive research,
it has been proved that many large-scale neural networks within the brain, including those in the
visual system and the brain stem, exhibit the characteristics of a small-world topology. Furthermore,
at the level of computational modeling, small-world network exhibits favorable short-term memory
characteristics. The small-world network is characterized by: (i) Build a regular ring lattice with N
nodes, each connected to K neighbors. (ii) Reconnect each edge of each node in sequential order
with a probability of p and randomly select the target nodes for reconnection.

4     M ETHOD
With the aim of closely simulating all processes of real-world neural organoid experiments, we
propose a neural organoid simulation framework using the elements mentioned in Section 3. It
comprises of three main components, information encoding and Observation/Stimulation(O/S) ar-
ray establishment, O/S information transmission mechanisms, organoid network architecture and
learning strategy. Furthermore, we develop an organoid intelligence extension platform based on
SNN to provide additional support for research in oraganoid-machine collaborative intelligence.
The following subsections will go over the details of the framework.

4.1   INFORMATION ENCODING AND O/S ARRAY ESTABLISHMENT

In typical neural organoid experiments using MEA, information is transmitted through electrical
signals that interact with neurons via electrodes. Therefore, the primary task is to transform diverse
natural signals into electrical signals with minimal loss. Simultaneously, the form of the O/S ar-
ray(corresponding to the MEA) is determined depending on the requirements of different types of
information. We present two encoding methods for two common input formats.
Intensity Encoding. Element values are utilized to represent information of fixed-size discrete
matrix data (e.g. images), and are considered as intensities. Mapping the intensity to electrical
currents enables the encoding of information. Excessive currents leads to the physiological demise
of neurons in real-world experiments. So, it can identify a upper limit of external current, denoted as
Imax . After obtaining the external current range [0, Imax ), intensity values of matrix is normalized
to fit within the range, providing the current stimulation intensity matrix. It is a common practice
to set the size of O/S array as an integer multiple of the matrix size, allowing for a one-to-one or
spaced correspondence between the positions of the matrix elements and the nodes in the O/S array.
The schematic diagram of the intensity encoding is depicted in the first process line of the top-left
subplot in Fig.3.
Position Encoding. In some studies investigating the intelligence in neural organoids (Kagan et al.,
2022; Cai et al., 2023), the stimulation method is often straightforward. They use stimulation sites
on the MEA to form their own specific patterns and represent information. This approach can
represent simple pattern information, such as numbers, letters and geometric shapes. Although it
appears overly simplistic compared to AI’s information processing method, this method is widely
utilized in neural organoids. Initially, the simple patterns are abstracted into discrete points on a
2D coordinate axis artificially, which is called ”position encoding”. An O/S array of appropriate
size is generated based on the initial process, and the position encoding is mapped one-to-one into
the corresponding positions inside the O/S array. Following the identification of the stimulation
site, a preset stimulation pattern is applied, which is typically set at 20mA and 1Hz in real-world
experiments. The schematic diagram of the position encoding is depicted in the second process line
of the top-left subplot in Fig.3.

4.2   O/S INFORMATION TRANSMISSION MECHANISMS

During the O/S process, encoded input information is converted into temporal current/voltage sig-
nals. These signals are then applied to the O/S array and transmitted to the neural organoid network
via each O/S node. While the neural organoid network learns the information and generates a re-
sponse, neuron activity can also be read from the O/S nodes. From the perspective of common AI


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   2 Encoding to Current                                                                                     4 Observation/Stimulation mechanism                                    6 Expansion Input
                                                                                                                     Current                                                                           Learnable Weight
                                                                                                                                            No Weight
                              Intensity Encoding                                                                      With
                                                                                             Current                Frequency            Origin Stimulation                                               Input Edge
                                                                                              With                                                                                        Spikes
                                                                                            Frequency                                       No Weight                                                  Learnable Weight
                              Position Encoding                                                                                           Origin Readout                                                 Output Edge
                                                                                                                 Spikes      Raw                                                          Spikes

                                                                                                                    Organoid                                                                           Total = N
  1 Perception Input                                          3 O/S Array                                       5
                                                                                                                    Simulation

                                                                                                                    One-to-One


                                                                                                                                                                                                             …
                                                                                                                                                                                            …


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               …
                                                     2                                                          4                                                   6
                                                  Encoding                                                 O/S
                                                                                                                                                           Expansion
                                                                                                         Mechanism
                                                                                                                                                             Input
                                                       O/S
                                                       Node                                             AMPA Synapse                                           LIF Neuron
                                                                                                                                                                                                   FC                FC
                                                                                                         GIF Neuron                                                                             Connection        Connection


 Learning Strategy                                                                                      Lateral Inhibition          𝑺𝒎𝒂𝒍𝒍𝑾𝒐𝒓𝒍𝒅                 Surrogate Gradient BP Learning                                  Forward
            STDP                                                                                                                    𝑰𝒏𝒉𝒊𝒃𝒊𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏
                                                                                                                                                                             LIF                LIF                LIF             LIF
       pre                w          𝒕𝒑𝒓𝒆                                                                                                                                Σ                  Σ                 Σ                Σ
                                            𝑳𝑻𝑫
        𝒕   𝒑𝒓𝒆                𝒕𝒑𝒐𝒔𝒕
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Backward
 𝑳𝑻𝑷
                  𝒕𝒑𝒐𝒔𝒕                           𝑑𝑤
                                                     = −𝐴𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 ෍ 𝛿 𝑡 − 𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝐴𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 ෍ 𝛿(𝑡 − 𝑡 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 )
                                                                                                                                                              Gradient       ATan    BP         ATan    BP        ATan    BP       ATan
                                                  𝑑𝑡
                              post


Figure 3: The overall architecture of the proposed method. Cold color background represents the
NOSF, warm color background represents the intelligent expansion platform.
methods like perceptron, CNN and SNN, O/S array appears to serve as both the input and output
layers. The weights exist between the input layer/output layer and hidden layers in traditional AI
methods. These weights are vital for extracting initial features and ultimately classifying features.
However, MEA and neurons are only connected for signal transmission in real-world experiments.
There are no weights involved in the connections between O/S nodes and neurons inside the simu-
lation framework’s O/S information transmission processes, as shown in Subplot 4 in Fig.3. Com-
pared to typical AI methods, there is a fundamental difference from the input and output layers in
information transmission.

4.3               ORGANOID NETWORK ARCHITECTURE AND LEARNING STRATEGY

Before constructing the oganoid network, it is necessary to determine the correspondence be-
tween neurons and O/S nodes. We devised a simple and effective method where each O/S
node corresponds precisely to a single neuron. This correspondence can efficiently monitor or
stimulate each single neuron, which is also the ideal setup pursued in real-world experiments.
The size of electrodes of the advanced MEA can be smaller than that of the neurons. Hence,
a single electrode matching to a single neuron is functionally possible. Since the prolifera-
tion of neuron is typically not interfered during the organoid culture process, the growth di-
rection is chaotic and the growth density is uneven. Our framework implements precise stim-
ulation of neurons, resulting in a one-to-one correspondence that makes experiments simpler.

Once the O/S array’s size is determined, the required
number of GIF neurons is calculated based on the one-to-
one correspondence. The small-world connection pattern
is used to randomly generate the connection relationship
between neurons, with AMPA synapses functioning for
the connections. The oragnoid neural network architec-
ture is displayed in the subgraph 5 in Fig.3. Under the
basic configuration, only one single layer of neurons, re- Figure 4: Differences between the 2D
ferred to as the ”2D model”, adheres closely to the O/S and 3D models
nodes. An expansion method is also proposed for expanding more layers of neurons, referred to as
the ”3D model”. A 3D model with more layers is equivalent to duplicates of a single 2D model, with
small-world connections used between layers. Fig. 4 illustrates the differences between the 2D and
3D models. Unlike traditional feedforward neural networks, the multi-layer organoid network does


                                                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


not output responses from the outermost/last layer. Whether the model is 2D or 3D, the response
is output from the nearmost/first layer of neurons adhered to the O/S node. In this form, organoid
neurons learn and perceive information only in their interior which can be called as ”oscillations”.
After receiving information stimulation, the organoid neural network learns by enhancing the plas-
ticity of the synapses to adjust the connection weight in the simulation framework. We utilize the
modified Spike-Time-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) mechanism to adjust synaptic weights. STDP
adjusts synaptic weights based on the timing of presynaptic and postsynaptic spikes, which is a typ-
ical unsupervised learning method consistent with Hebbian learning principles (Bi & Poo, 1998).
Inspired by Paredes-Vallés et al. 2020 and Dong et al. (2022), the definition of STDP used in this
work is:
                                        NX
                                         batch
                         dw        1                      (i)        (i)

                             =                   η+ x(i)                   (i)
                                                     pre δpost − η− xpost δpre                   (3)
                         dt     Nbatch i=1
                             (i)       (i)            (i)        (i)
                          dxpre      xpre          dxpost      xpost
                                 =−        + δ(t),        =−          + δ(t)                      (4)
                            dt        τ+             dt         τ−
where Nbatch is the number of samples in the corresponding batch, while η+ and η− are constants
representing the learning rates of the Long-Term Potentiation (LTP) and Long-Term Depression
                        (i)      (i)
(LTD) mechanisms. δpre and δpost indicate whether the pre-synaptic neurons of the i-th sample
are releasing neurons at the current moment. τ+ and τ− are time constants. To enhance compe-
tition among neurons and facilitate faster model convergence, we draw inspiration from the E-I
balance network in Diehl & Cook (2015). Lateral inhibition and weight attenuation mechanisms are
introduced to further optimize this model. Due to lateral inhibition, when a neuron fires a spike, it
suppresses neighboring neurons from firing. This is equivalent to the presence of inhibitory synapses
between the firing neuron and its neighbors by reducing their membrane potential. Besides, weight
attenuation mechanism is introduced to restrict the weight range and prevent some neurons from ex-
hibiting harmful levels of competitiveness. When synapses are inactive for an extended period, their
weights attentuate, which means positive weights will decrease and negative weights will increase.

4.4   I NTELLIGENT EXPANSION P LATFORM

We develop an intelligent expansion platform based on SNN, cooperating with the simulation frame-
work. The goal of intelligent expansion is to utilize advanced AI technology to compensate for
organoid intelligence’s weakness and further look into the potential of organoid-machine intelli-
gence. In SNN, information is transmitted via spike mechanism that aligns with the output of the
organoid simulation framework. Therefore, SNN is employed to establish the intelligent expansion
platform, which includes Leaky Integrate and Fire (LIF) neurons that are described as:
                                 dV (t)  1
                                        = (RI − (V (t) − Vrest ))                                  (5)
                                  dt     τ
where V is membrane potential, Vrest is resting potential, R is membrane resistance, and I is exter-
nal current. Once V exceeds the threshold Vth , a spike will be fired. LIF neurons are the most widely
used neuron model in the SNN domain becuase of their tremendous computational simplicity. The
platform uses basic linear layers as main architecture, and the number of layers can be adjusted ac-
cording to experimental requirement. The output of the two-dimensional O/S array is flattened into a
one-dimensional vector, which serves as the input for the linear SNN. As shown in the bottom right
subfigure of Fig.3, the platform uses the supervised surrogate gradient backpropagation algorithm
for network learning. Supervised learning can improve the ability of certain tasks such as object
recognition, in a specific direction.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   S IMULATION SIMILARITY EVALUATION

Benchmark. The first benchmark is proposed for our organoid simulation framework in this sec-
tion, which comprises a set of real-world organoid experiment data and evaluation metrics. In the
real-world organoid experiment, a cluster of 200-day neural organoid adheres to the 8x8 MEA. The


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          2 6 QRGH LQGH[


                                                     7LPH  V                    2UJDQRLG 126)


          2 6 QRGH LQGH[


                                                     7LPH  V                    2UJDQRLG 126)


          2 6 QRGH LQGH[


                                                     7LPH  V                    2UJDQRLG 126)

Figure 5: Comparison between real-world experiment organoid data and simulation framework re-
sults. In order from left to right, the figures show: the schematic of firing spike, the boxplot of spike
firing timestamps, the results of SVD, and the results of QR. In order from top to bottom, the figures
illustrate three sets of the real-world organoid data and the simulation framework results.

MEA electrodes are used to draw shapes with semantic meaning, such as numbers or geometric
figures. Regular stimulation is applied at 500mV and 1Hz. Each round of stimulation lasts for 10
seconds, and three rounds are conducted to obtain three sets of data. We present evaluation metrics
from different perspectives to assess the resemblance between real-world organoid experiment data
and results of the simulation framework. From the perspective of mathematical analysis, we intro-
duce two types of metrics, including matrix analysis and statistics analysis. The spikes recorded by
MEA within 10s is regard as a matrix for matrix analysis. We employ some metrics about matri-
ces to measure this similarity, such as singular value decomposition (SVD), QR decomposition and
spectral norm. SVD and QR decomposition are conventional techniques for extracting matrix fea-
tures in matrix analysis. Spectral norm is used to measure the matrix stability, and we consider that
having similar stability is required for measuring similarity. For statistics analysis, the average firing
rate is used to measure the total number of spikes. Subsequently, we determine the timestamps of
spike firing and calculate the mean, variance and average maximum/minimum firing intervals. From
the perspective of bionics, we introduce two metrics: inherent characteristics of neurons and Hebb
Learning Rule (Hebb, 1949). The inherent characteristics of neurons include extensive resting state
and correlation spikes. Hebb Learning Rule suggests that when one neuron repeatedly stimulates
another neuron, the connection strength between them will enhance. Check the Appendix A.2 for
further information on evaluation metrics.
BrainPy (Wang et al., 2022) is utilized to construct our framework. We set the number of GIF neu-
rons to 64 and the K neighbors of small-world connection to 5. Outstanding results are obtained in
the displayed metrics as shown in Fig.5. The spike firing diagram shows that the real-world organoid
data (black dots) and the simulation framework results (red dots) exhibit substantial parallelism, with
both having a fixed burst period (vertical line) and a highly competitive neuron (horizontal line). We
make a boxplot of all the spike firing time to visualize the spike distribution throughout the whole
time period. The similarity can be clearly defined by the size of the box and the position of the quad-
rant line. The slope and width of diagonal lines, which shows a considerable resemblance, must be
observed for the results of the two types of decomposition. Table 1 illustrates the high similarity
between the real-world experiment organoid and the simulation framework results in mathematical
analysis metrics. The small difference in the specific values of the first two rows reflects the afore-
mentioned similarity. Each value in the last four lines represents a specific time value in seconds.
Strong similarity is proved by calculating the absolute error between these values. For instance, the
difference between 2.33 seconds and 2.49 seconds is only 0.16 seconds, which is relatively minor
considering the entire time period (10 seconds). Check Appendix A.2 for more details . Regarding
the bionic metric, the red region in the first column of Fig.5 illustrates that only a small portion of the
entire time generates spikes, indicating that the system is extensively resting. Simultaneously, the
GIF model reflects non-spontaneous correlation spikes that generate in response to external input.


                                                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison of the real-world organoid data and the simulation framework results with
mathematical analysis metrics.
                                            Group 1              Group 2                   Group 3
                  Metric
                                        Organoid   NOSF     Organoid      NOSF       Organoid      NOSF
               Spectral norm             23.32     21.00     22.87        20.62         21.72      19.95
             Average firing rate         6.16      6.41      6.31         6.35          5.84       6.39
            Average firing time          2.33      2.49      2.44         2.48          2.56       2.49
            Firing time variance         1.76      1.56      1.77         1.56          1.66       1.56
      Average maximum firing interval    0.74      0.90      0.85         0.90          0.86       0.90
      Average minimum firing interval    0.40      0.35      0.20         0.36          0.46       0.58


              Table 2: Accuracy of classifying 0 and 1 under different hyperparameters.
                GIF             AMAP               Small-world            Training
      Model                                                                                     Result(%)
                 τ         α     β      T dur          K          delay        sim T
                 4      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             12           60              94.70
                 5       0.8    0.6      0.01          5             12           60              94.23
                 5      0.96    0.8      0.01          5             12           60              92.34
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.05           5            12            60             95.56
       2D
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.05          10            12           60              64.26
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             16           60              94.99
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             12           100             94.99
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             12           60              96.80
                 6      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             12           60              92.39
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          10            12           60              54.00
       3D
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          5              8           60              90.07
                 5      0.96    0.6      0.01          5             12           60              94.52

Since the Hebbian Learning Rule is one of the characteristics of STDP, our framework conforms to
this rule.

5.2    SIMULATION INTELLIGENT EVALUATION

Some previous works(Zheng et al., 2022) have demonstrated their own intelligence by letting neu-
ral organoids classify simple patterns. Similarly, we classify digits 0 and 1 in MNIST to ascertain
whether the simulation framework exhibits consistency in own intelligence performance as real-
world neural organoids. Since various hyperparameters may influence the result, we include adjust-
ments to them into the experimental process to investigate some critical part of our framework.
We employ a voting mechanism to determine the classification accuracy. Firstly, we assigned each
neuron a category based on its highest average firing rate for the digits 0 and 1 across training set
samples. Subsequently, the predicted digit for each image is determined by averaging the spike
count of each neuron per class and selecting the class with the highest average spike count. As
shown in Table 2, the results fully prove the own intelligence of this framework and the correlation
between the own intelligence and the real-world organoid experiments. For both the 2D and 3D
models, we highlight the best results in bold red text. Meanwhile, we discover that the appropri-
ateness of particular hyperparameter settings will greatly affect the performance of the framework.
Therefore, we finetuned each hyperparameter (black with bold and underlined in Table 2) based on
the optimal result and evaluated the subsequent changes in the accuracy rate. Since 2D models have
sparser connections compared to 3D models, most hyperparameter adjustments will not result in a
significant decrease in accuracy (such as τ and delay). As we increase the value of K (from 5 to
10), the network becomes denser. The initial weights not being adjusted will result in the generation
of a large number of spikes, making it difficult for STDP to learn additional features. As a result,
the correct rate will decline sharply. Since 3D models are denser, little changes in hyperparame-
ters might result in significant accuracy decreases. For example, decreasing the value of delay will
greatly reduce the efficiency of STDP learning for 3D models with a larger number of synapses,
resulting in a significant decrease in accuracy. Check the Appendix A.3 for more details related to
the experimental setting.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   I NTELLIGENT EXPANSION EVALUATION

Consistent with the methods of classifying 1 and 0, the organoid simulation only achieves
31.45% accuracy in classifying complete Mnist, which is consistent with the methods of clas-
sifying 0 and 1. The output of the simulation framework is used as the input data for
SNN and the accuracy improvement with minimal computational burden is tested. Specif-
ically, we set up an single linear layer SNN with 28×28 neurons. Subsequently, We flat-
ten the 2D data observed by the simulation framework into 1D data and feed it into the
SNN linear layer, resulting in an enhancement of the classification accuracy to 91.64%.
It verifies the feasibility of the in-
telligent expansion platform, achiev- Table 3: The accuracy comparison of different algorithms
ing the goal of intelligent supple- and different layers on Mnist.
mentation and collaboration with
organoids. In addition, we also con-               Method           1 layer   2 layers 3 layers
duct a comparison experiment by in-
troducing ANN and extra SNN with                    ANN             92.79% 97.89% 98.34%
the same structure but a different in-              SNN
                                                                    92.71% 98.34% 98.69%
put scheme. We also investigated          (Poisson Encoding Mnist)
whether extra layers would improve                  SNN
                                                                    91.64% 97.60% 97.96%
performance, experimenting with 1            (Simulation Output)
layer, 2 layers, and 3 layers config-
urations. The results, as shown in Table.3, demonstrate that the accuracy of the organoid simula-
tion+SNN intelligent expansion solution is comparable to the pure AI method of ANN and SNN,
with an accuracy difference of less than 1%, proving the superiority of the intelligent expansion
platform.

5.4   D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATION

When the simulation framework’s experiment results are compared to the mainstream recognition
methods in the field of AI, the simulation framework appears to only produce relatively mediocre
results. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that our aspiration is to reproduce the performance of real-
world neural organoids using the simulation framework, rather than pursuing the optimal perfor-
mance. The intelligence exploration of current real-world neural organoid is relatively primitive,
far from reaching human intelligence. The simulation framework also performs some basic tasks
and obtains feedback that aligns with real-world organoids. There are still some limitations in our
work. In most real-world organoid experiments, a one-to-one correspondence between neurons and
MEA electrodes cannot be achieved. An electrode frequently captures responses from multiple neu-
rons, making it difficult to determine the electrical signal state of a specific single neuron. On the
other hand, the neuron and synapse model used in our framework is still not detailed enough, and a
gap from the dynamic processes of real-world neurons still exists. In terms of learning, real-world
neurons tissues enhance intelligence by improving synaptic plasticity and growing new neurons.
However, due to the unclear biological growth mechanism, our framework only implements the
synaptic plasticity and cannot support real-time neuron expansion. We are focusing on proposing a
novel path, and trying to further explore intelligent expansion with other AI researchers.

6     C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present the first neural organoid simulation framework with a intelligence expansion
platform to save costs of repeated real-world experiments, resulting in a outstanding performance. In
the future, complex correspondence between neurons and O/S nodes, detailed biological modeling,
and neuron proliferation simulation are attractive directions to pursue.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Guo-Qiang Bi and Mu-Ming Poo. Synaptic modifications in cultured hippocampal neurons: De-
  pendence on spike timing, synaptic strength, and postsynaptic cell type. J. Neurosci., 18(24):
  10464–10472, 1998.
Kaifeng Bi, Lingxi Xie, Hengheng Zhang, Xin Chen, Xiaotao Gu, and Qi Tian. Accurate medium-
  range global weather forecasting with 3d neural networks. Nature, pp. 1–6, 2023.
Hongwei Cai, Zheng Ao, Chunhui Tian, Zhuhao Wu, Hongcheng Liu, Jason Tchieu, Mingxia Gu,
  Ken Mackie, and Feng Guo. Brain organoid computing for artificial intelligence. bioRxiv, pp.
  2023–02, 2023.
Peter U Diehl and Matthew Cook. Unsupervised learning of digit recognition using spike-timing-
  dependent plasticity. Front. Comput. Neurosci., 9, 2015.
Yiting Dong, Dongcheng Zhao, Yang Li, and Yi Zeng. An unsupervised STDP-based spiking neural
  network inspired by biologically plausible learning rules and connections. 2022.
Mototsugu Eiraku, Nozomu Takata, Hiroki Ishibashi, Masako Kawada, Eriko Sakakura, Satoru
 Okuda, Kiyotoshi Sekiguchi, Taiji Adachi, and Yoshiki Sasai. Self-organizing optic-cup mor-
 phogenesis in three-dimensional culture. Nature, 472(7341):51–56, 2011.
Wei Fang, Zhaofei Yu, Yanqi Chen, Tiejun Huang, Timothée Masquelier, and Yonghong Tian. Deep
 residual learning in spiking neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:21056–21069, 2021.
Eliza Goddard, Eva Tomaskovic-Crook, Jeremy Micah Crook, and Susan Dodds. Human brain
  organoids and consciousness: Moral claims and epistemic uncertainty. Organoids, 2(1):50–65,
  2023.
Peiliang Gong, Pengpai Wang, Yueying Zhou, and Daoqiang Zhang. A spiking neural network with
  adaptive graph convolution and lstm for eeg-based brain-computer interfaces. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 31:1440–1450, 2023.
D O Hebb. The organization of behavior; a neuropsychological theory. xix, 335, 1949.
A L Hodgkin and A F Huxley. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application
  to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol., 117(4):500–544, 1952.
Meritxell Huch, Craig Dorrell, Sylvia F Boj, Johan H Van Es, Vivian SW Li, Marc Van De Wetering,
 Toshiro Sato, Karien Hamer, Nobuo Sasaki, Milton J Finegold, et al. In vitro expansion of single
 lgr5+ liver stem cells induced by wnt-driven regeneration. Nature, 494(7436):247–250, 2013.
E M Izhikevich. Spike-timing dynamics of neuronal groups. Cereb. Cortex, 14(8):933–944, 2004.
Brett J Kagan, Andy C Kitchen, Nhi T Tran, Forough Habibollahi, Moein Khajehnejad, Bradyn J
  Parker, Anjali Bhat, Ben Rollo, Adeel Razi, and Karl J Friston. In vitro neurons learn and exhibit
  sentience when embodied in a simulated game-world. Neuron, 110(23):3952–3969, 2022.
Youngeun Kim, Yuhang Li, Hyoungseob Park, Yeshwanth Venkatesha, and Priyadarshini Panda.
  Neural architecture search for spiking neural networks. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 36–56. Springer, 2022.
Wolfgang Maass. Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models.
 Neural networks, 10(9):1659–1671, 1997.
Nick Marotta, Soojin Kim, and Dimitri Krainc. Organoid and pluripotent stem cells in parkinson’s
  disease modeling: an expert view on their value to drug discovery. Expert opinion on drug
  discovery, 15(4):427–441, 2020.
Ştefan Mihalaş and Ernst Niebur. A generalized linear integrate-and-fire neural model produces
   diverse spiking behaviors. Neural computation, 21(3):704–718, 2009.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Keiko Muguruma, Ayaka Nishiyama, Hideshi Kawakami, Kouichi Hashimoto, and Yoshiki Sasai.
  Self-organization of polarized cerebellar tissue in 3d culture of human pluripotent stem cells. Cell
  reports, 10(4):537–550, 2015.

Chikafumi Ozone, Hidetaka Suga, Mototsugu Eiraku, Taisuke Kadoshima, Shigenobu Yonemura,
  Nozomu Takata, Yutaka Oiso, Takashi Tsuji, and Yoshiki Sasai. Functional anterior pituitary
  generated in self-organizing culture of human embryonic stem cells. Nature communications, 7
  (1):10351, 2016.

Federico Paredes-Vallés, Kirk Y. W. Scheper, and Guido C. H. E. de Croon. Unsupervised learning
  of a hierarchical spiking neural network for optical flow estimation: From events to global motion
  perception. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 42(8):2051–2064,
  2020. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2903179.

Anca M Paşca, Steven A Sloan, Laura E Clarke, Yuan Tian, Christopher D Makinson, Nina Huber,
  Chul Hoon Kim, Jin-Young Park, Nancy A O’rourke, Khoa D Nguyen, et al. Functional cortical
  neurons and astrocytes from human pluripotent stem cells in 3d culture. Nature methods, 12(7):
  671–678, 2015.

Xuyu Qian, Ha Nam Nguyen, Mingxi M Song, Christopher Hadiono, Sarah C Ogden, Christy Ham-
  mack, Bing Yao, Gregory R Hamersky, Fadi Jacob, Chun Zhong, et al. Brain-region-specific
  organoids using mini-bioreactors for modeling zikv exposure. Cell, 165(5):1238–1254, 2016.

Hideya Sakaguchi, Taisuke Kadoshima, Mika Soen, Nobuhiro Narii, Yoshihito Ishida, Masatoshi
  Ohgushi, Jun Takahashi, Mototsugu Eiraku, and Yoshiki Sasai. Generation of functional hip-
  pocampal neurons from self-organizing human embryonic stem cell-derived dorsomedial telen-
  cephalic tissue. Nature communications, 6(1):8896, 2015.

Andrew W Senior, Richard Evans, John Jumper, James Kirkpatrick, Laurent Sifre, Tim Green,
  Chongli Qin, Augustin Žı́dek, Alexander WR Nelson, Alex Bridgland, et al. Improved protein
  structure prediction using potentials from deep learning. Nature, 577(7792):706–710, 2020.

Lena Smirnova, Brian S Caffo, David H Gracias, Qi Huang, Itzy E Morales Pantoja, Bohao Tang,
  Donald J Zack, Cynthia A Berlinicke, J Lomax Boyd, Timothy D Harris, et al. Organoid intelli-
  gence (oi): the new frontier in biocomputing and intelligence-in-a-dish. Frontiers in Science, pp.
  0, 2023.

Jason R Spence, Christopher N Mayhew, Scott A Rankin, Matthew F Kuhar, Jefferson E Vallance,
  Kathryn Tolle, Elizabeth E Hoskins, Vladimir V Kalinichenko, Susanne I Wells, Aaron M Zorn,
  et al. Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue in vitro. Nature,
  470(7332):105–109, 2011.

Corinne Teeter, Ramakrishnan Iyer, Vilas Menon, Nathan Gouwens, David Feng, Jim Berg, Aaron
  Szafer, Nicholas Cain, Hongkui Zeng, Michael Hawrylycz, et al. Generalized leaky integrate-
  and-fire models classify multiple neuron types. Nature communications, 9(1):709, 2018.

James A Thomson, Joseph Itskovitz-Eldor, Sander S Shapiro, Michelle A Waknitz, Jennifer J
  Swiergiel, Vivienne S Marshall, and Jeffrey M Jones. Embryonic stem cell lines derived from
  human blastocysts. science, 282(5391):1145–1147, 1998.

Sujith Vijayan and Nancy J Kopell. Thalamic model of awake alpha oscillations and implications
  forstimulus processing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 109(45):18553–18558, 2012.

Holly K Voges, Richard J Mills, David A Elliott, Robert G Parton, Enzo R Porrello, and James E
  Hudson. Development of a human cardiac organoid injury model reveals innate regenerative
  potential. Development, 144(6):1118–1127, 2017.

Chaoming Wang, Xiaoyu Chen, Tianqiu Zhang, and Si Wu. Brainpy: a flexible, integrative, efficient,
  and extensible framework towards general-purpose brain dynamics programming. bioRxiv, 2022.
  doi: 10.1101/2022.10.28.514024. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2022/10/28/2022.10.28.514024.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. nature, 393
  (6684):440–442, 1998.
Dan C Wilkinson, Jackelyn A Alva-Ornelas, Jennifer MS Sucre, Preethi Vijayaraj, Abdo Durra,
  Wade Richardson, Steven J Jonas, Manash K Paul, Saravanan Karumbayaram, Bruce Dunn, et al.
  Development of a three-dimensional bioengineering technology to generate lung tissue for per-
  sonalized disease modeling. Stem cells translational medicine, 6(2):622–633, 2017.
Mengjuan Xu, Xiang Chen, Antong Sun, Xu Zhang, and Xun Chen. A novel event-driven spiking
 convolutional neural network for electromyography pattern recognition. IEEE Transactions on
 Biomedical Engineering, 2023.
Man Yao, Guangshe Zhao, Hengyu Zhang, Yifan Hu, Lei Deng, Yonghong Tian, Bo Xu, and Guoqi
 Li. Attention spiking neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13929, 2022.
Man Yao, Jiakui Hu, Zhaokun Zhou, Li Yuan, Yonghong Tian, Bo Xu, and Guoqi Li. Spike-driven
 transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01694, 2023.
Honghui Zheng, Yilin Feng, Jiyuan Tang, and Shaohua Ma. Interfacing brain organoids with preci-
  sion medicine and machine learning. Cell Reports Physical Science, 3(7), 2022.
Yaoyu Zhu, Zhaofei Yu, Wei Fang, Xiaodong Xie, Tiejun Huang, and Timothée Masquelier. Train-
  ing spiking neural networks with event-driven backpropagation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:30528–30541, 2022.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     P RELIMINARIES

A.1.1    G ENERALIZED I NTEGRATE - AND -F IRE N EURON

In the realm of bionic computational modeling for neurons, numerous models have been proposed,
including the Hodgkin-Huxley (H-H), Morris-Lecar , Izhikevich, Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF)
and others. Different models have different emphases, for example, H-H model focuses on ion
channel modeling, and LIF model focuses on release mode reduction and computational simplicity.
In our framework, the focus for neurons is on precise spike delivery and accommodating various
delivery modes (e.g. burst, bistability, etc), rather than specific ion channels. For this reason, we
opt for the Generalized Integrate-and-Fire model as the neuron component within the framework.
This model offers a detailed representation of spike delivery while striking a balance between per-
formance and computational complexity. Specifically, we use the scheme of (Mihalaş & Niebur,
2009) and (Teeter et al., 2018), which can be described as:
                                   dIj (t)
                                           = −kj Ij (t);   j ∈ [1, N ]                               (6)
                                     dt

                          dV (t)  1        X
                                 = (RI + R   Ij (t) − (V (t) − Vrest ))                              (7)
                           dt     τ        j


                          dVth (t)
                                   = a(V (t) − Vrest ) − b(Vth (t) − Vth∞ )                          (8)
                            dt
where V is membrane potential, Vth is instantaneous threshold, Vrest is resting potential, R is Mem-
brane resistance, Ij are an arbitrary number of internal currents and I is external current. kj , τ, a, b
are control arguments respectively. Once V exceeds the threshold Vth , a spike will be fired. Mean-
while, V will be reset to the resting potential Vreset , Vth will follow Vth = max(Vthreset , Vth )
where Vthreset is reset threshold, and Ij (t) will be defined as Ij (t) = Rj × Ij (t) + Aj where Aj is
constant parameter.

A.1.2    AMPA SYNAPSES

In bionic computational modeling of synapses, they are primarily categorized into two main types
based on information transmission: chemical synapses and electrical synapses. Electrical synapses
exhibit high speed transmission but lack regulation and have limited information transmission capac-
ity. Conversely, chemical synapses are more flexible and their plasticity contributes to explaining the
mechanisms of learning and memory within the nervous system to some extent. Hence, establish-
ing a simulation framework using chemical synapses is essential. Two common chemical synaptic
models are based on the AMPA receptor and the NMDA receptor. Since AMPA receptors have a
fast response, making them more suitable for our framework implementation, we opt for the AMPA
receptor model as the foundational synaptic model for the framework. Specifically, we adopt the
approach employed by (Vijayan & Kopell, 2012):
                                      dg
                                         = α[Glu](1 − g) − βg                                        (9)
                                      dt

                                           I = Gg(V − E)                                            (10)
where g represents the concentration of AMPA receptors (which, to some extent, also represents the
probability of channel opening), α signifies the binding rate constant between AMPA receptors and
glutamic acid, while β represents the dissociation rate constant. [Glu] represents the concentration
of the external neurotransmitter. Under normal circumstances, it is considered to be a hopping pro-
cess. When the presynaptic neuron firing, it immediately changes to T0 , and continues for Tdur and
then quickly changes to 0. I represents the postsynaptic current (PSC), G stands for the maximum
conductance, V denotes the postsynaptic neuron membrane potential, and E represents the reversal
potential.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.1.3     S MALL - WORLD NETWORK
Small-world network (Watts & Strogatz, 1998) is a distinctive type of complex network that is preva-
lent in reality and holds substantial practical significance. Specifically, after extensive research, it
is observed that many large-scale neural networks within the brain, including those in the visual
system and the brain stem, exhibit the characteristics of a small-world topology. Furthermore, at the
level of computational modeling, small-world networks exhibit favorable short-term memory char-
acteristics. Hence, in comparison to other topological structures like complete graph networks and
probabilistic connection networks, the small-world network possesses greater biological relevance
and practical significance, making it a superior choice for the network structure of this framework.
In terms of the small-world network, it is characterized by:

      1) Build a regular ring lattice with N nodes, each connected to K neighbors.
      2) Reconnect each edge of each node in sequential order with a probability of p and randomly
         select the target nodes for reconnection.

A.2     EVALUATION METRICS

To assess the similarity between real-world organoid data and simulation framework results, we
propose evaluation metrics from different perspective.
From the perspective of mathematical analysis:

        • For matrix analysis, we regard the spikes recorded by MEA within 10s as a 100 x 64
          matrix. Here, the 100 dimensions represent time, and the 64 dimensions correspond to 64
          O/S nodes. Consequently, the primary focus lies in analyzing the crucial characteristics of
          these matrices. If these crucial characteristics are similar, it demonstrates a strong similarity
          between real-world organoid data and simulation framework results. In matrix analysis,
          there are two classical approaches for extracting features: Singular Value Decomposition
          (SVD) and QR decomposition. For SVD, it can be expressed as:
                                                    A = U ΣV T
          where U and V matrices are SVD results, which can be met by computing the eigenvalues
          and eigenvectors of AAT . For QR decomposition, it can be expressed as:
                                              Am×n = Qm×n Rn×n
          where Q is a standard orthogonal vector group matrix and R is a positive upper triangu-
          lar matrix. We can use Schmidt orthogonalization to get Q and use R = QT A to get R.
          Simultaneously, we extract and compare the spectral norm which provides a numerical rep-
          resentation of the similarity between real-world organoid data and simulation framework
          results. Spectral norm is the largest singular value in SVD.
        • From a statistical perspective, certain key statistics provide insights into the overall char-
          acteristics of real-world organoid experiment data and results of the simulation framework,
          including measures such as mean and variance. When they are substantially similar, these
          statistics can also imply some degree of similarity. In this context, we examine the firing
          rates of all O/S nodes over the entire 10-second period. We count the spikes and divide it by
          the total time. We also calculate the mean and variance for the timestamps of spikes firing
          of each O/S node, as well as determine the maximum and minimum firing intervals, which
          reflect the activity levels of neurons. We record the timestamp of each spike and calculate
          the mean and variance, which helps in depicting the overall spike distribution throughout
          the entire time period. Simultaneously, for each O/S node’s timestamps, we compute both
          the maximum and minimum firing intervals and then calculate the average. This provides
          insights into the total neuronal excitability. These statistical analyses allow us to evaluate
          the similarity from a statistical standpoint.

From a bionics perspective, we introduce three metrics to assess the bionic characteristics of this
framework. These metrics include: (i) Extensive Resting State. It refers to the observation that
neuron clusters spend most of their time in a resting state. This behavior is the natural resting state
observed in biological systems. (ii) Correlation spikes. This metric focuses on the generation of


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


spikes as a result of interactions with other spikes, rather than spontaneous generation. (ii) Hebb
Learning Rule (Hebb, 1949). The Hebb learning rule suggests that when one neuron repeatedly
stimulates another neuron, the connection strength between them enhance. This rule is widely found
in existing biological systems.

A.3   HYPERPARAMTERS

Regarding certain crucial hyperparameters in the experiment, we provide explanations for each of
them below:

      • In the GIF model, τ governs the scale of change in neuron membrane potential. A large
        value for τ signifies a small growth rate of the membrane potential, which is evident in the
        dynamic equation of the GIF neuron model.
      • α controls the rate of change in synaptic conductance. In biological terms, it represents the
        binding rate of the AMPA receptor to glutamic acid. In this framework, a larger α value
        implies that AMPA synapses will require more time to stabilize.
      • β also controls the rate of change in synaptic conductance. In contrast, in biological terms,
        it represents the unbinding rate of the AMPA receptor to glutamic acid. In this framework,
        a larger β value implies that AMPA synapses can stabilize more quickly. Besides, it’s
        imperative that α is greater than β.
      • T dur plays a crucial role in governing the growth scale of AMPA neurons from a state of
        rest to stability. A larger T dur leads to more stable AMPA usage.
      • K represents the number of synapses connected from one neuron to adjacent neurons when
        constructing the small-world connection. In fact, it reflects the sparseness of the network.
        A larger K will result in a denser network.
      • delay signifies the magnitude of network weight attenuation. An appropriate delay can
        help the model to fit faster. If delay is set to be too large, the synaptic weight in the model
        will be excessively low. Furthermore, if there is reduced neural activity in the network,
        meaning fewer spikes are released, the network will deteriorate rapidly. In such a scenario,
        the weight of each synapse will decrease swiftly, ultimately leading to the ”deactivation” of
        all neurons. When the parameter delay is set to be too small, it may not effectively suppress
        the weight increase caused by STDP. Conversely, if the weight increasing is too large, it can
        result in high-intensity network activity. In extreme cases, every neuron may continuously
        release spikes, which is clearly contrary to the real-world organoid mechanisms.
      • sim T represents the duration of a simulation. In the training set, this data essentially
        corresponds to the time required for STDP to learn. Selecting an appropriate value for
        sim T is crucial. If it is set too small, STDP may not learn enough features, resulting in
        poor results. On the other hand, if it is set too large, delay may not be sufficient to restrain
        the increase in STDP weight, which results in excessive synaptic weight growth within the
        network.

In simulation intelligent evaluation, we use the 2D and 3D models described above (Section 4).
We employed 57x57 neurons to create a two-dimensional plane, while also evenly selecting 28x28
neurons to serve as O/S nodes. For 3D model, it is essentially a 2D model with two layers. Further-
more, the layers are interconnected by small-world connection. In terms of intensity encoding, we
first normalize the gray value of the image and then encode it using Imax = 64.


                                                  15
