Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS C ODABLE WATERMARKING FOR I NJECTING
M ULTI -B ITS I NFORMATION TO LLM S
 Lean Wang∗ †,§ , Wenkai Yang∗‡,§ , Deli Chen∗¶ ,
 Hao Zhou§ , Yankai Lin‡ , Fandong Meng§ , Jie Zhou§ , Xu Sun†
 †
   National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
   School of Computer Science, Peking University
 ‡
   Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
 §
   Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
 ¶
   DeepSeek AI
 {lean, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, victorchen@deepseek.com
 {wenkaiyang, yankailin}@ruc.edu.cn
 {tuxzhou, fandongmeng, withtomzhou}@tencent.com



                                            A BSTRACT
           As large language models (LLMs) generate texts with increasing fluency and real-
           ism, there is a growing need to identify the source of texts to prevent the abuse
           of LLMs. Text watermarking techniques have proven reliable in distinguish-
           ing whether a text is generated by LLMs by injecting hidden patterns. How-
           ever, we argue that existing LLM watermarking methods are encoding-inefficient
           and cannot flexibly meet the diverse information encoding needs (such as en-
           coding model version, generation time, user id, etc.). In this work, we con-
           duct the first systematic study on the topic of Codable Text Watermarking for
           LLMs (CTWL) that allows text watermarks to carry multi-bit customizable in-
           formation. First of all, we study the taxonomy of LLM watermarking technolo-
           gies and give a mathematical formulation for CTWL. Additionally, we provide
           a comprehensive evaluation system for CTWL: (1) watermarking success rate,
           (2) robustness against various corruptions, (3) coding rate of payload informa-
           tion, (4) encoding and decoding efficiency, (5) impacts on the quality of the gen-
           erated text. To meet the requirements of these non-Pareto-improving metrics,
           we follow the most prominent vocabulary partition-based watermarking direc-
           tion, and devise an advanced CTWL method named Balance-Marking. The core
           idea of our method is to use a proxy language model to split the vocabulary into
           probability-balanced parts, thereby effectively maintaining the quality of the wa-
           termarked text. Extensive experimental results show that our method outperforms
           the baseline under comprehensive evaluation. Our code is available at https:
           //github.com/lancopku/codable-watermarking-for-llm.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, with the explosive development of Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022; Tou-
vron et al., 2023), there has been growing concern in the community about the potential negative
effects of the AI-generated content (AIGC). For instance, LLMs could be exploited to produce fake
news, encyclopedia entries, or academic papers. Hence, there is an urgent need to reliably distin-
guish between human-written and AI-generated texts.
Text watermarking (Jalil & Mirza, 2009; Venugopal et al., 2011) aims to inject hidden patterns
into the generated text, and detect the specific patterns to determine the source of text. The most
representative line of LLM watermarking methods (Kirchen. et al., 2023a; Lee et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023) injects the watermark by controlling the available part of the vocabulary during LLM’s
decoding process and can detect whether a text contains a watermark with high accuracy and low
false positive rate. However, we argue that these existing LLM watermarking methods encode too
    ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Taxonomy of LLM watermarking technologies, with a representative work of each direc-
tion attached. It can be found that existing LLM watermarking methods either do not make full use
of the generation ability of LLMs, or lack customized watermarking information. Our work simul-
taneously addresses both of these issues, filling the gap in this line of academic research.

   Watermark                                       Watermark Injection Timing
   Information          Post-process after LLM Generation                    Integrate with LLM Generation
     One-Bit     Black-Box Watermarking (Yang et al., 2023b)        LLM Watermarking (Kirchen. et al., 2023a)
    Multi-Bits   Natual Language Watermarking (Yoo et al., 2023a)   Codable Text Watermarking for LLMs (This Work)


limited information (only 1 bit of information - whether the text is generated by one specific model
or not), and can not satisfy the increasing demand for customizing information in the application
of LLMs (for example, embedding model and version information in the watermark can effectively
trace the source of a text among multiple LLMs, etc.).
Present Work. We conducted the first systematic study on the topic of Codable Text Watermarking
for LLMs (CTWL), which allows the watermark injected into LLM-generated text to carry more
customizable information. First and foremost, given the fact that the boundary and definition of
CTWL remain unclear, we start with a taxonomy study on watermarking technologies (Section 2)
and then give a mathematical formalization of the CTWL problem (Section 3). Then, we propose a
comprehensive evaluation system for CTWL (Appendix C), which consists of the following 5 crite-
ria: (1) Success Rate: the LLM watermarking method should have high success rates of recovering
message from watermarked texts and distinguishing between human-written and watermarked ones.
(2) Robustness: the watermarking method should remain a high success rate when facing different
challenging attacks (such as copy-paste attack, substitution attack, etc.). (3) Coding Rate: the ratio
of text token number to information bit number should be high. (4) Computational Complexity:
the computation cost of watermark writing and decoding should meet the practical hardware and
latency requirements. (5) Text Quality: the impact of adding complex watermark patterns on the
quality of generated texts should be minimal.
Therefore, devising a practically applicable CTWL method is a challenging task, since it is difficult
to make Pareto improvements in these conflicting metrics. In this work, we first extend the random
vocabulary splitting idea from Kirchen. et al. (2023a), and devise the Vanilla-Marking method to
encode a multi-bit message in watermark. However, this naive baseline perform poorly in maintain-
ing generated text quality, since multi-bit watermark is more complex than one-bit watermark, thus
injecting multi-bit watermark causes a greater impact on the text quality.
To overcome this challenge, and inspired by the idea that a probability-balanced vocabulary partition
can more effectively ensure the quality of the watermarked text, we devise an advanced CTWL
method named Balance-Marking. Specifically, we leverage a proxy language model (proxy-LM)
to guide the vocabulary partitioning instead of random splitting, ensuring that the probabilities of the
available/unavailable parts are close to 50-50. This balance partition avoids the excessive impact of
watermark on text quality caused by random vocabulary splitting(e.g. most high-probability tokens
are in the unavailable part). Also, this mechanism implicitly helps the watermark algorithm to skip
low-entropy segments of text, which further ensures the text quality. Moreover, we can achieve a
flexible and customizable watermarking algorithm deployment for different LLM application scenes
by switching the proxy-LM. For example, we can take a small language model as the proxy-LM to
ensure a higher inference efficiency; we can take a public language model as the proxy-LM and
achieve an open watermarking protocol among different LLM providers without the leakage of the
LLMs. 1 Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the Balance-Marking method surpasses the
Vanilla-Marking method across different sizes of LLMs (OPT-1.3B (Zhang et al., 2022), LLaMA-
7B and LLaMA-13B (Touvron et al., 2023)). Additional experiments are performed to assess the
influence of crucial modules within our approach. Furthermore, we analyze the application scenarios
of CTWL and potential avenues for future research.


   1
     A more detailed discussion on the application scenarios of codable text watermark and the selection of
proxy language models is presented in the Appendix D.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       R ELATED W ORK

The current studies on identifying LLM-generated texts can be mainly divided into two categories:
detecting-based (introduced in Appendix A) and watermarking-based methods. The watermarking-
based method has proven more effective and reliable Sadasivan et al. (2023) and we focus on
the watermarking-based method. Text watermarking technology marks text by injecting human-
invisible hidden patterns into the text, and then determines the text source by detecting whether the
text contains a watermark (Jalil & Mirza, 2009; Venugopal et al., 2011; Abdelnabi & Fritz, 2021;
Yang et al., 2022). We analyze the taxonomy of LLM watermarking methods in Table 1. LLM
watermarking techniques can be categorized into two types according to the point of watermark
insertion: (1) Integrated into the model generation process (Kirchen. et al., 2023a), and (2) Post-
processing after text generation (Yoo et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2023b). Post-processing methods are
independent of LLMs and they usually utilize masked language models (MLMs) (e.g. BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019)) to replace tokens with synonyms. Both one-bit Yang
et al. (2023b) or multi-bits Yoo et al. (2023a) information can be injected in this manner. However,
we argue that post-processing methods are not as effective as integrating methods for generating
high-quality watermarked texts, since they do not take advantage of the generative power of LLMs.
Moreover, replacement-based methods can only operate individual tokens and cannot adaptively
change the subsequent generation sequence like integrating methods.
The most representative integrating watermarking technique for LLMs is proposed by Kirchen. et al.
(2023a), which watermarks the LLM-generated text by manipulating the available part of the vocab-
ulary. Following Kirchen. et al. (2023a), several studies explore effective text watermarking in
various scenarios. Kirchen. et al. (2023b) later improves this method by exploring diverse choices
of random seed generators for splitting the vocabulary. Lee et al. (2023) takes a step further to
actively select high entropy tokens to watermark instead of all tokens, which is shown to be more
effective in the code detection task. Zhao et al. (2023) simplify the watermark method of Kirchen.
et al. (2023a) by making the vocabulary splitting independent of the previously generated tokens
and only dependent on a global key. However, all these methods generate watermarks that only con-
tain 1 bit of information, which cannot meet the need to inject watermarks with diverse customized
information. There are some very concurrent works (Yoo et al., 2023b; Fernandez et al., 2023) that
focus on this problem. These methods still follow the random vocabulary partition (Kirchen. et al.,
2023a), posing an unignorable threat to the quality of generated text caused by the multi-bits wa-
termark. In contrast, our Balance-Marking method can effectively maintain the text quality after
injecting complex messages by balancing the probability distribution of the vocabulary partitions.


3       M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATION OF C ODABLE LLM WATERMARKING

3.1       N OTATIONS AND P RELIMINARIES

Here, we first introduce the necessary notations used in this paper. Assume there is a large lan-
guage model LLM that takes a prompt sequence xprompt as the input and sequentially outputs the
corresponding tokens to form natural sentences as the response. At l-th step (l = 1, 2, · · · , L),
the entire input for LLM is the combination of the original prompt xprompt and the sequence
of tokens t:(l−1) = {t0 , · · · , tl−1 } that is already predicted by LLM in previous steps.2 Then,
LLM produces a probability distribution over the entire vocabulary V as PLLM (xprompt , t:(l−1) ) =
(· · · , PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ), · · · ), in which PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ) is the predicted probabil-
ity of a specific token v by LLM . The next token tl is sampled based on PLLM (xprompt , t:(l−1) )
according to specific sampling rules, such as multinomial sampling or greedy sampling.

3.2       F ORMULATION OF C ODABLE T EXT WATERMARKING

In this paper, we propose the concept of codable text watermarking for LLMs (CTWL) that can
encode rich and necessary information into the text watermarks, in order to satisfy the multiple
demands on the realistic application of LLMs. Formally, CTWL can be formulated as a message

    2
        In the first step, there is no previously generated token, thus define t0 is none.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


encoding stage with a message decoding/extracting stage:
                                Encoding:             P × M → T , Enc(xprompt , m) = t,
                                                                                                                        (1)
                                Decoding:             T → M, Dec(t) = m,
where P, T and M represents the prompt space, text space, and message space separately, m ∈ M
is the message that needs to be encoded. Thus, one-bit watermarking methods can be considered as
a simplified case of CTWL, where the message space only contains {0, 1}. Following the definition
in Eq. (1), the target on decoding messages from t can be written as
                                                      m = arg max Pw (m′ |t),                                           (2)
                                                            m′ ∈M
where we need to design a specific probability function Pw referred to as message function (refer
to Section 4.2.) to measure how likely is that the watermarked message is m′ given t.
Therefore, according to Bayes Formula, in the message encoding phase, it is equivalent to achieve3
                   max{Pw (t|m)/ max
                                  ′
                                     Pw (t|m′ )}
                     t                      m ̸=m
                                      L
                                      X                                            L
                                                                                   X                                    (3)
                    ⇐⇒ max{                 log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                                        ′
                                                                                         log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )}.
                                t                                          m ̸=m
                                      l=1                                          l=1
That is, we aim to enlarge the gap between the probability that the text t is generated under message
m and the probability that it is generated under other m′ .4 However, as we can see, the above
equation only considers the target of effectively hiding message m into t, but does not take the
quality of the generated text into consideration. Thus, we take the original text generated without
embedded watermarks tori as a baseline for comparison, and reformulate the encoding phase as:
                                L
                                X                                            L
                                                                             X
                         max{         log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                                  ′
                                                                                   log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )},
                            t
                                l=1
                                                                  m ̸=m
                                                                          l=1
                                                                                                                        (4)
                                             prompt            ori     prompt
                         s.t.   PPL(t|x               ) ≤ PPL(t       |x           ) + ϵ.
Here, we utilize the perplexity (PPL) metric to measure the quality of the generated text, with the
aim of ensuring the watermarked text maintains a similar quality to the text without watermarks.

4       BALANCE -M ARKING : A S IMPLE YET E FFECTIVE CTWL M ETHOD
In this section, we first present an approximation algorithm to solve Eq. (4) in Section 4.1, which
serves as a general encoding algorithm for any predefined Pw . Then, we introduce two designs of Pw
in Section 4.2 as unified guidelines to encode and decode messages. Finally, given the pre-defined
encoding algorithm and Pw , the message extracting can be performed as presented in Section 4.3.

4.1         A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CODABLE WATERMARK ENCODING

In order to solve the constrained optimization problem in Eq. (4), we are motivated to apply
the method of Lagrange Multipliers by introducing a dual variable λ and turn it into an uncon-
strained optimization problem. Furthermore, assume that the PPL scores in Eq. (4) are calcu-
lated based on the same LLM used to generate t,5 given the prompt xprompt and LLM , the term
PPLLLM (tori |xprompt ) can be regarded as a constant. Therefore, the target can be rephrased as:3
            L
            X
    max           {log PLLM (tl |xprompt , t:(l−1) ) + δ(log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − log Pw (tl |m̂, t:(l−1) )},
        t
            l=1
                                                                                                      (5)
                                                                             1
                                                                            −L               L
where we use PPL(t|xprompt ) = [ΠL     l=1 P LLM (t l |x prompt
                                                                , t:(l−1) )]   , and set δ = λ and m̂  =
             L
               log P (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) ).
             P
argmaxm′ ̸=m
                      l=1
    3
      The detailed derivations can be found in Appendix B.
    4
      We take the form of division in Eq. (3) in order to successfully derive the optimization target to Eq. (5).
    5
      This assumption is practical as the LLM is powerful enough to accurately measure the perplexity of a text.


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: A General Message Encoding Framework for A Settled Pw
Input: Language model LLM , prompt xprompt , message m, watermarking weight δ
for l = 1, · · · , L do
    1. Calculate log PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) )} for each v in the vocabulary using LLM ;
    2. Calculate log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) based on the settled Pw ;
    3. Select tl = arg max {log PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ) + δ(log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) −
                         v
       1
                    log Pw (v|m′ , t:(l−1) )}
             P
      |M|
          m′ ∈M
end
Output: watermarked text t = {t1 , t2 , · · · , tL }


Eq. (5) motivates us that in order to encode m into t, we can manipulate the output logits dur-
ing each token’s generation by adding a term δ(log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − log Pw (tl |m̂, t:(l−1) ))
to the original log logits. However, in practice, solving m̂ is infeasible because the true
m̂ can only be solved after the whole output t is determined, while we need to calculate
δ(log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − log Pw (tl |m̂, t:(l−1) ) in each generation step according to Eq. (5).
                                                                  1                        ′
                                                                     P
Therefore, we replace log Pw (tl |m̂, t:(l−1) ) with calculable |M|     m′ ∈M log Pw (tl |m , t:(l−1) ) as
an alternative, and finally get the message encoding object function in each generation step as:
           L(m, xprompt , t:(l−1) ) = max{log PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) )
                                       v  |           {z               }
                                                           model logit
                                                             1 X                                          (6)
                           + δ(log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) −              log Pw (v|m′ , t:(l−1) )},
                                                            |M| ′
                                                                m ∈M
                                 |                            {z                          }
                                                           message logit

where we denote the first term in the right as the model logit, which is determined by the LLM
only; we denote the second additional term as the message logit, which is the key component for
encoding message m into t.
As we can see, as long as the function Pw is well-defined, the encoding process can be completed
by adding the message logits to the model logits and sampling the token based on the new logits.
We put the general message encoding procedure in Algorithm 1,6 and will discuss how to properly
design Pw in detail in the next section.

4.2     T HE D ESIGN OF MESSAGE FUNCTION Pw

In the above section, we present a general encoding algorithm for an arbitrary Pw . In the following,
we will introduce two designs of Pw as our preliminary attempts toward CTWL.

4.2.1    VANILLA Pw FOR R ANDOM VOCABULARY PARTITION
According to Eq. (6), a high value of L(m, xprompt , t:(l−1) ) relies on the existence of a v with a high
message logit. In other words, there should be a v for which log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) greatly surpasses
the mean. To achieve this, one natural idea is to ensure that the distribution Pw (m, t:(l−1) ) =
(Pw (v1 |m, t:(l−1) ), Pw (v2 |m, t:(l−1) ), · · · , Pw (v|V| |m, t)) varies greatly across distinct messages.
In this way, for a message m, there would at least exist a v whose log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) deviates
                        1                             ′
                           P
far from the mean |M|         m′ ∈M log Pw (v|m , t:(l−1) ), thereby resulting in a high message logit.
To ensure such differences in Pw (m, t:(l−1) ) with different m, we can assign random values for
Pw (m, t:(l−1) ) based on the random seeds directly decided by their own m:

                                                          1, h(v, m, t:(l−1) ) = 1,
                           log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) =                                                       (7)
                                                          0, h(v, m, t:(l−1) ) = 0.
   6
     Though we employ a greedy search as the text generation algorithm in Algorithm 1 for example, our
framework is also compatible with other generation rules such as beam search.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2: Algorithm of Choosing Subset Vm,t:(l−1) (Practical Version in Red)
Input: Message m, text prefix t:(l−1) , language model LLM , proxy-LM LMproxy ,
           MA = {1, · · · , A}, hash functions h and ĥ.
1. Calculate a seed s = h(m, t:(l−1) ), or s = h(ĥ(m), t:(l−1) ) where ĥ maps m to
 ĥ(m) ∈ MA ;
2. Shuffle the vocab list (v1 , · · · , v|V| ) to (v1′ , · · · , v|V|
                                                                  ′
                                                                      ) with the seed s;
3. Select the first k tokens in the shuffled list so that k is the minimal value to make
 {v1′ , · · · , vk′ } satisfy Eq. (9) or Eq. (11).
Output: Vm,t:(l−1) = {v1′ , · · · , vk′ }


                                                        P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) )
                          log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) = log P                      .                    (8)
                                                          P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) )
                                                         v
In the above, h denotes a hash function that maps the input (v, m, t:(l−1) ) to either 0 or 1. This can
be considered as a vanilla extension from the soft watermarking method in Kirchen. et al. (2023a)
by further taking m into consideration, thus we denote it as Vanilla-Marking.

4.2.2   LMproxy - AIDED Pw FOR BALANCE VOCABULARY PARTITION
The message function Pw proposed in Section 4.2.1 has a problem that it does not guarantee that
the same v can also have a high model logit at the same time. This could potentially result in a
small sum of the model logit and the message logit. Therefore, we argue that a more advanced Pw
should produce a v with both a high model logit and a message logit.
To accomplish this, we are motivated to utilize the model logit distribution PLLM (xprompt , t:(l−1) )
as prior knowledge, and pre-select a subset of tokens that is likely to contain some tokens with high
model logits in advance. Then, we assign high message logits to the tokens in the above subset,
ensuring the existence of a token v with both a high model logit and message logit. Formally, we
propose Algorithm 2 to randomly choose the subset Vm,t:(l−1) that satisfies the following condition:
                                X
                                        PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ) ≥ σ,                          (9)
                             v∈Vm,t:(l−1)

where σ is a controllable threshold. W set σ = 0.5 in the following paper unless otherwise stated, be-
cause we believe that balancing the probability accumulations of tokens within and out of Vm,t:(l−1)
can achieve the maximal diversity of Vm,t:(l−1) w.r.t. different m. The reason why we design Al-
gorithm 2 in such a way is, the case when all {PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) )|v ∈ Vm,t:(l−1) } values
tend to be small, yet still sum to σ, is very unlikely to occur. Thus, there should always be some
PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ) that is relatively large to make the summation exceed the threshold. Ad-
ditionally, introducing randomness in the selection process of Vm,t:(l−1) can enlarge the difference
in Vm,t:(l−1) among different messages m, which plays the same role as that in Vanilla-Marking.
After getting Vm,t:(l−1) , we assign the message logits by following Eq.( 8) but modifying Eq. (7) as
                                                       (
                                                        1, v ∈ Vm,t:(l−1) ,
                             log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) =                                           (10)
                                                        0, v ̸∈ Vm,t:(l−1) .

Also, we make some specific improvements to make our method more practical in various scenarios.
We summarize these strategies briefly here, and put the detailed illustrations in Appendix F: (1)
We omit xprompt and truncate t:(l−1) to a fixed-length t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) for consistency during
both encoding and decoding. (2) To make our method applicable in various scenarios discussed
in Appendix D, we broaden the LLM used in PLLM (v|t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) ) into a general proxy
model denoted as LMproxy , and modify the condition in Eq. (9) to:
                           X
                                  PLMproxy (v|t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) ) ≥ σ.                     (11)
                         v∈Vm,t:(l−1)



                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(3) For efficient encoding and decoding on the entire message space, we opt to first map the entire
message space into a smaller space as m → ĥ(m) ∈ MA = {1, · · · , A}7 by using another hash
function ĥ, and then compute the seed s as s = h(ĥ(m), x:(l−1) ).
The practical version of the above LMproxy -aided watermarking method is specially highlighted in
red in Algorithm 2. Given that it employs a probability-balanced vocabulary partition, we refer to it
as Balance-Marking.
Here, we briefly discuss about the two advantages that Balance-Marking has compared to Vanilla-
Marking. (1) First, Balance-Marking is more effective in maintaining text quality. That is
because the way of pre-choosing the subset Vm,t:(l−1) ensures that Balance-Marking can find tokens
with both high model logits and message logits, thus making the next generated word more mean-
ingful and reliable. However, Vanilla-Marking, which just randomly selects the available tokens,
might end up with an unreasonable next token. (2) Secondly and interestingly, Balance-Marking
also has the ability to automatically bypass low-entropy sections of the text, which is a property
that Lee et al. (2023) explicitly aims to achieve. For example, if there is only one reasonable token
candidate whose predicted probability by proxy-LM is almost 1.0, then for all messages, this token
would be selected into the available part. In other words, this position in the sequence is implicitly
“skipped” during watermark encoding and decoding, and the decoding process is actually carried
out by comparing the values of Pw under different m on those high-entropy sections of the text.

4.3       M ESSAGE D ECODING

For a settled Pw , the decoding process is conducted by finding a solution to Eq. (2). As per Bayes’
Theorem, this can be rewritten as:

                                                      XL
                    m = arg max Pw (t|m′ ), = arg max{   log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )}.            (12)
                            m′ ∈M                    m′ ∈M
                                                               l=1

Eq. (12) can be computed directly using either Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) for Vanilla-Marking, or Eq. (10)
and Eq. (8) for Balance-Marking. Furthermore, when we need to encode multiple messages into
text, we can sequentially encode each message into one segment of the text (e.g., every 100 tokens
of the text). Then, message decoding can be conducted independently within each segment.


5       E XPERIMENT

5.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Following the experimental settings used by Kirchen. et al. (2023a), we utilize OPT-1.3B (Zhang
et al., 2022) for the generation of texts in main experiments. We also conduct experiments on
LLaMA-7/13B (Touvron et al., 2023) models. Our prompt inputs are derived from the news-like
subset of the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2019). In each experiment, we extract 500 prompt inputs and
truncate them to a uniform length of 300 tokens. The language model is then requested to generate
200 tokens via a 4-way beam search. To mitigate repetition in the generated text, we implement
a repetition penalty of 1.5. We evaluate the quality of the text by perplexity. For OPT-1.3B, we
use OPT-2.3B to calculate perplexity. As for LLaMA-7/13B, we use LLaMA-33B to calculate
perplexity. The evaluation protocol for CTWL is introduced in Appendix C. Besides, a case study is
provided in Appendix K.
As for the LMproxy in Balance-Marking, we opt to use GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019), a well-known,
publicly available, and comparatively smaller language model, which comprises 124M parame-
ters. Additional hyper-parameters used in Balance-Marking are set to the following: A = 100,
Lpref ix = 10, σ = 0.5 and M = {0, 1, ..., 220 − 1}. Here, a message m ∈ M corresponds to
20-bit information. The hash scheme is the same as Kirchen. et al. (2023a). A detailed discussion
is presented in G. Besides, we conduct some approximation for acceleration, which is detailed in
Appendix E.
    7
        For a detailed discussion about the choice of A, refer to Appendix G.2.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-marking under both different coding rates (subfig-
ure a, b) and different attack scenarios (subfigure c, d).


5.2    T HE R ESULTS OF WATERMARK Q UALITY

We experiment with Vanilla-Marking and Balance-Marking by adjusting the parameter δ in Algo-
rithm 1. This parameter helps strike a balance between text quality and watermark success rate.
Higher δ values lead to a stronger watermark but at the expense of text quality. We run tests using
a range of δ values (i.e., {0.5, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.8, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 4.0}) and coding
rates of 10 or 5 tokens per bit to observe the corresponding effects.
Figure 1a and 1b depict the trade-off between text quality, assessed by perplexity, and the success
rate of recovering the embedded watermark. Enhancing the watermark’s success rate tends to ad-
versely affect text quality, and embedding watermarks with a high coding rate of 5 tokens per bit is
particularly challenging. In both cases, Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking, offering
a superior trade-off between text quality and watermark success rate.

5.3    T HE R ESULTS OF ROBUSTNESS TO R EAL - WORLD ATTACKS

In real-world applications, the embedded watermark in a text can be weakened by different types of
attacks. For example, watermarks can be difficult to detect when hidden in human-written texts, a
situation known as Copy-Paste Attacks (Kirchen. et al., 2023b). Moreover, the watermark can be
eroded by actions like word substitution, referred to as Substitution Attacks. In our study, we apply
these attacks to the watermark under a coding rate of 10 tokens per bit.8

Robustness to Copy-paste Attacks. A possible way to use LLM-generated text is to integrate it
into human-written documents. We refer to this as a “Copy-Paste Attack” (Kirchen. et al., 2023b).
This presents a challenge in watermark detection as the location of the watermarked text becomes
unpredictable. To simulate this, we insert a 200-token watermarked text into a 1000-token piece
of human-written text, taken from the C4 dataset. The detection process involves using a slid-
ing window technique (Kirchen. et al., 2023b) and computing Pw (m|xsliding window ).9 To avoid
incorrectly labeling human-written texts as watermarked texts, we set a threshold of 1 − 10−5 .
Any xsliding window with maxm P (m|x) below this threshold will make it be classified as human-
written. Our tests reveal that this threshold successfully prevents mislabeling human-written texts as
watermarked. Figure 1c demonstrates the robustness of both Balance-Marking and Vanilla-Marking
methods against copy-paste attacks, with Balance-Marking maintaining superior performance.

Robustness to Substitution Attacks. In the practical application of model-generated texts, to-
kens may be replaced for editing purposes or to prevent watermark detection. To replicate this, we
employ the RoBERTa-Large (Liu et al., 2019) model to carry out word substitution (see details in
   8
     We omit the case of coding rate of 5 tokens per bit since it makes both watermarks ineffective under attacks.
   9
     Applying Bayes’ Theorem, we know that Pw (m|x) is proportional to Pw (x|m), which can be computed
as explained in Section 4.3. By normalizing Pw (x|m), we obtain Pw (m|x).


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: (a) Trade-off between efficiency and watermark success rate. Specifically, Vanilla-
Marking can be viewed as Balance-Marking with LMproxy = Ø (denoted as “null”). (b) Balance-
Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking in distinguishing between message-embedded and human-
written texts. (c, d) Balance-Marking is still superior to Vanilla-Marking when using LLaMA-7/13B.


Appendix H). Figure 1d illustrates the impact of Substitution Attacks (substitution ratio=5%) on
Vanilla-Marking and Balance-Marking. Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking as under
Copy-Paste Attacks. Experiments with a substitution ratio of 10% are reported in Appendix I.

5.4   F URTHER A NALYSIS

Distinguishing between message-embedded and human-written texts. In practice, it’s very im-
portant to ensure that human-written texts are not wrongly identified as watermarked. To prevent
extracting pseudo messages from human-written texts, we use the same threshold 1−10−5 as in Sec-
tion 5.3. While this threshold guarantees to prevent all human-written texts from being incorrectly
identified, it may also misidentify some watermarked texts as human-written. Figure 2b demon-
strates this by showing both the success rate of correctly distinguishing message-embedded texts
from human-written ones, and the corresponding text quality (the coding rate is 10 tokens per bit).
Still, Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking.

Trade-off between Efficiency and Watermark Quality. The LMproxy introduced in Balance-
Marking brings better watermark quality but also along with extra computational cost. In Figure 2a,
we verify this trade-off between the efficiency and watermark quality when larger LMproxy s are
introduced. Specifically, we can view Vanilla-Marking as a special kind of Balance-Marking with
LMproxy = Ø. We also discussed the LMproxy = LLM case in Appendix G.1

Scaling to larger LLMs. To verify that our watermark algorithm also works for larger LLMs,
we conduct experiments with LLaMA-7/13B (under a coding rate of 10, and a smaller δ set
{0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0} to save computational costs), as shown in Figure 2d. Appendix J also
lists the results with a coding rate of 5. Balance-Marking stably outperforms Vanilla-Marking when
scaling to larger LLMs.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we provide the first systematic study on the topic of Codable Text Watermarking for
Large Language Models (CTWL), filling the research gap of integrating multi-bit information wa-
termarks into the generation process of LLMs. We first conduct a taxonomic analysis of CTWL
and provide a rigorous mathematical formalization for CTWL. We then design a CTWL method
Balance-Marking, which effectively ensures the balance of the probabilities of available and un-
available vocabularies with the help of a proxy language model, thereby ensuring the high quality
and diversity of the generated text. Extensive experiments have shown that our method significantly
outperforms the direct baseline method in the comprehensive evaluation of five dimensions, reach-
ing a practical level of usability. We hope that our work can help the community better understand
the CTWL issue and inspire more outstanding research in the future.


                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICAL S TATEMENT
Our paper aims to provide an effective way to reduce the ethical problems brought by the LLMs. Our
method can inject a watermark that carries rich information into the text generated by the LLMs, thus
helping the public to identify whether the specific text is machine-generated under some necessary
circumstances. For example, a machine-generated text with watermarks that carry the information
of the name of the source LLM can be easily traced from the source once it is used for harmful
purposes, such as creating fake news or cheating on academic writings. Therefore, our work does
not have any negative ethical concerns.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have provided the necessary explanations for all the assumptions we made after they are pro-
posed in the main paper. We provide detailed mathematical derivations for the complicated formu-
las such as deriving Eq. (4) to Eq. (5) in Appendix B. We present the detailed illustrations of the
approximations we made during mathematical derivations in Appendix E. We give the necessary
illustration of the experiment settings in Section 5.1 and Section 5.1 in the main paper. The detailed
explanations and explorations of training hyper-parameters are in Appendix G. The descriptions of
the implementations of substitution attacks are in Appendix H.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions on improving our
manuscript. This work is supported in part by a Tencent Research Grant and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 62176002). Yankai Lin and Xu Sun are the corresponding authors
of this paper.

R EFERENCES
Sahar Abdelnabi and Mario Fritz. Adversarial Watermarking Transformer: Towards Tracing Text
  Provenance with Data Hiding. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 121–
  140. IEEE, 2021.
Anton Bakhtin, Sam Gross, Myle Ott, Yuntian Deng, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Arthur Szlam.
  Real or Fake? Learning to Discriminate Machine from Human-Generated Text. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.03351, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Pierre Fernandez, Antoine Chaffin, Karim Tit, Vivien Chappelier, and Teddy Furon. Three Bricks
  to Consolidate Watermarks for Large Language Models. CoRR, abs/2308.00113, 2023.
Zunera Jalil and Anwar M Mirza. A Review of Digital Watermarking Techniques for Text Docu-
  ments. In 2009 International Conference on Information and Multimedia Technology, pp. 230–
  234. IEEE, 2009.
Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Laks VS Lakshmanan. Automatic Detection of
  Machine-Generated Text: A Critical Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01314, 2020.
John Kirchen., Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A Water-
  mark for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10226, 2023a.
John Kirchen., Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong, Kasun Fer-
  nando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. On the Reliability of Watermarks
  for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04634, 2023b.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ryuto Koike, Masahiro Kaneko, and Naoaki Okazaki. OUTFOX: LLM-generated Essay Detection
  through In-context Learning with Adversarially Generated Examples. CoRR, abs/2307.11729,
  2023.

Taehyun Lee, Seokhee Hong, Jaewoo Ahn, Ilgee Hong, Hwaran Lee, Sangdoo Yun, Jamin Shin,
  and Gunhee Kim. Who Wrote this Code? Watermarking for Code Generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.15060, 2023.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A Robustly Optimized Bert Pretraining
  Approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.

Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn.
  Detectgpt: Zero-Shot Machine-Generated Text Detection using Probability Curvature. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.11305, 2023.

Sandra Mitrović, Davide Andreoletti, and Omran Ayoub. Chatgpt or Human? Detect and Explain.
  Explaining Decisions of Machine Learning Model for Detecting Short Chatgpt-Generated Text.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13852, 2023.

OpenAI. GPT-2: 1.5B Release. November 2019. URL https://openai.com/research/
  gpt-2-1-5b-release.

OpenAI. ChatGPT: Optimizing Language Models for Dialogue. November 2022. URL https:
  //openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.

OpenAI. New AI Classifier for Indicating AI-Written Text, 2023. URL https://openai.com/
  blog/new-ai-classifier-for-indicating-ai-written-text.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-
  Text Transformer. arXiv e-prints, 2019.

Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi.
  Can AI-Generated Text be Reliably Detected? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11156, 2023.

Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. DistilBERT, a Distilled Version
  of BERT: Smaller, Faster, Cheaper and Lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.

Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec
   Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al. Release Strategies and the
   Social Impacts of Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09203, 2019.

Edward Tian. GPTZero. 2023. URL https://gptzero.me/.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

Ashish Venugopal, Jakob Uszkoreit, David Talbot, Franz Josef Och, and Juri Ganitkevitch. Water-
  marking the Outputs of Structured Prediction with an Application in Statistical Machine Trans-
  lation. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 1363–1372, 2011.

Kangxi Wu, Liang Pang, Huawei Shen, Xueqi Cheng, and Tat-Seng Chua. LLMDet: A Large
  Language Models Detection Tool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15004, 2023.

Lingyi Yang, Feng Jiang, and Haizhou Li. Is ChatGPT Involved in Texts? Measure the Polish Ratio
  to Detect ChatGPT-Generated Text. CoRR, abs/2307.11380, 2023a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xi Yang, Jie Zhang, Kejiang Chen, Weiming Zhang, Zehua Ma, Feng Wang, and Nenghai Yu.
  Tracing Text Provenance via Context-Aware Lexical Substitution. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 11613–11621, 2022.
Xi Yang, Kejiang Chen, Weiming Zhang, Chang Liu, Yuang Qi, Jie Zhang, Han Fang, and
  Nenghai Yu. Watermarking Text Generated by Black-Box Language Models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.08883, 2023b.
KiYoon Yoo, Wonhyuk Ahn, Jiho Jang, and Nojun Kwak. Robust Multi-bit Natural Language
  Watermarking through Invariant Features. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2092–2115, 2023a.
KiYoon Yoo, Wonhyuk Ahn, and Nojun Kwak. Advancing beyond identification: Multi-bit water-
  mark for large language models. CoRR, abs/2308.00221, 2023b.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformer Language Models. ArXiv, abs/2205.01068, 2022.
Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Vijendra Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provable Robust Wa-
  termarking for AI-Generated Text. 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A         S UPPLEMENT TO R ELATED W ORK
Detecting-based Methods. This kind of method aims to detect whether a text is generated by a
language model by formulating the task as a binary classification problem (Bakhtin et al., 2019;
Jawahar et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2019). (1) One way to achieve this goal is to first collect outputs
from a specific LLM along with human-written texts, and then use them to train a binary classi-
fier Mitrović et al. (2023). For example, OpenAI (2019) fine-tune a RoBERTa classification model
to detect whether a text is generated by GPT-2 model or not. Later, Mitrović et al. (2023) collect
data produced by ChatGPT OpenAI (2022) and fine-tune a DistilBERT model (Sanh et al., 2019)
to distinguish texts written by humans and that generated by ChatGPT. OpenAI (2023) create a
more advanced classifier that can detect texts generated by a variety of diverse LLMs. (2) Besides
explicitly training deep classifiers, some other methods achieve detection by exploring the statisti-
cal differences between LLM-generated texts and human-written texts (Solaiman et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2023). GPTZero (Tian, 2023) is a popular tool to identify machine-generated texts by cal-
culating the perplexity and burstiness scores of texts and comparing them with specific thresholds.
DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023) claims that when a machine-generated text is perturbed, its log
probability will always show a decreasing pattern, which is not the same for human-written texts.
Based on this finding, it defines a log probability-based metric to help detect texts generated by
LLMs. Recently, there have been some works (Koike et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023a) exploring
the detection of machine-generated text in specific domains. However, all these detection methods
face the risk of becoming increasingly ineffective in the future, as the LLMs will be consistently im-
proved to behave more and more like humans, which finally makes detection impractical (Sadasivan
et al., 2023).

B         D ETAILED MATHEMATICAL DERIVATIONS OMITTED IN THE MAIN PAPER
Here, we provide detailed mathematical derivations about the formulas that are simplified in the
main paper.

Eq. (3):
                     max{Pw (t|m)/ max
                                    ′
                                       Pw (t|m′ )}
                      t                     m ̸=m
                                      L                                   L
                                                                      ′
                     ⇐⇒ max{ Π Pw (tl |, m, t:(l−1) )/ max Π Pw (tl |m , t:(l−1) )}
                                 t   l=1                ′        m ̸=m l=1                                           (13)
                                     L
                                     X                                          L
                                                                                X
                     ⇐⇒ max{                log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                                        ′
                                                                                      log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )}.
                                 t                                      m ̸=m
                                     l=1                                        l=1

                                                                                                          1
From Eq. (4) to Eq. (5): As PPL(t|xprompt ) = [ΠL    l=1 P (tl |x
                                                                  prompt
                                                                         , t:(l−1) )]− L , Eq. (4) is equiv-
alent to
                 XL                                   XL
           max{       log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                  ′
                                                         log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )},
                      t                                      m ̸=m
                            l=1                                      l=1
                                                                                                                     (14)
                                 L
                              1 X
                 s.t.        − [   log P (tl |xprompt , t:(l−1) )] ≤ log(PPL(tori |xprompt ) + ϵ).
                              L
                                     l=1
By applying the method of Lagrange Multipliers, we can re-define the target as:
                          L
                          X                                       L
                                                                  X
              max{              log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                            ′
                                                                        log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )
                 t                                        m ̸=m
                          l=1                                     l=1
                                                                                                                     (15)
                                  L
                               1 X
                          − λ[− [   log P (tl |xprompt , t:(l−1) )] − log(PPL(tori |xprompt ) + ϵ)]}.
                               L
                                      l=1
For simplicity but without loss of generality, let’s assume that the PPL scores are calculated based
on the same LLM used to generate t.10 In this case, given the prompt xprompt and LLM , the term
    10
         This assumption is practical as the LLM is powerful enough to accurately measure the perplexity of a text.


                                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PPLLLM (tori |xprompt ) can be regarded as a constant. Therefore, Eq. (15) can be rephrased as:
                       L
                       X                                        L
                                                                X
                max{         log Pw (tl |m, t:(l−1) ) − max
                                                         ′
                                                                       log Pw (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) )
                  t                                     m ̸=m
                       l=1                                       l=1
                                                                                                        (16)
                              L
                         λ    X
                                                    prompt
                       +            log PLLM (tl |x          , t:(l−1) )}.
                         L
                              l=1

                                L
Let δ = L                            log P (tl |m′ , t:(l−1) ), the objective function can be restructured as
                                P
        λ and m̂ = argmax
                       m′ ̸=m l=1
Eq. (5).


C     T HE E VALUATION S YSTEM OF C ODABLE LLM WATERMARKING

The prosperity of LLM technology has brought more diverse and differentiated application scenarios
than traditional NLP models. Therefore, the evaluation of the practicability of LLM-generated text
watermarking technology is expected to keep pace with this trend. However, existing studies lack
a unified convincing evaluation system for LLM-generated text watermarking technology. In this
section, we start with analyzing the uniqueness of LLM applications and establish a comprehensive
evaluation system for LLM-generated text watermarking from 5 different aspects.

C.1   WATERMARKING S UCCESS R ATE

We define two indicators to measure how successful the watermark is injected into LLM-generated
texts as expected: (1) Success rate of recognizing the model-generated texts from human written
texts, and (2) Success rate of recovering the injected watermark message. Both of these two metrics
need to be considered for CTWL; while for normal LLM watermarking (Kirchen. et al., 2023a),
only the first metric need to be evaluated.

C.2   ROBUSTNESS AGAINST ATTACKS

Texts generated by LLMs are usually modified before they are actually used for the purpose of pol-
ishing or detection escaping. Thus, the watermarking algorithms need to ensure robustness in the
face of various corruptions and attacks. We summarize the two most representative attacks threat-
ening the success of LLM watermarking: (1) Copy-Paste Attack (Kirchen. et al., 2023b), where
LLM-generated text fragments are mixed with human-written text fragments; (2) Substitution At-
tack, where individual or sequential tokens are synonymously replaced based on human knowledge
or masked language models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) or RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019).

C.3   PAYLOAD I NFORMATION C ODING R ATE

For non-codable watermarking methods, the encoded information is always one-bit. For CTWL, we
divide the number of bits carried by the watermark by the length of the covered tokens as the indica-
tor for measuring the coding rate of the watermarking algorithm. Obviously, a good watermarking
technique should encode as many bits of information as possible without sacrificing the performance
on other metrics.

C.4   E NCODING AND D ECODING E FFICIENCY

Injecting watermarks during LLM’s generation will inevitably increase the computational cost.
Moreover, restoring multiple bits of information from the text also takes higher computational com-
plexity than decoding 1-bit information. We argue that it is necessary to consider the additional
computational complexity brought by the encoding and decoding of the large model watermarking
algorithm. Besides, the parallelism of the watermarking algorithm is also vital for the actual time
consumption.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5   I MPACT ON THE Q UALITY OF G ENERATED T EXT

Codable watermarks contain more complex information and have a larger impact on the quality of
text generated by LLMs than non-codable watermarks. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure that the
impact of the watermark on the quality of LLM-generated text is within an acceptable range for the
deployment of watermarking algorithms. In the current work, we adopt the text perplexity (PPL) as
an automated metric to measure the quality of LLM-generated texts. In future work, we will include
more metrics such as semantic similarity or human evaluation for comprehensive evaluation of text
quality.


D     P OTENTIAL A PPLICATION S CENES OF C ODABLE LLM WATERMARKING

In this section, we analyze some potential application scenarios of codable LLM watermarking, and
examine how our method adjusts the proxy-LM to adapt to the varying demands for watermarking
techniques in different application scenarios.

D.1   C ORPORATE I NTELLECTUAL P ROPERTY P ROTECTION

For service providers based on LLMs, generating texts with watermarks containing information
related to the model, service, request, or user can effectively ensure that the generated texts can
be traced and identified, thereby preventing the model from being used unreasonably or without
authorization. Service providers can flexibly choose and combine the information to be included in
the watermark to better protect their intellectual property. In this scenario, as the owner of LLMs,
the service provider can choose to use the large model itself as a proxy-LM to minimize the impact
of adding watermarks on the quality of the text, or prepare a small model similar to the large one to
accelerate inference through methods like distillation, quantization, or pruning.

D.2   U SER - LEVEL C OPYRIGHT P ROTECTION

The discussion on the copyright of text generated by LLMs is also an interesting topic, as users may
believe that their intellectual input when writing prompts gives them (at least part of) the copyright of
the generated text. In such a situation, users can choose to reach an agreement with the LLMs service
provider on a customized watermark algorithm for the user self (through customizing the proxy-LM
or hash function). In the encoding stage, the service provider will generate text containing a specific
watermark according to the user’s exclusive watermark encoding algorithm. When the user wants
to prove that a piece of text comes from him- or herself, the user can request the service provider
to use his or her exclusive decoding algorithm to confirm whether it contains a personal watermark.
To make this more credible, an independent third-party organization similar to the patent office can
take the responsibility to manage and certify these customized watermark algorithms.

D.3   O PEN WATERMARKING P ROTOCOL

For the public, it is desirable to have a very convenient way to identify whether a text comes from a
model and which model it comes from. We propose an idea based on an open watermark protocol
to reduce the identification problems caused by scattered and differentiated watermarking methods
adopted by different service providers. First, the protocol selects an open-source language model
(such as GPT-2) as a proxy-LM, and then determines a unified and scalable message coding system
to establish a publicly available watermark encoding and decoding algorithm. Any service provider
that joins this protocol can use the watermark encoding algorithm to inject watermarks into the
texts generated by their private models by extending the message coding system. In this way, the
public can efficiently identify all models that join the protocol using a single decoding algorithm.
The technical support for this idea to work is that our Balance-Marking leverages both the LLMs
and the proxy-LM during the encoding stage, while in the decoding stage, only the proxy-LM is
needed to restore the watermark information. This makes it possible to have multiple closed-source
LLMs encoding and a single public model decoding. If as many service providers as possible join
this protocol, identifying the source of the text will become an increasingly easy task, which can
effectively alleviate the impact of LLM-generated texts on human community order and security.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.4    R ELAY WATERMARKING AMONG M ODELS

Model-generated text that is actually applied is usually not generated in one step, but may go through
multiple users or multiple models for processing, such as expansion, polishing, translation, para-
phrasing, and so on. If we want to track the complete production process of a text, not just obtain
the information of the last model processing, it is feasible to ensure that the watermark is incremen-
tally written in a relay form among different models. As discussed in the previous subsection, this
requires an open watermark protocol and a scalable information encoding system. This also requires
adding a processing step to our method: first extract the watermark message from the text input to
the model, mix it with the message of the new model itself, and then add the new message to the
watermark of the newly generated text. In this way, we can track the complete life cycle of machine-
generated text. Of course, as discussed in the previous subsection, this also requires as many LLM
service providers as possible to join the open watermark protocol.


E     A PPROXIMATION DURING CALCULATION Pw

In calculating Pw of Vanilla-Marking and Balance-Marking, we perform the following two approx-
imations.

                      1                       ′
                         P
Excluding Term |M|          m′ ∈M log Pw (v|m , t:(l−1) ) from Encoding When implementing Al-
                                            1                       ′
                                               P
gorithm 1, there is a need to compute |M|        m′ ∈M log Pw (v|m , t:(l−1) ), which can be a time-
consuming task. However, due to the inherent randomness of Pw , we hypothesize that this mean
value almost remains constant under the Law of Large Numbers. This hypothesis is corroborated
by our empirical studies (see Appendix E.1) that indicate that this value remains close to -11 with
a relatively insignificant standard deviation (less than 0.05) across v. Hence, we can exclude this
calculation from Algorithm 1 during encoding for efficiency.


Substituting log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) with log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) during Decoding Similarly, we
substitute log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) with log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) in Eq. (12). The difference between the
                           P
two expressions equals log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ), which we assume to be almost constant. Our empir-
                               v
ical findings (see Appendix E.2) support this claim. In the Vanilla-Marking approach, the standard
deviation is as low as 0.002, with an average value of 11.4. Despite Balance-Marking having a
slightly higher deviation (0.23) and a mean of 11.4, it still allows for the exclusion of this calcula-
tion to help speed up the computation process.

                         1                              ′
                                   P
E.1    E XCLUDING T ERM |M|            m′ ∈M log Pw (v|m , t:(l−1) ) FROM ENCODING


The randomness present within the designP        of the message function Pw allows us to interpret ex-
pressions of log Pw (v|m′ , t:(l−1) )s in |M|1                      ′
                                                  m′ ∈M log Pw (v|m , t:(l−1) ) as independent and iden-
tically
     Pdistributed (i.i.d.) random      variables. Consequently, via the law of large numbers, the term
  1                        ′
|M|      ′
        m ∈M  log P w (v|m   , t:(l−1) ) remains approximately constant.
As a practical test of our hypothesis, we randomly selected 100 sequences of t:(l−1) from human-
written texts (specifically, the news-like subset of the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2019)) as well as
watermarked texts. Afterward, for each t:(l−1) , we randomly picked 100 tokens v from the vocab-
                                               1
                                                         log Pw (v|m′ , t:(l−1) ) across v.11 We report
                                                    P
ulary to calculate the standard deviation of |M|
                                                       m′ ∈M
the standard deviation and mean across v (averaged over 100 instances of t:(l−1) s) in Table 2. Given
the small standard deviation across the vocabulary, it’s appropriate to exclude it in Algorithm 1.

   11
      Since the solution tl depends on the model logit and message logit of v under a given t:(l−1) , it’s enough
to concentrate on the variations across v.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          1
                         log Pw (v|m′ , t:(l−1) ) on human-written texts and watermarked texts. The num-
                  P
Table 2: |M|
                 m′ ∈M
bers are the mean ± and the standard deviation across v.

                                            Human-Written Texts              Watermarked Texts
                   Vanilla-Marking            -10.95 ± 0.0005                  -10.95 ± 0.0005
                  Balance-Marking             -10.93 ± 0.0461                  -10.93 ± 0.0457


E.2      SUBSTITUTING log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) WITH log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) DURING DECODING

Consider that
                                                                               X
                log Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) = log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) − log               P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ),          (17)
                                                                                v
                                                                        P
in a manner akin to Appendix E.1, we hypothesize that log                    P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) may remain nearly
                                                                         v
constant. If so, the magnitude of Pw (v|m, t:(l−1) ) can be represented by the term P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ).

As Appendix E.1, the term log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) can be interpreted as i.i.d. random variables, hence
by invoking the law of large numbers, for any ϵ, we establish:
                                  P                                 
                                        P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) )
                           lim P  v                        − µ > ε = 0,                         (18)
                                                                    
                         |V|→∞                |V|

with V representing the vocabulary and µ is the mean.
                                                                    P
According to the mean value theorem, a c exists between                  P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) and µ|V| such that
                                                                    v
                                        P
                                  log     P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) − log(µ|V|)
                                        v                                  1
                                                                          = .                                      (19)
                                                                           c
                                        P
                                           P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) − µ|V|
                                        v


Through empirical experimentation,12 it is observed that log
                                                                              P
                                                                                    P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) exceeds 10.5.
                                                                               v
Given that the size of vocabulary |V| is 50257, it implies c > e             10.5
                                                                                    > 21 |V|, leading to

                         X                                          X P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1)
                 | log       P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) − log µ|V|| < 2|                                ) − µ|.           (20)
                         v                                           v
                                                                                     |V|

                                                                                       P
Merging Eq. (18) and Eq. (20) confirms that, with high certainty, , log                     P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) approxi-
                                                                                        v
mates a constant.
To validate our hypothesis, we randomly select 100 t:(l−1) as above, and randomly pick 100 m
                                                  P
from M. The standard deviation and mean of log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) are presented in Table 3. The
                                                   v
                P
deviation of log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) is higher in Balance-Marking than in Vanilla-Marking, due to
                     v
the likelihood that log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) may not be precisely i.i.d for Balance-Marking. Neverthe-
                                                           P
less, this modest variation still allows us to exclude log P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) for the sake of swifter
                                                                v
computation.
  12
       We use the same experimental settings as the experiments shown in Table 3.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                  P
Table 3: log           P̂w (v|m, t:(l−1) ) on human-written texts and watermarked texts. The numbers are
                   v
the average ± the standard deviation across (t:(l−1) , m) .

                                           Human-Written Texts          Watermarked Texts
                       Vanilla-Marking          11.45 ± 0.0019             11.45 ± 0.0022
                       Balance-Marking          11.42 ± 0.1797             11.41 ± 0.2266


F        D ETAILED ILLUSTRATIONS ABOUT THE PRACTICAL IMPROVEMENTS ON
         BALANCE - MARKING

The method we introduced at the beginning of Section 4.2.2 may encounter several obstacles in
realistic applications. Thus, we make the following improvements to make it more practical when
facing various realistic circumstances:

(1) Omit xprompt and truncate t:(l−1) into a fixed length. Considering that the xprompt is usu-
ally unavailable and the text receiver might only obtains a segment of the watermarked text during
the message decoding phase, it will cause inconsistency between the encoding and decoding phases
on calculating the token probabilities for creating Vm,t:(l−1) . To address this problem, we employ
PLLM (v|t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) ) to approximate PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ). That is, we omit xprompt
and truncate t:(l−1) to a fixed-length t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) for consistency during both encoding and
decoding.

(2) Use a proxy language model (proxy-LM) LMproxy in Eq. (9). Moreover, consid-
ering several usage scenarios discussed in Appendix D, we broaden the LLM used in
PLLM (v|t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) ) into a general proxy model denoted as LMproxy . This model can
either be LLM itself when the model company wants the watermarked text only to be decoded by
itself, or be another smaller and public language model (e.g., GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)) PLLM
that allows for quicker computation of Pw and enables anyone to decode the embedded message
without knowing the specific LLM used in text generation.

(3) Pre-map message space into a smaller space for efficient computing. Since computing
Vm,t:(l−1) for each m during encoding can be much time-consuming when the message space
is pretty large, we opt to first map the entire message space into a smaller space as m →
ĥ(m) ∈ MA = {1, · · · , A} by using another hash function ĥ, and then compute the seed s as
s = h(ĥ(m), x:(l−1) ). By this way, we only need to run Algorithm 2 a mere A times for each
t:(l−1) .

G         H YPERPARAMETERS AND H ASH S CHEME
In Section 5.1, we opt to use LMproxy = GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019), A = 100, Lpref ix = 10,
σ = 0.5 and M = {0, 1, ..., 220 − 1} for Balance-Marking. The reason to set σ = 0.5 is to achieve
the maximal diversity of Vm,t:(l−1) w.r.t. different m. The choice of LMproxy , A, Lpref ix , M aims
to balance efficiency and performance, which is further discussed in Appendix G.1 to G.4. The hash
scheme is detailed in Appendix G.5

G.1        T HE IMPACT OF THE PROXY LANGUAGE MODEL LMproxy

In our Balance-Marking method, we employ LMproxy to generate an estimation for
PLLM (v|t:(l−1) ). It can be reasonably hypothesized that an enhanced LMproxy could offer a more
accurate estimation of PLLM (v|t:(l−1) ), thereby leading to superior performance. Experiments de-
tailed in Figure 3 support this hypothesis.13 However, GPT2-Large illustrates better performance in
comparison to GPT2-XL, suggesting that the improvement might have a certain ceiling.
    13
         Here, we run experiments with δ ∈ {1.0, 1.2, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0}. Appendix G.2 to G.4 also use the same δs.


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Illustration of LMproxy ’s impact on watermarking. Larger LMproxy tends to exhibit
improved performance.

Table 4: Growing LMproxy size amplifies the computational cost during both encoding and decod-
ing processes.

                                  GPT2      GPT2-Medium         GPT2-Large        GPT2-XL
              LMproxy
                                 (124M)        (355M)             (774M)           (1.5B)
          Encoding Time (s)       9.50           11.69              14.08           16.38
          Decoding Time (s)       2.97            3.09               3.43            3.53


Unfortunately, as the size of LMproxy increases, there follows a consequential surge in computa-
tional cost, clearly demonstrated in Table 4. For practical applications, it becomes necessary to
establish a balance between time expenditure and the quality of the watermark.

Special Case: LMproxy = LLM Table 5 and Table 6 show the efficiency and quality of different
LMproxy s and the LMproxy = LLM case. LMproxy = LLM has the best quality, but is slower
than LMproxy = GPT2.

G.2   T HE IMPACT OF THE PRE - MAPPING SPACE SIZE A

The purpose of introducing hyper-parameter A in Balance-Marking is to reduce the number of
Vm,t:(l−1) to be computed. A lower value of A results in lower computational expenses during
decoding, as shown in Table 7. On the other hand, the cost of encoding remains relatively constant
because only a single message m requires the computation of Vm,t:(l−1) during encoding.
To explore the impact of A on watermarking quality, we conducted additional experiments as
demonstrated in Figure 4. Although a larger A generally leads to enhanced performance, there exist
notable exceptions, such as when A = 150, where the performance is lower than when A = 100.
To strike a balance between performance and computational efficiency, we elected to use A = 100
for our main experiments in Section 5.2.

G.3   T HE IMPACT OF THE TRUNCATION LENGTH Lpref ix

The parameter Lpref ix , which is part of Eq. (11), impacts the quality of the watermark in two
significant ways. (1) A longer t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) in PLMproxy (v|t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) ) can poten-


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 5: Efficiency of different LMproxy s and the LMproxy = LLM case.

                            GPT2        GPT2-Medium           GPT2-Large          GPT2-XL          LLM self
       LMproxy
                           (124M)         (355M)                (774M)             (1.5B)         (OPT-1.3B)
  Encoding Time (s)          9.50             11.69                 14.08             16.38          11.05
  Decoding Time (s)          2.97              3.09                 3.43              3.53            4.07


Table 6: The watermark success rate of different LMproxy s and the LMproxy = LLM case under
different PPLs.

                                    PPL                       3.2     3.35      3.5
                                GPT2 (124M)                  83.1     91.3     95.3
                             GPT2-Medium (355M)              84.9     93.2     95.1
                              GPT2-Large (774M)              88.6     93.8     96.7
                               GPT2-XL (1.5B)                86.4     93.4     96.0
                             LLM self (OPT-1.3B)             91.7     94.8     96.9



tially provide a superior approximation of PLLM (v|xprompt , t:(l−1) ). However, (2) an increased
t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) length will reduce the number of effective tokens in t available for encoding
and decoding. This reduction occurs because t:Lpref ix lacks sufficient preceding words to form
a t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) , which consequently results in their exclusion from encoding and decoding.
Figure 5 illustrates the influence of Lpref ix . Generally speaking, a relatively low Lpref ix value can
degrade the watermark quality, while a moderate Lpref ix like 10 achieves similar performance to
larger values such as 15 or 20.
The time cost for encoding and decoding remains relatively consistent across varying Lpref ix val-
ues, as demonstrated in Table 8. Interestingly, a larger Lpref ix might lead to a decrease in time
cost, aligning with the aforementioned explanation that a more extended Lpref ix results in a shorter
effective t utilized in the encoding and decoding stages.


G.4    T HE IMPACT OF THE MESSAGE SPACE SIZE |M|

Increasing the size of |M| under a fixed payload information coding rate results in a larger number
of tokens available for embedding a single message. In text watermarking scenarios, certain parts
of the text often exhibit low entropy, thereby challenging the watermark encoding process (Kirchen.
et al., 2023a). However, an increase in the number of tokens mitigates this problem, as it improves
the likelihood of having high-entropy sections where the message can be effectively embedded.
Moreover, let’s consider an example where |M| is relatively small. In such a case, a piece of
information of 20 bits might need to be divided into four separate chunks of 5 bits each to be
encoded. If encoding fails for any of these 5-bit information segments, the encoding of the entire
20-bit information fails. This phenomenon potentially results in a significant accumulation of errors.
Figure 6 validates the analysis above by demonstrating a strong correlation between larger |M|
and better watermark quality. Here, the experiment utilizes the LLM to generate 210 tokens for
encoding and decoding, since when |M| = 27 and the coding rate is 10 tokens per bit, one message
corresponds to 70 tokens.
Table 9 shows the time costs of the encoding and decoding processes when |M| increases. The
time expenditure for encoding remains relatively stable, since there is only one message for which
the calculation of Pw is necessary. Contrastingly, the decoding process experiences a noticeable
increase in time cost when |M| rises up to 220 . Thus, while an increase in |M| steadily improves
watermark quality, the size of M can not be increased unlimitedly.14

  14
     For instance, if |M| equals 240 , it becomes exceedingly difficult to calculate Pw (t|m′ ) in Eq. (12) for all
messages m′ ∈ M during the decoding process.


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Investigation into the impact of A on watermark efficiency. A larger A value generally
results in a longer decoding time.

                              A              25         50   100    150     250
                      Encoding Time (s)     9.39    9.48     9.50   9.22   9.37
                      Decoding Time (s)     1.89    2.27     2.97   4.49   6.24


Figure 4: Illustration of A’s impact on watermarking quality. A higher A tends to have better
watermark quality.


G.5    H ASH S CHEME

Following the hash implementation in Kirchen. et al. (2023a), in the case of both the Vanilla-
Marking and Balance-Marking methods, we make use of the last token in t:(l−1) to calculate
h(v, m, t:(l−1) ) in Eq. (7) and h(m, t:(l−1) ) in Algorithm 2, i.e. h(v, m, t:(l−1) ) = h(v, m, tl−1 )
and h(m, t:(l−1) ) = h(m, tl−1 ).

H     I MPLEMENTATION OF S UBSTITUTION ATTACKS
For a chosen text to be tested on, we arbitrarily pick an unaltered token each time. This token is then
masked and the model is asked to predict it. In the event that a token’s predicted logit surpasses the
predicted logit of the original token minus 1.0, we replace the original token with the new one. With
a designated substitution ratio α and a sentence consisting of L tokens, we continue this process
until the substituted tokens reach the value of αL or after 3αL attempts are made. From empirical
analysis, we establish that such replacements result in a marginal increase in PPL by around 0.1.

I     S UBSTITUTION ATTACKS WITH A SUBSTITUTION RATIO OF 10%
Figure 7 compares the results under a substitution ratio of 5% and 10%. A higher substitution results
in a lower success rate, and the performance of Balance-Marking and Vanilla-Marking becomes
closer from Figure 7a to Figure 7b, indicating that Substitution Attacks may do more hurt to Balance-
Marking than Vanilla-Marking. This can be attributed to the fact that Pw of Balance-Marking relies
on t(l−1−Lpref ix ):(l−1) (see Eq. (11)), while Pw of Vanilla-Marking only depends on t(l−1) , since we
only use the last token of t:(l−1) to calculate h(m, t:(l−1) ) (see Section 5.1). So, Balance-Marking
will be affected more when more tokens are substituted.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Illustration of Lpref ix ’s impact on watermark quality. A too-low Lpref ix value can de-
grade the watermark quality.

Table 8: Investigation into the impact of Lpref ix on watermark efficiency. Lpref ix has a modest
impact on watermark efficiency.

                          Lpref ix           5         7    10     15      20
                     Encoding Time (s)     9.52    9.03    9.50   9.29    9.10
                     Decoding Time (s)     3.01    3.05    2.97   2.91    2.86


J   R ESULTS OF LL A MA-7B AND LL A MA-13B AT A CODING RATE OF 5
Besides experiments with a coding rate of 10 in Section 5.4, we also tested the coding rate of 5. The
results are shown in Figure 8 and 9. Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking in all cases.

K    I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLES OF WATERMARKED T EXTS
In this section, we present some examples generated using our watermarking approach (Table 10).
These examples serve as a case study to demonstrate the quality of our watermarking technique. All
the generated sentences are truncated at 200 tokens.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Investigation into the impact of |M| on watermark efficiency. The size of M has a modest
impact on watermark efficiency.

                                  |M|                  25      27      210       220
                          Encoding Time (s)        9.89      10.02     9.83    10.05
                          Decoding Time (s)        2.37       2.34     2.36     3.13


Figure 6: Illustration of |M|’s impact on watermark quality. A larger M results in better watermark
quality.


 (a) Substitution Attacks (substitution ratio = 5%).         (b) Substitution Attacks (substitution ratio = 10%).

Figure 7: The relationship between the success rate after Copy-Paste Attacks / Substitution Attacks
and the PPL. Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking under both attacks.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking under LLaMA-7B and coding rate of 5
tokens per bit).


Figure 9: Balance-Marking outperforms Vanilla-Marking under LLaMA-13B and coding rate of 5
tokens per bit).


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 10: Examples of generated texts.

 Case Study             Text
                        An EgyptAir jet sent a series of signals indicating that smoke had been
                        detected on board before it crashed into the Mediterranean on Thurs-
                        day, France’s air accident investigation agency said on Saturday. A
                        spokesman for the BEA agency said the signals did not indicate what
                        caused the smoke or fire on board the plane, which plunged into the
                        sea with 66 people on board as it was heading from Paris to Cairo. But
                        they offered the first clues as to what unfolded in the moments before
                        the crash. One aviation source said that a fire on board would likely
                        have generated multiple warning signals, while a sudden explosion may
                        not have generated any. The army spokesman published pictures on
                        Saturday on its official Facebook page of the recovered items, which in-
 Prompt
                        cluded blue debris with EgyptAir markings, seat fabric with designs in
                        the airline’s colours, and a yellow lifejacket. It was the third blow since
                        October to Egypt’s travel industry, still reeling from political unrest fol-
                        lowing the 2011 uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak. A suspected Is-
                        lamic State bombing brought down a Russian airliner after it took off
                        from Sharm el-Sheikh airport in late October, killing all 224 people on
                        board, and an EgyptAir plane was hijacked in March by a man wear-
                        ing a fake suicide belt. “These messages do not allow in any way to
                        say what may have caused smoke or fire on board the aircraft,” said a
                        spokesman for the French BEA agency, which is assisting an official
                        Egyptian
                        inquiry into the crash. “We will continue our work until we are able to
                        give you more information,” he added. Egyptian authorities have so far
                        given few details about the crash, saying only that it happened shortly
                        after take-off at 4:18 p.m. (1318 GMT) on Thursday. The flight data
                        recorder and cockpit voice recorder were recovered from the ocean floor
                        on Friday. The black box recorders are expected to be handed over to in-
 No-watermark           vestigators later this month. BEA spokesman Jean-Francois Delfraissy
 (OPT-1.3B)             told a news conference on Saturday that the black boxes contained “a
                        great deal of information”. He declined to comment on whether there
                        were any indications of mechanical failure. He also said the BEA had
                        received no reports of any distress calls from the plane before it disap-
                        peared from radar screens. French President Francois Hollande said on
                        Saturday that his thoughts were with the families of those who died in
                        the crash.
                        probe. “We will continue our work until we can be certain about the
                        cause.” Egyptian officials said earlier on Saturday that they had found
                        no evidence of foul play in the crash. They also said there were no signs
                        of mechanical failure on the Airbus A320, which was flying at 31,000
                        feet (9,800 meters) when it disappeared from radar screens shortly af-
 Vanilla-Marking
                        ter take-off from Oran, near the Libyan border, at 2:24 p.m. local time
 (OPT-1.3B)
                        (0824 GMT). The wreckage was found some 20 kilometres (12.5 miles)
 (watermark success
                        off the Libyan coast on Saturday afternoon. It is unclear how long it has
 rate = 93%)
                        been in the water or how deep it is. The search is being conducted by a
                        naval patrol vessel, two ships from the Italian navy, one from the United
                        Arab Emirates, one from Greece and a helicopter from the French Navy.
                        The aircraft was carrying 149 passengers and nine crew members, in-
                        cluding 82 Egyptians, 12 Italians,


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 10 (Continued): Examples of generated texts.

 Case Study             Text
                        inquiry into the crash. “They are just indications that there could have
                        been some kind of activity on the part of the aircraft,” he added. He
                        declined to comment further. French President Francois Hollande, who
                        visited the crash site in the southern city of Ismailia with Prime Minister
                        Manuel Valls on Saturday, has called for an international investigation
 Balance-Marking        into the crash. Egypt’s civil aviation authority said in a statement on
 (OPT-1.3B)             Saturday that an initial examination of the black box flight data recorder
 (watermark success     showed that “there were no signs of a mechanical problem with the
 rate = 95%)            aircraft.” It added: “The preliminary findings of the investigation sug-
                        gest that there was a technical fault that led to the loss of communica-
                        tion between the aircraft and the ground control centre.” CAUGHT BY
                        SURVIVORS Survivors described hearing a loud noise and then seeing
                        flames coming out of the rear of the Airbus A320, one of the world’s
                        most modern planes
                        aring a fake suicide belt who demanded to be flown to Cyprus. Egyptian
                        President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi declared three days of national mourn-
                        ing and ordered flags to fly at half-mast until Tuesday. “We will spare
                        no effort to find out the reasons behind this disaster,” Prime Minister
                        Sherif Ismail told reporters in Cairo. France’s foreign minister Jean-
 No-watermark
                        Marc Ayrault said he had spoken to his Egyptian counterpart Sameh
 (LLaMA-7B)
                        Shoukry and expressed France’s “solidarity” with the families of the
                        victims. French President Francois Hollande is due to speak to Sisi
                        later on Saturday, according to the Elysee presidential palace. German
                        Chancellor Angela Merkel said she was “deeply shaken” by the news
                        of the crash, adding: “Our thoughts are with the families
                        aring a fake suicide belt who forced it to land in Cyprus. Egyptian offi-
                        cials say there is no evidence so far of a terrorist attack but investigators
                        are treating the incident as a “criminal act”. France’s foreign minister
                        Jean-Marc Ayrault, speaking on BFM TV, said he could not rule out a
 Vanilla-Marking        terrorist attack. “I can’t exclude anything at this stage . . . We must re-
 (LLaMA-7B)             main very vigilant,” he said, adding that French experts were taking part
 (watermark success     in the investigation. Egyptian security officials told Reuters on Friday
 rate = 96.8%)          that a technical glitch was being investigated as the possible cause of
                        the crash. Another senior Egyptian security official, speaking on con-
                        dition of anonymity, said investigators had found no trace of explosives
                        or traces of chemicals used to make explosive devices on the remains of
                        the Airbus A320. Investigators also found
                        aring a fake suicide belt who demanded to be flown to Cyprus. He was
                        overpowered and the plane landed safely in Cyprus. British Foreign
                        Secretary Philip Hammond said he had spoken to Egyptian President
                        Abdel Fattah al-Sisi about the incident. “I expressed our condolences to
 Balance-Marking        the families of the victims,” he told reporters in Brussels. Hammond de-
 (LLaMA-7B)             clined to comment when asked whether Britain would review security
 (watermark success     arrangements at British airports, including London’s Heathrow, which
 rate = 96.2%)          has direct flights to Egypt’s main tourist destinations. The United Na-
                        tions Security Council condemned the “outrageous and cowardly ter-
                        rorist attack” but made no mention of possible retaliatory action against
                        militants in Sinai. The council also urged all states to cooperate with
                        the Egyptian authorities in their efforts to bring perpetrators to justice.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 10 (Continued): Examples of generated texts.

 Case Study             Text
                        aring a fake suicide belt. Egyptian Prime Minister Sherif Ismail told
                        reporters at the crash site: “There is no indication so far of any terror-
                        ist or sabotage act.” He added that investigators were looking into all
                        possible causes including mechanical failure, human error and weather
                        conditions. “We are working very hard to find the black box,” he said,
 No-watermark
                        referring to the cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder that could
 (LLaMA-13B)
                        help explain why the Airbus A320 plummeted from 37,000 feet (11,280
                        metres) into the sea. French President Francois Hollande, whose coun-
                        try lost 54 citizens in the disaster, has ordered an inquiry to be carried
                        out jointly with Egyptian authorities. The BEA will lead the French side
                        of the probe. The BEA spokesman said the search for the wreckage
                        aring a suicide belt who forced it to divert to Cyprus. Egyptian Prime
                        Minister Sherif Ismail told reporters on Saturday that investigations
                        were focusing on the possibility of a “terrorist attack” but stressed this
                        could not yet be confirmed. “There is no clear indication at this time,”
 Vanilla-Marking
                        he said, adding that Egypt was cooperating with other countries to find
 (LLaMA-13B)
                        out the cause of the crash. Investigators are combing through the wreck-
 (watermark success
                        age of the Airbus (AIR.PA) A320 found 295 km north of the coastal city
 rate = 98%)
                        of Alexandria, searching for the black box flight recorders that will pro-
                        vide crucial clues to the cause of the crash. France’s Bureau d’Enquetes
                        et d’Analyses pour la Securite du Trafic Aérien (BEA), which is leading
                        the probe into the crash, said
                        aring a fake suicide belt who forced it to divert to Cyprus. He surren-
                        dered and was arrested after giving himself up. The cause of Thursday’s
                        crash remains unknown, but the focus has turned to the possibility of a
                        technical failure, terrorism or a deliberate act by the pilot or co-pilot,
 Balance-Marking
                        given their high level of training. The Airbus A320 is a workhorse of
 (LLaMA-13B)
                        worldwide aviation. It has a good safety record, with only two fatal ac-
 (watermark success
                        cidents in the past 15 years – one of them the Germanwings disaster in
 rate = 97%)
                        the French Alps last year, when a co-pilot appears to have intentionally
                        crashed the plane, killing all 150 people on board. The other was an
                        A320 operated by Indonesian budget carrier Adam Air that crashed into
                        the sea off the coast of Sulawesi in 2007,


                                               27
