Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PAIRWISE P ROXIMAL P OLICY O PTIMIZATION :
H ARNESSING R ELATIVE F EEDBACK FOR LLM A LIGN -
MENT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLMs) can acquire extensive world knowledge through
         pre-training on large corpora. However, due to exposure to low-quality data,
         LLMs may exhibit harmful behavior without aligning with human values. The
         dominant approach for steering LLMs towards beneficial behavior involves Rein-
         forcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF), with Proximal Policy Opti-
         mization (PPO) serving as the default RL optimizer. Despite its effectiveness, PPO
         has limitations when optimizing rewards trained from comparison-based loss. Pri-
         marily, PPO is not invariant to equivalent reward functions containing identical
         preference information due to the need to calibrate the reward scale. Additionally,
         PPO’s necessity for token-wise updates introduces complexity in both function ap-
         proximation and algorithm design compared to trajectory-wise optimization. This
         paper proposes a new framework, reinforcement learning with relative feedback,
         and a novel trajectory-wise policy gradient algorithm, Pairwise Proximal Policy
         Optimization (P3O) that operates directly on comparative rewards. We show the-
         oretically that P3O is invariant to equivalent rewards and avoids the complexity
         of PPO. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that P3O outperforms PPO in the KL-
         Reward trade-off and can align with human preferences as well as or better than
         prior methods. In summary, this work introduces a simpler yet effective approach
         for aligning LLMs to human preferences through relative feedback.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have made remarkable progress, profoundly influencing the AI
community (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023).
However, due to the reliance on massive corpora of internet data, which encompasses a high portion
of low-quality data, LLMs are likely to express unintended behavior. These include fabricating facts,
generating biased or toxic text, and even harmful content to humans (Perez et al., 2022; Ganguli
et al., 2022). Consequently, it is crucial to align LLMs with human values, e.g., helpful, honest,
harmless (Bai et al., 2022a).
A dominant approach in the realm of AI Alignment for LLMs named Reinforcement Learning with
Human Feedback (RLHF) involves a three-stage procedure: supervised fine-tuning, reward learning,
and reinforcement learning (RL) fine-tuning (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022). In the critical
third stage, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is widely adopted as the default RL optimizer
(Schulman et al., 2017). Despite the acclaimed efficiency of PPO, recent studies have highlighted
several intriguing questions and potential issues that require additional attention:
Instability of PPO. Despite its acclaimed effectiveness, recent studies have identified instability
associated with PPO. Factors such as reward normalization, reward scaling, reward clipping, KL
control, advantage normalization and critic initialization (Zheng et al., 2023; Engstrom et al., 2020)
can contribute to this instability. Moreover, we identify another source of instability: there is an
inconsistency when it comes to optimizing the reward trained with the Bradley-Terry Loss (BTL)
comparative reward model. In essence, BTL is invariant to constant shift while PPO is not. This
means that even if two reward models carry identical information about human preferences, opti-
mizing them using PPO can produce different outcomes. (Section 4)


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reinforcement Learning with Absolute Feedback                   Reinforcement Learning with Relative Feedback
    Q1           A1                                                     A1    RM
            LM        RM   R1                                      LM
                                                 update                                                            update
                                         GAE               Q                                         Pairwise
                                          +           LM                             R1-R2                              LM
                                   Policy Gradient                                               Policy Gradient
    Q2           A2                                                     A2    RM
            LM        RM   R2
                                                                   LM


    single response    absolute                                pairwise responses     relative
       per prompt     preference                                   per prompt       preference


Figure 1: The figure on the left illustrates the prevalent method for fine-tuning LMs using RL, which
relies on Absolute Feedback. In this paradigm, algorithms like PPO has to learn a V function, which
capture not only the valuable relative preference information, but also less part, which is the scale of
the reward for a given prompt. Contrastingly, the figure on the right presents paradigm for optimizing
reward model trained via comparative loss, e.g., Bradley-Terry Loss (Bradley & Terry, 1952). Our
algorithm generate a pair of responses per prompt, leveraging only the Relative Feedback - derived
from the difference in reward - for policy gradient updates. This method obviates the need for
additional V function approximations and intricate components like GAE (Schulman et al., 2015b).

Trajectory-wise vs Token-wise. A prevailing tension in fine-tuning LLMs using RL revolves
around whether tuning should be trajectory-wise or token-wise. This dichotomy arises primarily
from the nature of the reward model training phase wherein the reward model is trained using com-
parison dataset with human labelers ranking multiple completions of a single prompt. The obvious
reason for taking this indirect approach based on trajectory-wise comparison is that it is often chal-
lenging for labelers to make a direct score assignment or provide comparison beyond a trajectory-
wise perspective. An exception might be specific tasks with less ambiguity, such as math problems
(Lightman et al., 2023), where partial credit for partially correct answers is feasible. This difficulty
arises from the fact that the reward model returns only a single scalar reward after receiving the entire
response (when the model hits the <eos> token). Given this complexity, two dominant viewpoints
emerge: Should language generation be approached as a Contextual Bandit (CB) or a Markov Deci-
sion Process (MDP)? Although the prevalent approach is to use PPO to perform token-wise updates,
it introduces additional complexity both in function approximation and in algorithmic design, i.e.,
PPO requires to additionally learn a value function V and use Generalized Advantage Estimation
(GAE) (Schulman et al., 2015b) to redistribute the sparse reward to all tokens.
In this paper, we provide new insights to address the above two issues. We summarize our primary
contributions as:

         (1) We define an equivalent relationship for reward functions trained from human preferences.
             We identify that BTL is invariant under this equivalent relationship, while PPO is not.
         (2) We observed that Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) can be used
             jointly with a trained reward model, leading to online-DPO. Further, we demonstrate that
             online-DPO remains invariant under the reward equivalent relationship. Empirical evidence
             suggest that online-DPO can achieve higher reward while being less KL efficient than PPO.
         (3) We introduce a novel policy gradient algorithm, Pairwise Proximal Policy Optimization
             (P3O) under the framework of Reinforcement Learning with Relative Feedback (Figure 1).
             Our algorithm aligns perfectly with the comparative nature of the reward model, avoiding
             complications like estimating the V function, GAE and various normalization techniques
             (Zheng et al., 2023). Empirical evaluations show that P3O consistently outperforms PPO
             and DPO in terms of KL-Reward trade-off and GPT-4 Evaluation.

2        R ELATED W ORK
Significant efforts have been made towards aligning LLMs with human values. These alignment
strategies broadly fall into two categories: offline training and online training.
Offline training typically involve a static dataset, and doesn’t require additional evaluations or gen-
erations. For instance, Thoppilan et al. (2022); Gunasekar et al. (2023) use instruction fine-tuning to
update the model on a high quality dataset tailored to a specific downstream task of interest. Snell
et al. (2022) proposed to employ offline Q Learning to learn an add-on term for decoding. While


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rafailov et al. (2023) introduced DPO, an offline approach that can directly align LM with human
preference data, drawing from the closed-form solution of the Contextual Bandit with KL control
problem. There are also methods like PRO (Song et al., 2023) and RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) that
fine-tune the model based on ranking of the rewards.
Our work is categorized under online training, which consist of a loop of generating new responses
from the updated policy, evaluating them with the reward model and update the policy. The current
dominant approach RLHF relies on online RL methods such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), A2C
(Mnih et al., 2016) or their variants (Ramamurthy et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023b). There are also few
methods that deviate from this standard. For instance, Gulcehre et al. (2023) introduce ReST, which
use offline RL instead of online RL in the policy improvement phase. Besides, Dong et al. (2023)
proposed RAFT, which iteratively fine-tune the policy on the responsed generated by the Best-of-N
policy. Another paradigm parallel to RLHF is Reinforcement Learning with AI Feedback (RLAIF)
(Bai et al., 2022b; Lee et al., 2023), which aim for using AI to improve AI. RLAIF substitute the
role of human with AI in the feedback loop and yield comparable results with RLHF with models
of smaller scale.
Outside of the context of language, preference-driven policy learning has been explored in both
bandit and RL. Contextual dueling bandit (Dudı́k et al., 2015; Yue et al., 2012) use preferences
or rankings of actions to adjust the policy, rather than rewards. Similarly, PbRL (Jain et al., 2013;
Busa-Fekete et al., 2014; Christiano et al., 2017; Sadigh et al., 2017; Kupcsik et al., 2018) learn from
binary preferences generated by some unknown scoring function. Our work share resemblance to
the pairwise policy gradient outlined in Xu et al. (2020), though we integrate the critical clipping
technique and the KL control that better fit into the language generation setting.

3   P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we briefly reviewing the RLHF pipeline in (Ziegler et al., 2019). Then we discuss
how language generation fits into CB and RL setting (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Yang et al., 2021;
Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020; Wu et al., 2022).

       • SFT Phase (Supervised Fine-Tuning): This stage start with a pre-trained LM, and then
         fine-tuned with supervised learning (typically maximum likelihood loss) on a high quality
         dataset for the downstream task of interest. Outcome of this stage is denoted as π SFT .
       • Reward Learning Phase. In the second phase the SFT model is prompted with prompts x
         to produce pairs of answers y1 , y2 ∼ π SFT (y|x). The responses pairs are then presented to
         human labelers who express preferences for one answer, denoted as yw ≻ yl |x, where yw
         is the one favored by the labeler and yl is the one less favored. Under these preferences is
         the inaccessible latent reward model r∗ (y, x). According to the Bradley-Terry (Bradley &
         Terry, 1952) model, the human preference distribution p∗ can be expressed as:
                                       exp(r∗ (y1 |x))                              1
           p∗ (y1 ≻ y2 |x) =                                     =
                              exp(r (y1 |x)) + exp(r∗ (y2 |x))
                                    ∗                               1 + exp (r∗ (y1 |x) − r∗ (y2 |x))
                                                       (i)   (i)                 ∗
         Assuming the access to a dataset {(x(i) , yw , yl )}Ni=1 sampled from p . We parameterize
         the reward as rϕ and estimate it via maximum log-likelihood:
                                    N
                                   X    1
                                                        (i) (i)        (i)

                            LR =           log σ rϕ (yw    |x ) − rϕ (yl |x(i) )               (1)
                                   i=1
                                       N
         where σ is the sigmoid function. rϕ is initialized with π SFT augmented by additional linear
         layers on top. Constraints like E [r(y|x)] = 0 might be incorporated to lower the variance.
       • RL Fine-Tuning Phase. Prior work formulate the optimization problem as:
                        max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (·|x) rϕ (y|x) − βDKL (πθ (·|x)∥π SFT (·|x))

                                                                                                  (2)
                         πθ

         The βDKL (πθ (·|x)∥π SFT (·|x)) term is used to regulate the deviation from the SFT
         model, it is important to prevent the model from completely forget the world knowl-
         edge acquired in the pre-training stage. The standard approach is to directly employ
         PPO (Schulman et al., 2017; Ouyang et  al., 2022) to optimize the modified reward
         rϕ (y|x) − β log πθ (y|x) − log π SFT (y|x) .


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   MDP VS CB

Language Generation modeled as an MDP: A language model takes a sequence of tokens
(t1 , ..., th ) as input and produce the distribution for the next token th+1 . The action space of this
MDP consists of all potential tokens, with the state being a concatenation of all the history tokens as
well as the prompt. The transition in the model is deterministic, the next state equal to the concate-
nation of current state and the recently produced token. Formally,
                       P (sh+1 = (t1 , ..., th+1 )|sh = (t1 , ..., th ), ah+1 = th+1 ) = 1
An episode end either when the total tokens generated attain a predefined limit or when the language
model produce the special token <eos>. Upon the end of an episode, the entire sequence is scored
by a reward model, which produces a scalar reward r. PPO follows this formulation, where the single
scalar reward will be assigned to the last token and combine with the token-wise KL penalty to form
the ultimate reward. To tackle the challenge of sparse feedback, PPO employs the Generalized
Advantage Estimation (Schulman et al., 2015b) to reallocate the scalar reward across all tokens.
Language Generation modeled as a CB: A language model takes a prompt x = (t1 , ..., th ) and
generates a response y = (th+1 , ..., th′ ). The response either terminates with with a <eos> token
or continues until a predefined token limit is met. Within this setting, every possible response is
treated as an action, and there’s no transition at all. The entire sequence is scored by a reward
model, producing a scalar reward. This formulation is adopted by (Rafailov et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023a) as well as our paper.

4     A LGORITHM
4.1   P ROXIMAL PAIRWISE P OLICY O PTIMIZATION (P3O)

To derive P3O, we start from Vanilla Policy Gradient (VPG, Pseudocode ) (Sutton et al., 1999;
Schulman et al., 2017). For simplicity, we omit the prompt x in the formula and focus on the
derivation for bandit setting and extend to the more general contextual bandit in theorem 1.
In the bandit setting, assume we are updating a parameterized policy πθ with actions denoted as y.
The VPG aims for estimating the following formula with samples:
                                                           X
                         ∇LVPG = E r(y)∇ log πθ (y) =         r(y)∇πθ (y)                      (3)
                                          y∼πθ
                                                                         y
Previous works on PG propose to subtract a baseline b to reduce variance, resulting in
                                          X
                               ∇LVPG =        (r(y) − b)∇πθ (y)
                                                     y
                                                  P
We plug in the popular choice of the baseline, b = y r(y)πθ (y):
                         X                       X
               ∇LVPG =       r(y1 )∇πθ (y1 ) −     r(y2 )πθ (y2 )∇πθ (y1 )
                               y1                        y1 ,y2
                               X                                    X
                           =            r(y1 )πθ (y2 )∇πθ (y1 ) −            r(y2 )πθ (y2 )∇πθ (y1 )
                               y1 ,y2                               y1 ,y2
                               X
                           =            (r(y1 ) − r(y2 )) πθ (y2 )∇πθ (y1 )                                  (4)
                               y1 ,y2
Equation (4) gives rise to an expression that directly rely on the relative difference r(y1 ) − r(y2 ).
We further introduce πθold and rewrite Eq (4) with importance sampling:
                                                                      πθ (y2 ) ∇πθ (y1 )
                      ∇LVPG =          E        (r(y1 ) − r(y2 ))
                                  y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                      πθold (y2 ) πθold (y1 )
Swap actions y1 , y2 and average together we get a symmetry gradient expression we termed Pair-
wise Policy Gradient (PPG):

                                                     πθ (y2 ) ∇πθ (y1 )           πθ (y1 ) ∇πθ (y2 )
      ∇LPPG =         E        (r(y1 ) − r(y2 ))                             −                             /2 (5)
                 y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                      πθold (y2 ) πθold (y1 )      πθold (y1 ) πθold (y2 )

                                                   πθ (y1 ) πθ (y2 )               πθ (y1 )
               =      E        (r(y1 ) − r(y2 ))                          ∇ log                 /2            (6)
                 y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                    πθold (y1 ) πθold (y2 )          πθ (y2 )


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Its immediate generalization to contextual bandit is the following theorem:
Theorem 1 (Pairwise Policy Gradient with Importance Sampling). For any prompt x, the policy
gradient can be expressed as ∇LVPG = E ∇LVPG (x), where ∇LVPG (x) can be expressed as:
                                               x∼D

                                              πθ (y2 |x) ∇πθ (y1 |x)        πθ (y1 |x) ∇πθ (y2 |x)
            E      (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                                 −                                /2
       y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                         πθold (y2 |x) πθold (y1 |x)   πθ (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)
                                                                           old
                                            πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)            πθ (y1 |x)
      =     E        (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                             ∇ log              /2
       y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                       πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)       πθ (y2 |x)


4.2     C OMBINE WITH C LIPPING

A significant modification of PPO over VPG is to clip the loss function, which disincentivizes large
updates to the policy. Specifically, PPO dictates that the ratio πθ /πθold should remain close to 1,
guided by the sign of the Advantage function Adv. Understanding this in an intuitive sense, if
Adv(y|x) > 0, it implies that taking the action y is beneficial on average. Hence, we aim to
increase the probability πθ (y|x). However, if the policy ratio πθ /πθold exceeds 1 + ϵ, we consider
the change sufficient and halt the gradient; otherwise, the gradient is computed for further learning.
Conversely, if Adv(y|x) < 0, we strive to optimize the ratio towards 1 − ϵ instead of 1 + ϵ. This
intuition guides us to derive two variants of the algorithm, differentiated by whether clipping is
applied separately or jointly for actions y1 and y2 .
Clipping Separately (Version 1): For {i, j} = {1, 2},

     P3O                                                   πθ (yj |x)      πθ (yi |x)
   Li (x) =         E        sg (r(yi |x) − r(yj |x))
               y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                              πθold (yj |x) πθold (yi |x)

                                                           πθ (yj |x)              πθ (yi |x)
 LP3O
  i,clip (x) =      E        sg   (r(y i |x) − r(y j |x))                 clip(                 , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)
               y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                              πθold (yj |x)           πθold (yi |x)
       LP3O            min(LP3O           P3O                    P3O       P3O

         sep = E               1 (x), L1,clip (x)) + min(L2 (x), L2,clip (x)) /2
                  x∼D

Clipping Jointly (Version 2):

          P3O                                                 πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)             πθ (y1 |x)
        L (x) =         E        sg (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                                   log
                   y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                             πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)        πθ (y2 |x)

                                                              π θ (y 1 |x)  π θ (y 2 |x)
       LP3O
        clip (x) =      E        sg (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))
                   y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                             πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)

                                      πθ (y1 |x)      πθ (y1 |x)               πθ (y1 |x)
                      × clip log                 , log old           − ϵ, log old             +ϵ
                                      πθ (y2 |x)      πθold (y2 |x)            πθold (y2 |x)
            LP3O
             joi = E min(L
                           P3O
                               (x), LP3O
                                     clip (x))
                     x∼D

 The sg and clip refers to the stop-gradient and clip operator respectively. We present the entire
pipeline of P3O in Pseudocode 2.

4.3     R ELATIONSHIP WITH PPO AND DPO

In this section, we briefly discuss the relationship of our proposed algorithm and two existing algo-
rithms, PPO and DPO. We further elaborate their theoretical properties in Section 4.4.
Comparison with PPO: The objective of PPO, before clipping is applied and reduced to the con-
textual bandit setting, can be expressed as follows:
                                                                          πθ (y|x)
                           LPPO
                            no clip = −        E     (r(y|x) − Vϕ (x))
                                         y∼πθold (·|x)                   πθold (y|x)
Where Vϕ (x) is a proxy to the value function V πθold = Ey∼πθold r(y|x). In contrast to PPO, P3O
expands Vϕ (x) using another sample y ′ to construct an unbiased estimator, bypassing the need to
learn an additional value function V , which leads to more stable result.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparison with DPO: Like P3O, DPO also adopts the contextual bandit (CB) formulation. The
gradient of DPO’s objective function takes the following form:

      DPO                              πθ (yl |x)          πθ (yw |x)        πθ (yw |x)
   ∇L (x, yw , yl ) = −βσ β log SFT                − β log SFT         ∇ log              /2
                                      π (yl |x)           π (yw |x)          πθ (yl |x)
The gradient direction of DPO resembles that of our formulation in Theorem 1. However, DPO uses
a different weight in front of the gradient. We hypothesize that the reason for DPO usually achieving
a higher reward but falling short on KL-control (Figure 2 and 3) compared to PPO is because DPO
aligns the policy towards the goal policy while doesn’t directly consider the reward. Unlike PPO
and P3O, which applies policy gradient based on the idea of strict policy improvement for every
gradient update (Schulman et al., 2015a), DPO aligns the policy via an alternate “distance”, where
the intermediary steps are not guaranteed to maximize the KL-Reward trade-off. We note that P3O
combines the benefits of PPO and DPO, offering guaranteed policy improvement akin to policy
gradient.

4.4   R EWARD E QUIVALENCE & I NSTABILITY OF PPO

In this section, we formally define the concept of reward equivalence (Definition 1). We show that
BTL is invariant under this equivalent relationship in lemma 1. We then discuss why it leads to a
desirable property named invariance (Definition 2) that we want RL algorithms to satisfy. In the
end, we present our main theorem (Theorem 2) which shows that PPO does not satisfy this property,
contributing to its instability.
Definition 1 (Reward Equivalence). Two reward functions r(y|x) and r′ (y|x) are termed equiva-
lent, denoted as r ∼ r′ , if and only if there exist a function δ(x) depend solely on the prompt x, such
that for every prompt and response pair (x, y),
                                      r(y|x) − r′ (y|x) = δ(x)
The equivalent class associated with reward r is represented as [r].

Note that comparative losses such as Bradley-Terry loss and Plackett-Luce loss, is unaffected by a
shift in the prompt’s reward as in definition 1. This observation leads to the following Lemma:
Lemma 1 (Invariance of BTL). For two reward functions that satisfy r ∼ r′ , they both yield identical
loss for any response pairs (or K responses) under the Bradley-Terry Loss (or Plackett-Luce Loss).

Lemma 1 underscores that the only information we can learn from the preference data is the reward
difference of two responses to the same prompt. This implies that direct comparison of responses
stemming from different prompts should be avoided. This is because we can craft an arbitrary
function denoted as δ and replace r̂ with the identical r̂ + δ, while flipping the sign of r̂(y|x) −
r̂′ (y ′ |x′ ). As a result, an ideal algorithm should focus only on the relevant information within the
reward function, filtering out the noise represented by δ. This leads the following definition:
Definition 2 (Invariance). An algorithm is said to be invariant with respect to the equivalent relation
“∼”, if for any two equivalent reward functions r ∼ r′ and a fixed set of prompt and response pairs,
the algorithm perform identical updates to the policy.

To illustrate definition 2, assume that we have two equivalent reward functions r̂ and r̂′ = r̂ + δ.
Notably, even when initialized with the same random seed, PPO can result in distinct updates for
an identical batch. This behavior can be attributed to PPO’s reliance on learning a V function to
estimate advantage. In the simplest scenario, where the advantage is estimated via one-step TD
(Adv(y|x) = r(y|x) − V (x), corresponding to λGAE = 0) and y is a single token, we should
expect the advantage function to stay unchanged. However, following the derivation
                                         Advr̂ (y|x) = Advr̂′ (y|x)
                             ⇐⇒ r̂(y|x) − Vr̂ (x) = r̂′ (y|x) − Vr̂′ (x)
                             ⇐⇒ Vr̂′ (x) − Vr̂ (x) = δ(x)
We can see that even though r̂ and r̂′ are equivalent, they yield different updates for V function.
This give rise to our main theorem (full proof in Appendix B.2):
Theorem 2 (Non-invariance of PPO). P3O and DPO are invariant with respect to “∼”. In contrast,
PPO is not, given the same initialization of V .


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we empirically study how well can P3O align with human preference. We conduct
experiments on two widely-adopted RLHF tasks, summarization and question-answering, and we
find that P3O achieves better performance in terms of both KL-Reward trade-off and quality of
generation, against several strong baselines. We will first briefly introduce the tasks, compared
methods, and evaluations in our experiments, and then elaborate on these findings in detail.
Tasks. We explore two different open-ended text generation tasks, i.e. summarization and
question-answering. For both tasks, algorithms are given a reward model pre-trained from a dataset
                            (i)  (i)
of preference D = {x(i) , yw , yl }, and the goal is to obtain a policy π(y|x) that can generate high-
quality response y given prompt x. In summarization, we use the TL;DR “too long; didn’t read”
dataset (Völske et al., 2017), where x is a forum post from Reddit, and y is a corresponding sum-
mary. We use a 6B SFT model CarperAI/openai summarize tldr sft as the initial policy
and EleutherAI/gpt-j-6b as the reward model. In question-answering, x is a human query,
which may come from diverse topics, and the policy should learn to produce an engaging and helpful
response y. Following prior work, we use the Anthropic Helpful and Harmless (HH) dataset (Bai
et al., 2022a). We fine-tune two policies of sizes {1B,6B}, Dahoas/pythia-1B-static-sft
and Dahoas/pythia-6B-static-sft. Both models have gone through supervised fine-
tuning with labeled prompt-response pairs, similar to the protocol in Ouyang et al. (2022) and Ra-
mamurthy et al. (2022). For the reward model, we use the 6B model Dahoas/gptj-rm-static
trained from the same dataset based on EleutherAI/gpt-j-6b as a proxy of human preference.
Methods. We compare two versions of P3O, P3O-V1 and P3O-V2, which represent clipping sepa-
rately and jointly respectively, with several effective and representative approaches for LLM align-
ment. We start with the SFT policy trained by token-wise supervised fine-tuning. It hasn’t gone
through further alignment; Every other method uses the SFT model as initialization. For RL al-
gorithms1 , we consider the dominant approach PPO (Schulman et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022)
with reward specified in Eq (2). We follow the implementation of trlx (Castricato et al., 2023).
Besides, we also consider the newly proposed DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), a method that directly
optimizes the policy towards the closed-form solution of the KL-constrained reward maximization.
Although DPO is proposed as an offline alignment method, we notice that we can make it online
with the help of a proxy reward function. (More details can be found in Appendix A.2)
Evaluations. Deviating too much from the ref-
erence policy (e.g. SFT model) would lead
the online policy to cut corners of the reward
model and produce incoherent continuations, as
pointed out by previous works (Ziegler et al.,
2019). Gao et al. (2023) studied the scal-
ing law of reward over-optimization in a syn-
thetic setup, where labels are supplied by a
“gold standard” reward model. They empir-
ically find out the golden reward can be ap-
proximated by a simple function form involving
the square-root KL-divergence from the refer-
ence policy. Therefore, it is important to bal-
ance the trade-off between the KL-divergence
and asymptotic reward, and we measure the ef-
fectiveness of each algorithm by its frontier of     Figure 2: KL-Reward frontier for TL;DR: x-axis
achieved reward and KL-divergence from the           represent DKL (πθ ∥π SFT ), y-axis represent the re-
reference policy (KL-Reward Frontier). To            ward evaluated by the proxy reward model, both
directly evaluate the quality of generated re-       averaged over 200 test prompts and evaluate every
sponses, we also perform Head-to-Head Com-           500 gradient steps. We find that a simple linear
parisons between every pair of algorithms in         function fit the curve well, and P3O have the best
the HH dataset. We use two metrics for evalua-       KL-Reward trade-off among the three.

   1
     Among methods directly involving RL, we note that PPO and a modified version A2C (Mnih et al., 2016;
Lee et al., 2023) are the only two current online RL methods for LLM alignment. However, there is no strong
evidence showing the supremacy of A2C over PPO, so we choose PPO as our baseline.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: KL-Reward frontier for HH: x-axis and y-axis represents DKL (πθ ∥π SFT ) and the reward
respectively. Each point represent an average of results over 280 test prompts and calculated every
500 gradient updates. Left two figure compare P3O-V1 and PPO with varying base model sizes;
Right two figures compare P3O-V2 and online-DPO. Results showing that P3O can not only achieve
higher reward but also yield better KL control.

tion: (1) Reward, the optimized target during online RL, (2) GPT-4, as a faithful proxy for human
evaluation of response helpfulness. For the latter metric, we shall point out that previous studies
show that LLMs can be better automated evaluators than existing metrics (Chen et al., 2023), and
GPT-4 judgments correlate strongly with humans, with human agreement with GPT-4 typically sim-
ilar or higher than inter-human annotator agreement (Rafailov et al., 2023). Additional details can
be found in Appendix C.

5.1   KL-R EWARD F RONTIER

We conduct experiments on both TL;DR and HH datasets to evaluate the efficacy of the alignment
algorithms in optimizing reward while restricting policy deviation from the reference. Figures 2 and
3 demonstrate the KL-Reward frontier for TL;DR and HH respectively. Each point represents the
average evaluation over test prompts at every 500-step interval. The x-axis represents the average
sequence-level KL-divergence DKL (πθ ∥π SFT ), whereas the y-axis stands for the average reward
given by the proxy reward model. For summarization task, we find that P3O-V1 can reach a slightly
higher reward than P3O-V2, while with a worse KL-Reward trade-off. Consequently, only P3O-V2
is included in Figure 2 for comparison. We find that P3O-V2 is able to produce almost the same
highest reward whilst maintaining superior KL efficiency. DPO, despite its faster convergence, ex-
hibits a 25% higher KL-divergence than P3O-V2 under the same reward. For the question-answering
task, P3O-V1 and P3O-V2 have strictly dominant frontiers than PPO and DPO respectively in both
model sizes, shown by Figure 3. Empirical findings establish P3O’s superior trade-off between KL
and Reward over other baselines, delivering a substantial higher reward in the range of 0.1-0.3.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               P3O     DPO      PPO      SFT                                        P3O    DPO    PPO    SFT

        P3O   50.0     54.6     57.0    69.3        65                        P3O   50.0   50.5   60.5   77.9   70
                                                    60


                                                                                                                     reward win rate [%]
                                                         GPT-4 win rate [%]
                                                                                                                60
        DPO   45.4     50.0     54.0    67.3        55                        DPO   49.5   50.0   62.1   76.3
                                                    50                                                          50
        PPO   43.0     46.0     50.0    61.6        45                        PPO   39.5   37.9   50.0   69.6
                                                                                                                40
                                                    40
        SFT   30.7     32.7     38.4    50.0        35                        SFT   22.1   23.7   30.4   50.0   30



Figure 4: Head-to-head comparisons between algorithm pairs from {P3O, DPO, PPO, SFT}. Left
figure displays the win rate as evaluated by GPT-4. Right figure presents the win rate based on direct
comparison of the proxy reward. Despite the high correlation between the figures, we found that the
reward win rate must be adjusted according to the KL in order to align with the GPT-4 win rate.

5.2       H EAD - TO -H EAD C OMPARISONS

To verify the reliability of prior results, we conduct head-to-head comparisons between each al-
gorithm pair among {P3O, DPO, PPO, SFT}. Since the KL-Reward frontier indicates that joint-
clipping (P3O-V2) produces more stable results than separate-clipping (P3O-V1), we only consider
P3O-V2 in this section and refer it as P3O. We sample completions from different policies2 on the
test set of the HH dataset at default temperature 1.0, and we compute the average pairwise win rate
using (1) reward and (2) GPT-4 as evaluators. Previous studies (Chen et al., 2023; Rafailov et al.,
2023) have shown that GPT-4 is a faithful proxy for human preference and is widely adopted for
comparisons. The prompt used for evaluation is presented in Appendix C.4.
Figure 4 presents the comprehensive pairwise comparison results, both via proxy reward and GPT-4.
The average KL-divergence and reward ranking of these models is DPO > P3O > PPO > SFT.
Although DPO marginally surpasses P3O in reward, it has a considerably higher KL-divergence
(Table 1), which may be detrimental to the quality of generation. As a result, DPO has a reward win
rate 49.5% against P3O but only 45.4% as evaluated by GPT-4. Compared with other methods, P3O
exhibits a GPT-4 win rate of 57.0% against PPO and 69.3% against SFT. This result is consistent
with our findings from the KL-Reward frontier section, affirming that P3O could better align with
human preference than previous baselines.


6       C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORKS

This work presents new insights into aligning large language models with human preferences via
reinforcement learning. We introduced the Reinforcement Learning with Relative Feedback frame-
work, which unifies the core principles of reward modeling and RL fine-tuning. Under this frame-
work, we designed a novel policy gradient algorithm, P3O, based on pairwise feedback. Empirical
evaluations demonstrated that P3O outperforms prior methods in terms of the KL-Reward frontier as
well as GPT-4 win-rate. P3O inherit the advantages of policy gradient methods, while maintaining
a simplicity in both algorithmic design and function approximation.
Looking ahead, several intriguing questions arise for future exploration. Firstly, we aim to under-
stand the impacts of reward over-optimization on trajectory-based RL algorithms and token-based
RL algorithms. Secondly, we are interested in whether we can generalize the policy gradient al-
gorithm to accommodate more than two ranked responses, potentially enabling a better trade-off
between human effort and AI alignment. Finally, we wish to explore the benefits of applying our
P3O algorithm in contexts beyond training language models with human feedback. We eagerly
anticipate investigating these questions in our future work.

    2
        We select checkpoints with the highest reward for generation.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Róbert Busa-Fekete, Balázs Szörényi, Paul Weng, Weiwei Cheng, and Eyke Hüllermeier.
  Preference-based reinforcement learning: evolutionary direct policy search using a preference-
  based racing algorithm. Machine learning, 97:327–351, 2014.
Louis Castricato, Alex Havrilla, Shahbuland Matiana, Duy V. Phung, Aman Tiwari, Jonathan Tow,
  and Maksym Zhuravinsky. trlX: A scalable framework for RLHF, June 2023. URL https:
  //github.com/CarperAI/trlx.
Yi Chen, Rui Wang, Haiyun Jiang, Shuming Shi, and Ruifeng Xu. Exploring the use of large
  language models for reference-free text quality evaluation: A preliminary empirical study. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.00723, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum,
  and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.
Miroslav Dudı́k, Katja Hofmann, Robert E Schapire, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Masrour Zoghi. Con-
 textual dueling bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 563–587. PMLR, 2015.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study
  on ppo and trpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12729, 2020.
Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek
  Sharma, Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, et al. Reinforced self-training
  (rest) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Ashesh Jain, Brian Wojcik, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning trajectory pref-
  erences for manipulators via iterative improvement. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 26, 2013.
Andras Kupcsik, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee. Learning dynamic robot-to-human object handover
  from human feedback. Robotics Research: Volume 1, pp. 161–176, 2018.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia
  Glaese, Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. Red teaming language models with language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03286, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Chris-
  tian Bauckhage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural
  language processing?: Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01241, 2022.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learn-
  ing of reward functions. 2017.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015a.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation.  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.02438, 2015b.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11871, 2022.
Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
  Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17492, 2023.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 12, 1999.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. Tl; dr: Mining reddit to learn
 automatic summarization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization,
 pp. 59–63, 2017.
Tianhao Wu, Yunchang Yang, Han Zhong, Liwei Wang, Simon Du, and Jiantao Jiao. Nearly optimal
  policy optimization with stable at any time guarantee. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 24243–24265. PMLR, 2022.
Jun Xu, Zeng Wei, Long Xia, Yanyan Lan, Dawei Yin, Xueqi Cheng, and Ji-Rong Wen. Reinforce-
  ment learning to rank with pairwise policy gradient. In Proceedings of the 43rd International
  ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 509–518,
  2020.
Yunchang Yang, Tianhao Wu, Han Zhong, Evrard Garcelon, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric,
  Liwei Wang, and Simon S Du. A reduction-based framework for conservative bandits and rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11692, 2021.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
  Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.
Yisong Yue, Josef Broder, Robert Kleinberg, and Thorsten Joachims. The k-armed dueling bandits
  problem. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(5):1538–1556, 2012.
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Wei Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin, Qin Liu,
  Limao Xiong, Lu Chen, et al. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part i: Ppo. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04964, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael I Jordan. Principled reinforcement learning with human
  feedback from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11270, 2023a.
Banghua Zhu, Hiteshi Sharma, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Shi Dong, Chenguang Zhu, Michael I Jordan,
  and Jiantao Jiao. Fine-tuning language models with advantage-induced policy alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02231, 2023b.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


A     A LGORITHMS
A.1   P SEUDOCODES

We present the pseudocode for both the Vanilla Policy Gradient (VPG) and our proposed algorithm
P3O. While both algorithms follow the similar procedure of collecting trajectories and leveraging
these trajectories to estimate the gradient, there are key differences: Our method collect pairwise
trajectories and comput trajectory-wise rewards. This approach eliminates the need for estimating
the value function V and bypasses the requirement of estimating the advantage function using Gen-
eralized Advantage Estimation (GAE). Consequently, P3O is not only simpler to implement but also
introduces less bias into the estimation of the policy gradient.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Vanilla Policy Gradient
 1: Initialization: Initialize policy parameters θ0 and value function parameters ϕ0
 2: for k = 0, 1, 2 · · · do
 3:     Collect trajectories Dk = {τi } by running policy πθk starting from a batch of prompts and
        generate single trajectory from each prompt.
 4:     Compute token-wise rewards contain both token-wise KL and preference reward as in
        Equation 2. And then rewards-to-go R̂t .
 5:     Estimate advantage estimates Advd t via GAE or other methods.
 6:     Estimate policy gradient via:
                                                    T
                                        1 X Xd
                               ĝk =         Advt ∇θ log πθ (at |st )
                                       |Dk |
                                              τ ∈Dk k=0

 7:     Apply gradient updates to θk using gradient descent.
 8:     Fit value function by regression on mean-squared error via gradient descent:
                                                          T
                                                  1    X X
                           ϕk+1 = arg min                    (Vϕ (st ) − R̂t )2
                                          ϕ     |Dk |T
                                                          τ ∈Dk
                                                         t=0

 9: end for

Algorithm 2 Pairwise Proximal Policy Optimization (P3O)
 1: Initialization: Initialize policy parameters θ0
 2: for k = 0, 1, 2 · · · do
 3:     Collect pairwise trajectories Dk = {τi } by running policy πθk starting from a batch of
        prompts and generate two trajectories from each prompt.
 4:     Compute trajectory-wise rewards contain both trajectory-wise KL and preference reward:
                           r̂final = r̂preference − βDKL (πθk (y|x)∥π SFT (y|x))
 5:    Estimate either version of clipped pairwise policy gradient via equation in section 4.2
 6:    Apply gradient updates to θk using gradient descent.
 7: end for


A.2   D ERIVATION OF DPO

DPO start with a preference dataset D and minimize the loss:

                 DPO                                   πθ (yw |x)           πθ (yl |x)
               L     =−         E         log σ β log SFT          − β log SFT
                          (x,yw ,yl )∼D               π (yw |x)            π (yl |x)
However, this is offline since the algorithm only make use of a fixed dataset. Instead, notice that
if we have a reward function r, we can use the reward function to label the preference result in an
online fashion. Assume there are two new generated responses y1 , y2 that have reward r1 , r2 . Then
we simply label the preference according to Bradley & Terry (1952),
                                       y1 ≻ y2 w.p. σ(r1 − r2 )
                                       y2 ≻ y1 w.p. σ(r2 − r1 )
We would like to use the notation yw and yl to represent the preferred and less preferred response
chosen by the reward. We collect all the newly generated responses into a replay buffer Dreplay ,
therefore we can optimize the same DPO loss here:

                                                        πθ (yw |x)           πθ (yl |x)
             LDPO = −           E           log σ β log SFT         − β log SFT
                        (x,yw ,yl )∼Dreplay            π (yw |x)            π (yl |x)
We can further reduce the variance of the loss by eliminating the randomness in labelling the pref-
erence by incorporating the known labeling probability explicitly in the formula,

              DPO                                       πθ (y1 |x)            πθ (y2 |x)
            L      =−          E           log σ ϵβ log SFT         − ϵβ log SFT
                       (x,y1 ,y2 )∼Dreplay             π (y1 |x)             π (y2 |x)
                      ϵ∼Ber(σ(r1 −r2 ))


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, Ber(σ(r1 − r2 )) is the two point Bernoulli distribution on {−1, 1}.

B     P ROOFS
B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In the contextual bandit setting, VPG aims for estimating the gradient ∇LVPG = Ex∼D ∇LVPG (x),
where ∇LVPG (x) can be expressed as:
                                 ∇LVPG (x) =        E      r(y|x)∇ log πθ (y|x)
                                                y∼πθ (y|x)

The expectation can be replaced with a summation, leading to:
                 X
  ∇LVPG (x) =        r(y|x)∇πθ (y|x)                                                                         (7)
                    y
                                                                                              !
                     X                                X
               =             r(y1 |x)∇πθ (y1 |x) −            r(y2 |x)πθ (y2 |x)∇πθ (y1 |x)                  (8)
                        y1                           y1 ,y2
                                                                                                        !
                        X                                           X
               =               r(y1 |x)πθ (y2 |x)∇πθ (y1 |x) −              r(y2 |x)πθ (y2 |x)∇πθ (y1 |x)    (9)
                     y1 ,y2                                        y1 ,y2
                   X
               =             (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x)) πθ (y2 |x)∇πθ (y1 |x)                                    (10)
                   y1 ,y2
                                                            πθ (y2 |x) ∇πθ (y1 |x)
               =         E         (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                                                    (11)
                   y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                           πθold (y2 |x) πθold (y1 |x)
                                                                             P
In Equation (8) we subtract the latter term which equals to 0 because
   P                                                                    P       y1 ∇πθ (y1 |x) =
∇ y1 πθ (y1 |x) = ∇ · 1 = 0. We further multiply the first term by 1 = y2 πθ (y2 |x) in Equation
(9). Finally, we rephrase the previous equation using importance sampling and yield Equation 11.
Swap actions y1 , y2 and average together we get the desired form:

   VPG                                              πθ (y2 |x) ∇πθ (y1 |x)        πθ (y1 |x) ∇πθ (y2 |x)
∇L (x) =           E       (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                               −                            /2
             y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                         πθold (y2 |x) πθold (y1 |x)   πθ (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)
                                                                                 old
                                                  πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)            πθ (y1 |x)
           =       E       (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))                             ∇ log              /2
             y1 ,y2 ∼πθold                       πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)       πθ (y2 |x)

B.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

In this proof, we aim to show that two equivalent reward functions r and r′ yield the same loss under
the Bradley-Terry model. Assume that r ∼ r′ , then by definition there exist δ(x) such that for any
prompt and response pair (x, y), r′ (y|x) = r(y|x) + δ(x).
Consider any prompt x and two responses yw , yl labeled by human. According to Equation 1, the
Bradley-Terry loss for this pair given reward r is:
                                       loss = log σ (r(yw |x) − r(yl |x))

Similarly, the Bradley-Terry loss for this pair given reward r′ is:
                                      loss′ = log σ (r′ (yw |x) − r′ (yl |x))

By substituting r′ (y|x) with r(y|x) + δ(x) in loss′ , we get:
      r′ (yw |x) − r′ (yl |x) = (r(yw |x) + δ(x)) − (r′ (yl |x) + δ(x)) = r(yw |x) − r(yl |x)

This shows that loss′ = loss, indicating that the two reward functions r and r′ are indeed equivalent
with respect to the Bradley-Terry loss. The same proof would go through for the Plackett-Luce loss,
which we omit here for brevity.


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

We first prove the invariance for P3O and DPO, then we prove that PPO is not invariant.
Assume that we have two equivalent reward functions r ∼ r′ , by definition there exist δ(x) such
that for any prompt and response pair (x, y), r′ (y|x) = r(y|x) + δ(x).
Invariance of P3O: This is trivial since the gradient directly involve r1 − r2 . We take P3O-V2 as
an example and write the gradient formulation with respect to the prompt responses pair (x, y1 , y2 ):
If the reward is r, the update follows:

                                                     πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)              πθ (y1 |x)
             LP3O
               r   =  sg   (r(y 1 |x) − r(y 2 |x))                                log
                                                    πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)         πθ (y2 |x)

                                                     πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)
          LP3O
            r,clip = sg (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))
                                                    πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)

                                        πθ (y1 |x)        πθ (y1 |x)              πθ (y1 |x)
                         × clip log                , log old             − ϵ, log old            +ϵ
                                        πθ (y2 |x)        πθold (y2 |x)           πθold (y2 |x)
           ∇LP3O            P3O  P3O
             r,joi = ∇ min(Lr , Lr,clip )

Similarly, if the reward is r′ , the gradient is:

                               ′             ′            πθ (y1 |x) πθ (y2 |x)              πθ (y1 |x)
                LP3O
                  r ′ = sg  (r   (y1 |x) − r   (y2 |x))                                 log
                                                         πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)         πθ (y2 |x)

                               ′             ′            π θ (y 1 |x)   π θ (y 2 |x)
         LP3O
            r ′ ,clip = sg (r (y1 |x) − r (y2 |x))
                                                         πθold (y1 |x) πθold (y2 |x)

                                          πθ (y1 |x)         πθ (y1 |x)               πθ (y1 |x)
                         × clip log                   , log old              − ϵ, log old           +ϵ
                                          πθ (y2 |x)         πθold (y2 |x)            πθold (y2 |x)
          ∇LP3O               P3O    P3O
            r ′ ,joi = ∇ min(Lr ′ , Lr ′ ,clip )
We can see that the only difference between these two updates in the reward difference part. How-
ever, due to the fact that
       (r′ (y1 |x) − r′ (y2 |x)) = (r(y1 |x) + δ(x) − r(y2 |x) − δ(x)) = (r(y1 |x) − r(y2 |x))
We conclude that LP3O    r    = LP3O
                                  r′ and LP3O       P3O
                                          r,clip = Lr ′ ,clip .              Consequently, the two updates
  P3O       P3O
∇Lr,joi , ∇Lr′ ,joi are the same.
Invariance of DPO: Assume the same setting as in the previous paragraph:
The gradient of DPO given reward r can be written as:

                                                        πθ (y1 |x)             πθ (y2 |x)
          ∇LDPO
              r   = −        E          log σ   ϵβ log               − ϵβ log
                      ϵ∼Ber(σ(r1 −r2 ))                π SFT (y1 |x)          π SFT (y2 |x)
Similarly, the gradient of DPO given reward r′ can be expressed as:

               DPO                                        πθ (y1 |x)          πθ (y2 |x)
            ∇Lr′ = −            E            log σ ϵβ log SFT        − ϵβ log SFT
                         ϵ∼Ber(σ(r1′ −r2′ ))             π (y1 |x)           π (y2 |x)
The only difference between these two equations is the sampling distribution of the Bernoulli distri-
bution. Easy to verify that they are the same since σ(r1 − r2 ) = σ(r1′ − r2′ ).
PPO is not Invariant: The loss of PPO is the combination of policy-loss and V -loss, with the
trade-off of these two terms controlled by hyper-parameter η:
                                            LPPO = Lpolicy + ηLV
Suppose the policy network and the V network have separate parameters, then taking the gradient of
LPPO is simply taking gradient of Lpolicy . We aim to prove that the gradient of Lpolicy is not identical
for two equivalent rewards. We first recap the formula of Lpolicy :

                                   πθ (at |st ) d                       πθ (at |st )
Lpolicy = −        E        min                   Adv(at |st ), clip                   , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ Adv(a
                                                                                                       d t |st )
            (st ,at )∼πθold       πθold (at |st )                      πθold (at |st )


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Where the Adv
          d is estimated via GAE:
                            d t |st ) = δt + (λγ)δt+1 + · · · + (λγ)T −t+1 δT −1
                            Adv(a
                                  δt = r(st , at ) + γV (st+1 ) − V (st )
For simplicity, we consider the one-sample case, where we are taking gradient with respect to the
sample (st , at ). According to the formula of Adv,
                                               d and combine with the fact that the reward is only
appended to the last token T . We have the following relation,
                                                  d r (at |st ) + (λγ)T −t+1 δ
                                 d r′ (at |st ) = Adv
                                 Adv
Here, δ =   δ(x), x represent the prompt  corresponding to st , which      is a prefix  of st . As a re-
              πθ (at |st ) d                  πθ (at |st )
sult, ∇ min                Adv(at |st ), clip
               πθold (at |st )                             , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ Adv(at |st ) will not stay un-
                                                  πθold (at |st )
                                                                          d

changed for different reward r, since Adv
                                      d can be arbitrary real number by choosing δ.


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
C.1   S ETUP

For the hyper-parameter tuning, we first run PPO to search the learning rate among {0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8}×
10−6 that yields the best KL-Reward frontier (Section 5). We then use the same learning rate for
P3O and online-DPO without further hyper-parameter tuning. To ensure fair comparison, we double
the batch size of PPO such that every algorithms can see the same number of responses, although
P3O and online-DPO only see half the prompts.

C.2   A BLATION S TUDY

In this study, we conducted ablation experiments to assess the impact of specific elements in our
algorithm design, namely the clipping technique and the KL coefficient. Our study primarily aims
to answer two questions:

      1 How does the clipping technique influence our algorithm’s performance?
      2 What is the effect of varying the KL-control coefficient on the KL-Reward frontier?


Figure 5: The Left figure illustrates the effect of varying the KL coefficient within the set
0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2. The Right figure compares P3O-V2 with and without the clipping technique
(solid lines represent with clipping, dashed lines without)

Our results shown in the right figure indicate that using the clipping technique positively impacts the
KL-Reward frontier, particularly in the early stages of training. This enhancement is accompanied
by a slight decrease in the asymptotic reward. Interestingly, our results also show that the clipping


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


technique is more effective when the learning rate is larger. This aligns with our understanding, as
a smaller learning rate would naturally keep the update ratio closer to 1, thereby reducing the need
for clipping.
In terms of the KL-control coefficient, our findings illustrate that its value significantly influences
the algorithm’s performance. Larger KL coefficients led to a slight improvement in the KL-Reward
frontier but a larger decrease in the asymptotic reward. This result suggests that using a smaller KL
coefficient might provide a more favorable trade-off between reward and KL-divergence.

C.3   A DDITIONAL S TATISTICS

Here we provide additional statistics for the checkpoints we used in GPT-4 evaluation. We see that
PPO and SFT tends to generate long responses while P3O and DPO generate shorter responses.
Moreover, P3O achieve nearly the same reward with DPO while incurring much less KL.


                                          Table 1: Reward
                                         P3O       DPO         PPO        SFT
                      Reward           −0.302     −0.298     −0.613     −1.195
                      KL % sample      9.83       12.01      7.02       0
                      KL % token       0.12       0.14       0.06       0
                      Token num        80.46      88.84      109.03     112.70


C.4   P ROMPT

For the following query to a chatbot, which response is more helpful?

Query:
<user_query>

Response A:
<response_a>

Response B:
<response_b>

FIRST provide a one-sentence comparison of the two responses and
explain which you feel is more helpful. SECOND, on a new line, state only
"A" or "B" to indicate which response is more helpful.
Your response should use the format:

Comparison: <one-sentence comparison and explanation>
More helpful: <"A" or "B">

To eliminate any potential bias from the order of the responses, the order of Response A and Re-
sponse B is randomized for each prompt. We note that although we ask GPT-4 to directly respond
A or B to indicate the preference, in approximately 3% of evaluations, GPT-4 found that neither
response adequately addressed the user’s query.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5    GPT-4 E VALUATION R ESULTS

 Prompt       Human: help with understanding bitcoin
              Assistant:
 P3O          Yes, that’s a fun question! Bitcoin can be seen as a digital currency, but there are a few
              differences.
              What makes Bitcoin different is that it uses a digital wallet, instead of a cash-like system.
              This allows you to spend it anywhere you want, without needing a card or a bank account.
              You can also use Bitcoin to spend other forms of currency.
              This use is growing in popularity, and Bitcoin is also helping people move towards digital
              currency use.
 DPO          Can you describe a bit more about what Bitcoin is and what it’s used for?
 PPO          What would you like to know?
 SFT          What is Bitcoin?
 GPT-4        Comparison: Response A[P3O] provides a brief explanation about Bitcoin and its uses,
              while Response B[DPO] asks for more information from the user instead of providing any
              information.
              Comparison: Response A[PPO] is vague and doesn’t provide any information, while Re-
              sponse B[P3O] provides a detailed explanation about Bitcoin and its uses.
              Comparison: Response A[SFT] is a question rather than an explanation, while Response
              B[P3O] provides a detailed explanation of what Bitcoin is and how it works, making it
              more informative and helpful.

Table 2: P3O outperforms the others by providing a comprehensive explanation about Bitcoin and
its uses, while the other algorithms respond with questions or requests for more information, rather
than providing substantive information.


 Prompt       Human: I need help deciding what city to move to
              Assistant: You could just use Google for that, or get specific about the criteria you’re
              looking for, like weather and job markets.
              Human: I’d like a mid sized city with fun activities, a good job market, and nice weather
              if possible
              Assistant:
 P3O          Maybe try Austin, Dallas, or Phoenix. They might be possible choices.
 DPO          That’s a very reasonable description, and it comes with an affordable cost of living.
 PPO          I think that depends a lot on your situation. Is there a job you’re particularly interested in?
 SFT          Is this for work, or pleasure?
 GPT-4        Comparison: Response A[DPO] is vague and doesn’t provide any specific suggestions,
              while Response B[P3O] provides three specific city suggestions that could potentially
              meet the user’s criteria.
              Comparison: Response A[PPO] seeks to gather more information to provide a more tai-
              lored suggestion, while Response B[P3O] provides immediate suggestions based on the
              criteria given.
              Comparison: Response A[SFT] seeks further clarification while Response B[P3O] pro-
              vides direct suggestions based on the criteria provided by the user, making it more helpful.

Table 3: In each comparison, P3O outperformed the other algorithms, effectively suggesting three
potential cities (Austin, Dallas, or Phoenix) that align with the user’s criteria. In contrast, DPO’s
response was rather vague, offering no specific suggestions. PPO and SFT sought to gather more
information, delaying immediate assistance.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt       Human: How can I make my own soap at home?
              Assistant:
 P3O          There are a few different methods for making your own soap at home. Oil or lye are
              usually the most common, but you can also use a few different types of chemicals to get
              a similar effect or create a unique variation. Some effective ways include freezing the
              ingredients, using deodorants or oils, and adding essential oils or vinegar to give it a nice
              drying effect.
 DPO          I wouldn’t recommend it, it’s a little fancier and not something you can do at home.
 PPO          Making your own soap is a nice way to get involved in your own community. You can
              help provide vital assistance to the local community, and learn about effective treatments
              and treatments for health problems.
 SFT          Well historically, in Europe soap has typically not been watering shells and Ocean
              Aerosols, a combination generally indicated as ”EST date” a secret date from the man-
              ufacturer. Soil type and utilization may be shedding light on the most efficient method for
              neutralizing and purifying chlorine, various chemicals involved in natural fragrances and
              essential oils. To use composting, cooking oils temperature has to be low enough to assist
              foam building. Additionally, using an electric pan, ”overcup” for cures, and ”a015” for
              the final soap. How do you plan to save your energy and waste water?
 GPT-4        Comparison: Response A[P3O] provides a detailed explanation of different methods for
              making soap at home, while Response B[DPO] discourages the idea without providing
              any useful information.
              Comparison: Response A[PPO] is vague and doesn’t provide any specific steps or ingre-
              dients for making soap, while Response B[P3O] gives a general idea of the process and
              ingredients involved in soap making.
              Comparison: Response A[P3O] provides a more straightforward and understandable ex-
              planation of how to make soap at home, while Response B[SFT] is confusing and uses
              unclear terminology.

Table 4: P3O is assessed as the most helpful by GPT-4. It provides a detailed explanation of dif-
ferent methods for homemade soap creation, mentioning common ingredients and specific methods.
Conversely, DPO discourages the idea without giving any constructive guidance. PPO fails to offer
any specific steps or ingredients for soap creation. Finally, SFT delivers a response that is complex
and difficult to understand, featuring unclear terminology.


                                                 19
