Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B IDIRECTIONAL -R EACHABLE H IERARCHICAL                                                         RL
WITH M UTUALLY R ESPONSIVE P OLICIES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) addresses complex long-horizon tasks
         by skillfully decomposing them into subgoals. Therefore, the effectiveness of HRL
         is greatly influenced by subgoal reachability. Typical HRL methods only consider
         subgoal reachability from the unilateral level, where a dominant level enforces
         compliance to the subordinate level. However, we observe that when the dominant
         level becomes trapped in local exploration or generates unattainable subgoals, the
         subordinate level is negatively affected and cannot follow the dominant level’s
         actions. This can potentially make both levels stuck in local optima, ultimately
         hindering subsequent subgoal reachability. Allowing real-time bilateral information
         sharing and error correction would be a natural cure for this issue, which motivates
         us to propose a mutual response mechanism. Based on this, we propose the
         Bidirectional-reachable Hierarchical Policy Optimization (BrHPO)—a simple yet
         effective algorithm that also enjoys computation efficiency. Experiment results on
         a variety of long-horizon tasks showcase that BrHPO outperforms other state-of-
         the-art HRL baselines, coupled with a significantly higher exploration efficiency.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated impressive capabilities in decision-making scenarios,
ranging from achieving superhuman performance in games (Mnih et al., 2015; Lample & Chaplot,
2017; Silver et al., 2018), developing complex skills in robotics (Levine et al., 2016; Schulman et al.,
2015) and enabling smart policies in autonomous driving (Jaritz et al., 2018; Kiran et al., 2021;
Cao et al., 2023). Most of these accomplishments are attributed to single-level methods (Sutton
& Barto, 2018), which learn a flat policy by trial and error without extra task decomposition or
subgoal guidance. While single-level methods excel at short-horizon tasks involving inherently
atomic behaviors (Levy et al., 2018; Nachum et al., 2018b; Pateria et al., 2021b), they often struggle
to optimize effectively in long-horizon complex tasks that require multi-stage reasoning or sparse
reward signals. To address this challenge, hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has been
proposed, aiming to decompose complex tasks into a hierarchy of subtasks or skills (Kulkarni et al.,
2016; Bacon et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017). By exploiting subtask structure and acquiring
reusable skills, HRL empowers agents to efficiently solve long-horizon tasks.
Subgoal-based HRL methods, a prominent paradigm in HRL, partition complex tasks into simpler
subtasks by strategically selecting subgoals to guide exploration (Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Nachum
et al., 2018b). Subgoal reachability is crucial in evaluating how effectively the low-level policies’
exploration trajectory aligns with the high-level policy’s subgoal, ultimately determining task perfor-
mance (Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020). However, existing approaches for improving
subgoal reachability predominantly focus on one level of the hierarchical policy, imposing dom-
inance on the other level. This can be categorized as either low-level dominance or high-level
dominance (Nachum et al., 2018b; Zhang et al., 2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Chane-Sane et al.,
2021; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Jurgenson et al., 2020). Low-level dominance (Figure 1a) refers to
the accommodation of low-level passive exploratory behaviour by the high-level policy, causing the
agent to get stuck near the starting position. On the other hand, high-level dominance (Figure 1b) may
result in unattainable subgoals, causing repeated failure and sparse learning signals for the low-level
policy. To assess these methods, we applied them to two HRL benchmarks, AntMaze and AntPush,
and generated state-subgoal trajectories for visualization. The results reveal that the former methods
exhibit lower exploration efficiency as the high level must generate distant subgoals to guide the low


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Subgoal    Set Fixed                    Bidirectional
                 Relabeling Subgoals                     Reachable

    ✘ passive exploration     ✘ unattainable subgoals     ✓ mutually responsive


    (a) Low-level dominance   (b) High-level dominance           (c) Ours                  (a) Corrected subgoals    (b) Fixed subgoals              (c) Ours

        State         Subgoal             Subtask trajectory             Final state
                                                                                                           AntMaze Task                   AntPush Task
                      Updated             (Updated) subtask              (Updated)
        Target                                                                             Start Point        Target Point        State Trajectory          Subgoal
                      subgoal              trajectory                    final state



Figure 1: A motivating example of our proposed Figure 2: The state-subgoal trajectory comparison
BrHPO. The earth, brain, and robot symbols stand of HIRO (a), RIS (b) and BrHPO (c). BrHPO
for the environment, high-level policy, and low- can improve the alignment between states and
level policy, respectively.                      subgoals, thus benefitting overall performance.

level (Figure 2a), while the latter methods may create unattainable subgoals, resulting in the low-level
policy’s inability to track them (Figure 2b).
Enforcing subgoal reachability through unidirectional communication between the two levels has
limitations in overall performance improvement. A bidirectional reachability approach, illustrated
in Figure 1c, holds the potential to be more effective in HRL. From an optimization perspective,
bidirectional reachability provides two key benefits: 1) the high-level policy can generate subgoals
that strike a balance between incentive and accessibility, and 2) the low-level policy can take
more effective actions that drive subtask trajectories closer to the subgoal. Despite its potential
advantages, bidirectional subgoal reachability has not been extensively studied in previous research,
and its effectiveness in enhancing HRL performance requires further investigation. We explore the
theoretical benefits of bidirectional insights, and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness through
visualizing the alignment between states and subgoals in Figure 2 and our ablation studies.
This paper aims to investigate the potential of bidirectional subgoal reachability in improving subgoal-
based HRL performance, both theoretically and empirically. Specially, we propose a joint value
function and then derive a performance difference bound for hierarchical policy optimization. The
analysis suggests that enhancing subgoal reachability, from the mutual response of both-level policies,
can effectively benefit overall performance. Motivated by these, our main contribution is a simple
yet effective algorithm, Bidirectional-reachable Hierarchical Policy Optimization (BrHPO) which
incorporates a mutual response mechanism to efficiently compute subgoal reachability and integrate
it into hierarchical policy optimization. Through empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that BrHPO
achieves promising asymptotic performance and exhibits superior training efficiency compared to
state-of-the-art HRL methods. Additionally, we investigate different variants of BrHPO to showcase
the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed mechanism.


2       P RELIMINARIES

We consider an infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) with state space S,
                                                                      a
action space A, goal/subgoal space G, unknown transition probability Ps,s′ : S × A × S → [0, 1],

reward function r : S × A × G → R, and discounted factor γ ∈ (0, 1).

Framework of subgoal-based HRL. Subgoal-based HRL, also called Feudal HRL (Dayan &
Hinton, 1992; Vezhnevets et al., 2017), comprises two hierarchies: a high-level policy generating
subgoals, and a low-level policy pursuing subgoals in each subtask. Assume that each subtask
contains a fixed length of k timesteps. At the beginning of the i-th subtask where i ∈ N, the high-
level policy πh observes state sik and then outputs a subgoal g(i+1)k ∼ πh (·|sik ) ∈ G. Then, in
each subtask, the low-level policy πl performs actions conditioned on the subgoal and the current
state, aik+j ∼ πl (·|sik+j , g(i+1)k ) ∈ A, where j ∈ [0, k − 1] is a pedometer in a subtask. With the


                                                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


guidance from the subgoal, the state-subgoal-action trajectory in the i-th subtask comes out to be
                                                                                           k−1
      τiπh ,πl ≜ (sik+j )|sik , g(i+1)k ∼ πh (·|sik , ĝ), aik+j ∼ πl (·|sik+j , g(i+1)k ) j=0 ,

                                                                                                 (2.1)
                                                                                        πh ,πl
and the whole task trajectory forms by stitching all subtask trajectories as τ = ∪∞
                                                                                  i=0 (τi      ).
Following prior methods (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018b; Zhang et al., 2020), we
optimize πh based on the high-level reward rh , defined as the environment reward feedback summed
over a subtask
                                                            k−1
                                                            X
                     rh (τiπh ,πl ) = rh (sik , g(i+1)k ) =     r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ),        (2.2)
                                                                    j=0

and the intrinsic reward for the low-level policy πl is
                       rl (sik+j , aik+j , g(i+1)k ) = −D(ψ(sik+j+1 ), g(i+1)k ).                        (2.3)
where ψ : S 7→ G is a pre-defined state-to-goal mapping function and D : G × G → R≥0 is a chosen
binary or continuous distance measurement.

Unilateral subgoal reachability in hierarchical policy optimization. To optimize both πh and πl ,
previous methods would establish the separated value functions with the initial state s0 ∈ d0 (s),
                                  ∞
                                  X
                   V πh (s0 ) =        γ i Es∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ),g∼πh (·|s,ĝ) rh (sik , g(i+1)k ) ,

                                                                                                         (2.4)
                                                  ik
                                   i
                                  ∞
                                  X
                   V πl (s0 ) =        γ t Es,a∼Pπt l ,g (·,·|s0 ),g∼πh (·|s,ĝ) [rl (st , at , g)] ,    (2.5)
                                  t

where Pπt l ,g (s, a|s0 ) represents
                                  Pthe probability of πl (·|s, g) reaching the state-action pair (s, a) at
time step t and Pπt l ,g (s|s0 ) = a Ptπl ,g (s, a|s0 ) as the state reaching probability.
Directly maximizing the high- and low-level value functions in isolation through off-policy training
methods, such as Vanilla HRL (Kulkarni et al., 2016; Wöhlke et al., 2021), would result in per-
formance oscillation or task failure due to the dynamically varying and inter-nested nature of the
hierarchical policies. To mitigate these issues, recent studies (Pateria et al., 2021b) have proposed
incorporating subgoal reachability to bridge the high- and low-level optimization. However, relying
solely on unilateral subgoal reachability can lead to the over-optimization of the value function in
the dominant layer, while imposing additional constraints (Zhang et al., 2020) or changing training
experience (Nachum et al., 2018b) for the follower level’s optimization, both of which can lead to
increased computational complexity and passive exploration.


3     I NVESTIGATION ON B IDIRECTIONAL S UBGOAL R EACHABILITY IN HRL

In this section, we investigate the theoretical benefits of bidirectional subgoal reachability compared
with the unilateral one. Specifically, we first construct a joint value function to estimate the perfor-
mance of hierarchical policies. Following up, a performance difference bound of subgoal-based HRL
is derived, which supplies the design insight of the mutual response mechanism.

3.1   J OINT VALUE FUNCTION FOR SUBGOAL - BASED HRL

To evaluate the overall performance of subgoal-based HRL, we construct a joint value function by
calculating the discounted sum of step-wise rewards accumulated along the trajectory generated by
both the high- and low-level policies, as presented below:
Definition 3.1 (Joint Value Function of Hierarchical Policies). The long-term cumulative return
V πh ,πl (s0 ) of the subgoal-based HRL in the real environment can be defined as,
                                       ∞
                                       X
                    V πh ,πl (s0 ) =        γ t Es,a∼Pπt l ,g (·,·|s0 ),g∼πh (·|s) [r(st , at , ĝ)] .   (3.1)
                                        t


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we turn to derive a refined joint value function, by decomposing it via the summation of
subtasks (refer to the blue part),
                                                                                              
                       ∞
                       X                     k−1
                                              X
      V πh ,πl (s0 ) =    Eg∼πh (·|s) γ ik     γ j Es,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ) . (3.2)
                                                                        ik+j
                       i=0                           j=0
With the joint value function established, we could use a single value function to assess the overall
performance of bi-level policies, which enables us to easily construct a performance difference bound.

3.2    T HEORETICAL INSIGHTS FROM PERFORMANCE DIFFERENCE BOUND

To investigate the optimality of the policies, we derive a performance difference bound between an
induced optimal hierarchical policy Π∗ = {πh∗ , πl∗ } and a learned one Π = {πh , πl }, which can be
                   ∗
formulated as V Π (s) − V Π (s) ≤ C. Hence, the learned hierarchical policy Π can be optimized by
minimizing the upper bound C.
Theorem 3.2 (Sub-optimal performance difference bound of HRL). The performance difference
bound C between the induced optimal hierarchical policies Π∗ and the learned one Π can be
                             "                                                                     #
                                                    πh∗

                     2rmax                                 g               πh ,πl           k

     C(πh , πl ) =             (1 + γ)Eg∼πh 1 +           ϵ ∗ + 2 Rmax + 2γ                          , (3.3)
                    (1 − γ)2                        πh πl ,πl        |          {z            }
                               |               {z              } (ii) subgoal reachability penalty
                                     (i) hierarchical policies’ inconsistency
where ϵgπ∗ ,πl is the distribution shift between πl∗ and πl , and Rπmax
                                                                     h ,πl
                                                                           is the maximum subgoal
         l
reachability penalty from the learned one Π, both of which are formulated as,
           ϵgπ∗ ,πl = max DT V (πl∗ (·|s, g)∥πl (·|s, g)) and Rmax  πh ,πl
                                                                           = max Riπh ,πl .
              l       s∈S,g∼πh                                                          i∈N
                                                                                           ∗
Summary of proof.             We first divide the bound into three parts, V Π (s) − V Π (s) =
   ∗
  πh ,πl∗            ∗
                    πh ,πl            ∗                    ∗                ∗
V         (s0 ) − V        (s0 ) + V πh ,πl (s0 ) − V πh ,πl (s0 ) + V πh ,πl (s0 ) − V πh ,πl (s0 ). Then, we find
|              {z             } |                 {z            } |                {z             }
             L1                                 L2                              L3
the similarity of L1 and L3 , both of which denote that under the same high-level policy (πh∗ in L1
while πh in L3 ). By Performance Difference Lemma (Kakade & Langford, 2002), we have
                                                             πh∗

                                        2rmax
                          L1 + L3 ≤             Eg∼πh 1 +          ϵg ∗ .                      (3.4)
                                       (1 − γ)2              πh πl ,πl
To deal with the middle term L2 , in each subtask we define the variable Riπh ,πl by
     Rπi h ,πl = Eg(i+1)k ∼πh ,s(i+1)k ∼τ πh ,πl D(ψ(s(i+1)k ), g(i+1)k )/D(ψ(sik ), g(i+1)k ) .

                                                                                                             (3.5)
                                            i

Then, we derive that
                                          rmax
                                      L2 ≤        (Rπh ,πl + 2γ k ).                                         (3.6)
                                        (1 − γ)2 max
Thus, we take the results of Equations (3.4) and (3.6) and achieve the final bound.
The variable Rπi h ,πl emerges as a pivotal element for several reasons. Firstly, it serves as a crucial
bridge connecting high- and low-level policies. The denominator reflects subgoal guidance by πh ,
while the numerator represents the final distance achieved through exploration by πl . This dual
perspective highlights its significance in the hierarchical framework. Secondly, in contrast to prior
work where subgoal reachability relies on environmental dynamics (Zhang et al., 2020) or policy
behavior (Nachum et al., 2018b; Kreidieh et al., 2019), our metric focuses on task completion,
measured by the final distance divided by the initial distance. This shift of focus allows us to centre
our attention squarely on the task itself. As a result, we propose Rπi h ,πl as a novel subgoal reachability
metric in this paper, which lays the foundation for our algorithm design.

3.3    A LGORITHMIC I NSTANTIATION

Motivated by theoretical insights in the previous section, here we turn to design the core mutual
response mechanism, which prompts the hierarchical policy optimization. Instantiating mutual
response mechanism amounts to specify two main designs: 1) how to measure the dynamically
varying subgoal reachability; 2) how to incorporate subgoal reachability into the high-level policy
optimization and low-level policy optimization?


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Efficient subgoal reachability computation. Although equation (3.5) provides a method for
computing subgoal reachability, the computational efficiency may be hindered when the low-level
distance function D is complex. Fortunately, by recognizing that the low-level intrinsic reward
shares the same form as the distance computation, we can replace the distance computation with the
low-level reward. Thus, we can calculate the subgoal reachability by
                                                 D(ψ(s(i+1)k ), g(i+1)k )

                                                                                            rl,(i+1)k
    Riπh ,πl = Eg(i+1)k ∼πh ,s(i+1)k ∼τ πh ,πl                              = Erl ∼τ πh ,πl           . (3.7)
                                       i          D(ψ(sik ), g(i+1)k )              i         rl,ik

Specifically, we use a temporary replay buffer for storing subtask trajectory τiπh ,πl upon subtask
completion. Then, we can sample the first low-level reward rl,ik = rl (sik , aik , g(i+1)k ) and the last
one rl,(i+1)k = rl (s(i+1)k , a(i+1)k , g(i+1)k ) from the temporary buffer to calculate the reachability.
If rl,ik = 0, it indicates that the initial state has already reached the subgoal, and the subtask is
deemed complete. Then, we set Rπi h ,πl = 0, and πl can be inactive for the remainder of the subtask.
Notably, our design mitigates over-reliance on the summation of step-wise low-level reward or the
environmental dynamic property, but merely considers the start and end point of the subtask trajectory,
consequently relaxing the constraint on low-level policy exploration. Further, such a design is quite
lightweight, incurring O(1) computational complexity, without introducing additional training costs.

High-level policy optimization. In our approach, we opt to use Rπi h ,πl as a regularization for
optimizing πh rather than reward penalties. This choice offers several advantages. During the
high-level policy evaluation phase, we exclusively rely on rewards from the environment to iteratively
compute Q-values, which ensures the accuracy of guidance performance evaluation. Furthermore, in
the policy improvement phase, using Rπi h ,πl as the regularization explicitly constrains the high-level
policy’s subgoal generation. This focus allows it to concern the subgoal-reaching performance of the
low-level policy within a subtask. Specifically, when using soft-actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018b) as the backbone, we evaluate the high-level policy in the usual manner,
                        1                                                                   2
    Qπh (s, g) = arg min Es,g∼Dh [rh (s, g) + γEs′ ∼Dh ,g′ ∼πh Qπh (s′ , g ′ ) − Qπh (s, g)] ,         (3.8)
                      Q 2

while the policy updates by minimizing the expected KL-divergence with the reachability term as,

          πh = arg min Es∼Dh [DKL (πh (·|s)∥ exp(Qπh (s, g) − V πh (s))) + λ1 Riπh ,πl ] ,             (3.9)
                      πh

where V πh (s) = Eg∼πh (·|s) [Qπh (s, a) − log πh (·|s)] is the high-level soft state value function and
λ1 is a weight factor. Thus, we can adjust the response of the high level through tuning λ1 .

Low-level policy optimization. In contrast to high-level policy, we utilize Rπi h ,πl as a reward
bonus for low-level policy. This approach is designed to enable πl to simultaneously focus on both
low-level rewards and subgoal reachability during subgoal exploration. It’s important to note that
enhancing low-level rewards by πl can not guarantee improved subgoal reachability. For instance, in
Subtask 1, a subgoal that is nearby yet challenging may result in poor subgoal reachability (e.g., initial
distance is 10, but final distance is 5). Conversely, in Subtask 2, distant yet accessible subgoals can
achieve better subgoal reachability (e.g., initial distance is 20, and final distance is 8). To address this,
we introduce subgoal reachability as well as the low-level reward in low-level policy optimization,
aiming to enhance the overall performance of πl . Thus, the surrogate low-level reward is

                  r̂l (sik+j , aik+j , g(i+1)k ) = rl (sik+j , aik+j , g(i+1)k ) − λ2 Rπi h ,πl .     (3.10)

With the surrogate low-level reward established, various policy optimizers (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Haarnoja et al., 2018b) could be adopted, here we also opt for SAC as the backbone algorithm for
low-level policy optimization,
                      1                                                                          2
  Qπl (s, a) = arg min Es,g,a∼Dl [r̂l (s, a, g) + γEs′ ,g∼Dl ,a′ ∼πl Qπl (s′ , a′ ) − Qπl (s, a)] , (3.11)
                    Q 2


                πl = arg min Es,g∼Dl [DKL (πl (·|s, g)∥ exp(Qπl (s, a) − V πl (s)))] .                (3.12)
                             πl


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) AntMaze                                                       (b) AntBigMaze                                                                        (c) AntPush                 (d) AntFall                     (e) Reacher3D                                                       (f) Pusher

Figure 3: Environments used in our experiments. In maze tasks, the red square indicates the start
point and the blue square represents the target point. In manipulation tasks, a robotic arm aims to
make its end-effector and (puck-shaped) grey object reach the target position, which is marked as a
red ball, respectively.

                                                                                                                                                           %U+32
                                          %U+32                                                                                                                                                                                                 %U+32
                                          +,52                                                                                                            +,52                                                                               +,52
                                       +,*/                                                                                                            +,*/                                                                                  +,*/
                                                                                                                                                              &+(5
                                                                                                                   6XFFHVV UDWH
                                          &+(5                                                                                                                                                                                                      &+(5
 6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                               6XFFHVV UDWH

                                       5,6                                                                                                              5,6                                                                                    5,6
                                          6$&                                                                                                              6$&                                                                                    6$&


                                                           7LPHVWHSV                         H
                                                                                                                                                                           7LPHVWHSV          H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7LPHVWHSV                         H



                                                     (a) AntMaze                                                                                                (b) AntBigMaze                                                                                      (c) AntPush
                                          %U+32                                                                                                       %U+32                                                                                %U+32
                                       +,52                                                                                                            +,52                                                                               +,52
                                          +,*/                                                                                                         +,*/                                                                                  +,*/
                                          &+(5                                                                                                            &+(5                                                                                  &+(5
6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                   6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                               6XFFHVV UDWH

                                       5,6                                                                                                           5,6                                                                                    5,6
                                          6$&                                                                                                              6$&                                                                                    6$&


                                                            7LPHVWHSV                          H
                                                                                                                                                                           7LPHVWHSV          H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7LPHVWHSV                          H



                                                      (d) AntFall                                                                                           (e) Reacher3D (Sparse)                                                                      (f) Pusher (Sparse)

Figure 4: The average success rate in various continuous control tasks of BrHPO and baselines. The
solid lines are the average success rate, while the shades indicate the standard error of the average
performance. All algorithms are evaluated with 5 random seeds.


4                              E XPERIMENT

Our experimental evaluation aims to investigate the following questions: 1) How does BrHPO’s
performance on long-term goal-conditioned benchmark tasks compare to that of state-of-the-art
counterparts in terms of sample efficiency and asymptotic performance? 2) How effective is the
mutual response mechanism in enhancing subgoal reachability and improving performance?


4.1                                   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

We evaluate BrHPO on two categories of challenging long-horizon continuous control tasks, which
feature both dense and sparse environmental reward, as illustrated in Figure 3. In the maze navigation
environments, the reward is determined by the negative L2 distance between the current state and the
target position within the goal space. In the robotics manipulation environments with sparse rewards,
the reward is set to 0 when the distance is below a predefined threshold; otherwise, it’s set to −1.
Task success is defined as achieving a final distance to the target point of d ≤ 5 for the maze tasks
and d ≤ 0.25 for the manipulation tasks. To ensure a fair comparison, all agents are initialized at the
same position, eliminating extra environmental information introduction from random initialization,
as discussed in (Lee et al., 2022). Detailed settings can be found in Appendix B.


                                                                                                                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   C OMPARATIVE EVALUATION

We compared BrHPO with the following baselines. 1) HIRO (Nachum et al., 2018b): designed an
off-policy correction mechanism which required high-level experience to obey the current low-level
policy; 2) HIGL (Kim et al., 2021): relied on the off-policy correction mechanism and introduced a
k-step adjacent constraint (Zhang et al., 2020) and the novelty to discover appropriate subgoals; 3)
RIS (Chane-Sane et al., 2021): utilized the hindsight method to generate the least-cost middle points
as subgoals, forcing the low-level policy to follow the given subgoals; 4) CHER (Kreidieh et al.,
2019): considered the cooperation of hierarchical policies, and the high-level policy needs to care
about the low-level behaviour per step; 5) SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018b): served as a benchmark of
flat off-policy model-free algorithm and was applied as the backbone of BrHPO. Simply put, HIRO
and HIGL focused on low-level domination, and RIS focused on high-level domination. CHER also
considers the cooperation of different level policies while it requires step-by-step consideration.
The learning curves of BrHPO and the baselines across all tasks are plotted in Figure 4. Overall, the
results demonstrate that BrHPO outperforms all baselines both in exploration efficiency and asymp-
totic performance. In particular, when dealing with large-scale (AntBigMaze) and partially-observed
environments (AntPush and AntFall), BrHPO achieves better exploration and training stability, bene-
fitting from the mutual response mechanism with information sharing and error correction for both
levels. In contrast, acceptable baselines like HIRO, HIGL and CHER exhibit performance fluctuations
and low success rates. It’s worth noting that BrHPO can handle sparse reward environments without
any reward shaping or hindsight relabeling modifications, indicating that our proposed mechanism
can capture serendipitous success and provide intrinsic guidance.

4.3   A BLATION STUDY

Next, we make ablations and modifications to our method to validate the effectiveness and robustness
of the mechanism we devised.

Ablation on design choices. To investigate the effectiveness of each component, we compared
BrHPO with several variants through AntMaze and AntPush tasks. The BrHPO variants include, 1)
Vanilla, which removes the mutual response mechanism in both-level policies, resulting in πh and πl
being trained solely by conventional SAC; 2) NoReg, which keeps the low-level reward bonus but
disables the regularization term in high-level policy training; 3) NoBonus, where only the high-level
policy concerns subgoal reachability but the low-level reward bonus is removed.
The learning curves and state-subgoal trajectory visualizations from different variants are presented in
Figure 6. BrHPO outperforms all three variants by a significant margin, highlighting the importance
of the mutual response mechanism at both levels. Interestingly, the NoBonus variant achieves better
performance than the NoReg variant, suggesting that the subgoal reachability addressed by the high-
level policy has a greater impact on overall performance. This observation is further supported by the
trajectory visualization results.

Computation load. The training wall-time is reported
in Figure 5, where methods are benchmarked on a sin-                                                                                          34.72
                                                                                            35                                              ( +23.06)
gle RTX3090 GPU. Our method demonstrates efficient
                                                                                                                               28.93
computational performance, with training times compara-                                     30                               ( +17.27)
                                                             Average computation time (h)


ble to a flat SAC policy. Notably, compared to previous
approaches that utilize adjacency matrices or graphs to                                     25
model subgoal reachability, our method achieves at least                                         Flat policy
                                                                                            20
a 2x improvement in training efficiency with performance                                                                15.2
                                                                                                                      ( +3.54)         13.35
guarantee. More details are provided in Table 4 of Ap-                                      15               11.66                   ( +1.69)
pendix B.5.                                                                                                 ( +0.0)
                                                                                            10     8.56
                                                                                                  ( -3.1)

Hyperparameters. We empirically studied the sensitiv-                                        5
ity of weight factors λ1 and λ2 in Figure 7. The results
                                                                                             0
show that λ1 and λ2 within a certain range are accept-                                              SAC BrHPO HIRO HIGL CHER RIS
able. Upon closer analysis, we observed that when λ1
is too small, the regularization term in high-level policy                                       Figure 5: Training wall-time


                                                   7
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           %U+32                                                                                                      %U+32
                                           1R%RQXV                                                                                               1R%RQXV
                                        1R5HJ                                                                                                      1R5HJ

6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                6XFFHVV UDWH
                                           9DQLOOD                                                                                                  9DQLOOD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a) NoReg                                                         (b) NoBonus                                                                   (c) BrHPO
                                                                7LPHVWHSV                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                7LPHVWHSV                   H


                                             (a) AntMaze                                                                                                      (b) AntPush                                                                                                   (c) State-subgoal trajectory visualization

   Figure 6: The performance and state-subgoal trajectory visualization from different BrHPO variants.

                                             1=2                                                                                                             2 = 10                                                                                                          2 QRUP                                                                                                         N
                                             1 = 0.1                                                                                                         2=5                                                                                                             1 QRUP                                                                                                         N
                                          1 = 10
                                                                                                                                                          2=2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             inf QRUP                                                                                                       N
                                             1 = 20                                                                                                          2=1
  6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                  6XFFHVV UDWH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                 7LPHVWHSV                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                 7LPHVWHSV                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VWHSV                        H                                                                   VWHSV                      H


                                      (a) Ablation on λ1                                                                                              (b) Ablation on λ2                                                                             (a) Diff. distance norms (b) Diff. subtask horizons

  Figure 7: The learning curves with different Figure 8: The learning curves from different D
  weight factors λ1 and λ2 by AntMaze task.    and k to verify the robustness of the mechanism.

  optimization has minimal influence. Consequently, the high-level policy tends to disregard the perfor-
  mance of the low-level policy during tuning, resembling a high-level dominance scenario. Conversely,
  when λ1 is too large, the high-level policy overly prioritizes subgoal reachability, diminishing its
  exploration capability and resembling a low-level dominance scenario. These observations validate
  the effectiveness of the mutual response mechanism in maintaining a balanced interaction between the
  high- and low-level policies. Additionally, the results for λ2 suggest that a larger value can generally
  improve subgoal reachability from the perspective of the low-level policy, leading to performance
  improvements and enhanced stability.

  Robustness of mutual response mechanism. We con-
  ducted additional experiments on the AntMaze task to                   %U+32
  verify the robustness of the proposed mechanism. The                      +,52
                                                                         +,*/
                                                                            &+(5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6XFFHVV UDWH


  computation of subgoal reachability, a key factor in the
  mutual response mechanism, depends on the choice of                    5,6
                                                                            6$&
  the distance measurement D and the subtask horizon k.
  To test the distance measurement D, we compared three
  distance functions: L2 norm, L∞ norm, and L1 norm.
  Figure 8a shows that our method performs well regardless

  of the distance function used, highlighting the adaptability

  of the proposed mechanism. Additionally, we varied the                               7LPHVWHSV     H

  subtask horizon by setting k = 5, 10, 20, 50 (Figure 8b).
  Surprisingly, we achieved success rates of around 0.9 with Figure 9: Performance comparison be-
  different subtask horizons, indicating that the performance tween BrHPO and baselines by Hu-
  is robust to variations in the subtask horizon, only with manoidMaze. Mean and std by 4 runs.
  a slight effect on the convergence speed during training.
  This flexibility of BrHPO in decoupling the high- and low-level horizons without the need for extra
  graphs, as required in DHRL (Lee et al., 2022), is noteworthy. More ablations by Reacher3D task are
  provided in Figure 14 of Apppendix B.5.
  In addition to evaluating parametric robustness, we subjected BrHPO to testing in stochastic environ-
  ments to further evaluate its robustness. As depicted in Figure 15 of Apppendix B.5, we introduce
  varying levels of Gaussian noise into the state space. The results demonstrate our BrHPO can
  effectively mitigate the impact of noise and ensure consistent final performance.

   Extension in complex environment. To further evaluate BrHPO’s performance, we introduce a
   challenging HumanoidMaze task, where a humanoid robot navigates through a maze with right-angled
   turns. In this task, the simulated humanoid operates in a state space comprising 274 dimensions and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


an action space of 17 dimensions. The primary goal of πl is to maintain body balance while following
subgoals generated by the high-level policy. Consequently, extensive training is required for the πl
to enable the humanoid to acquire proficient walking skills. This training process demands that πh
exhibits “patience”, gradually adjusting subgoals to effectively guide the humanoid’s progress. As
shown in Figure 9, the performance comparison clearly demonstrates the significant advantage of
BrHPO over the baselines, even when dealing with high-dimensional continuous tasks. For additional
insights, trajectory visualizations are available in Figure 12 of Appendix B.5.

5    R ELATED W ORKS
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) methods have emerged as promising solutions for
addressing long-horizon complex tasks, primarily due to the synergistic collaboration between high-
level task division and low-level exploration (Jong et al., 2008; Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Nachum et al.,
2019; Pateria et al., 2021b; Eppe et al., 2022). Generally, HRL methods can be broadly categorized
into two groups, option-based HRL (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup et al., 1998; Zhang et al., 2021;
Mannor et al., 2004) and subgoal-based HRL (Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Nachum et al., 2019; Campos
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021b; Islam et al., 2022), that highlights the scope of guidance provided by the
high-level policy. The first avenue in HRL involves the use of options to model the policy-switching
mechanism in long-term tasks, which provides guidance to the low-level policy on when to terminate
the current subtask and transition to a new one (Machado et al., 2017; Zhang & Whiteson, 2019).
In contrast, the subgoal-based HRL avenue (Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018a; Gürtler
et al., 2021; Czechowski et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a) focuses on generating subgoals in fixed horizon
subtasks rather than terminal signals, and our work falls under this category. Notably, subgoal-based
HRL approaches prioritize subgoal reachability as a means of achieving high performance (Stein
et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Czechowski et al., 2021; Pateria et al., 2021a).
Various methods have been proposed to enhance subgoal reachability, from either the high-level
or low-level perspectives. When the low level is considered to be dominant, several works have
proposed relabeling or correcting subgoals based on the exploration capacity of the low-level policy.
Examples include off-policy correction in HIRO (Nachum et al., 2018b) and hindsight relabeling
in HER (Andrychowicz et al., 2017), RIS (Chane-Sane et al., 2021) and HAC (Levy et al., 2019).
On the other hand, when the high-level dominates, subgoals are solved from given prior experience
or knowledge, and the low-level policy is trained merely to track the given subgoals (Savinov et al.,
2018; Huang et al., 2019; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Jurgenson et al., 2020). In contrast to the listed
prior works, BrHPO proposes a mutual response mechanism for ensuring bidirectional reachability.
Meanwhile, our method relates to previous research that encourages cooperation between the high-
level policy and the low-level one, where they explored various techniques for modelling subgoal
reachability, including k-step adjacency matrix (Ferns et al., 2004; Castro, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020)
or state-subgoal graph (Zhang et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022). However, these
methods can be computationally intensive and conservative. Our proposed method provides a more
computationally efficient and flexible approach to gain subgoal reachability. By avoiding an explicit
representation of the state-subgoal adjacency, our method can be more easily deployed and applied to
a variety of different environments.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we identify that bilateral information sharing and error correction have been long
neglected in previous HRL works. This will potentially cause local exploration and unattainable
subgoal generation, which hinders overall performance and sample efficiency. To address this
issue, we delve into the mutual response of hierarchical policies, both theoretically and empirically,
revealing the crucial role of the mutual response mechanism. Based on these findings, we proposed
the Bidirectional-reachable Hierarchical Policy Optimization (BrHPO) algorithm. BrHPO not only
matches the best HRL algorithms in asymptotic performance, but it also shines in low computational
load. Although BrHPO offers many advantages, a main challenge is to design an appropriate low-level
reward to compute the subgoal reachability, thus limiting the application in sparse low-level reward
settings (Lee et al., 2022). Future work that merits investigation are integrating up-to-date reachability
measurement and policy optimization backbone to develop strong HRL algorithm.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2021.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2017.
Víctor Campos, Alexander Trott, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Jordi Tor-
  res. Explore, discover and learn: Unsupervised discovery of state-covering skills. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Zhong Cao, Kun Jiang, Weitao Zhou, Shaobing Xu, Huei Peng, and Diange Yang. Continuous
  improvement of self-driving cars using dynamic confidence-aware reinforcement learning. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 5(2):145–158, 2023.
Pablo Samuel Castro. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov
  decision processes. In the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with
  imagined subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Marek Zbysiński, Michał Zawalski, Krzysztof Olejnik,
 Yuhuai Wu, Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Subgoal search for complex reasoning tasks. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 1992.
Manfred Eppe, Christian Gumbsch, Matthias Kerzel, Phuong DH Nguyen, Martin V Butz, and Stefan
 Wermter. Intelligent problem-solving as integrated hierarchical reinforcement learning. Nature
 Machine Intelligence, 4(1):11–20, 2022.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging
  planning and reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Norm Ferns, Prakash Panangaden, and Doina Precup. Metrics for finite markov decision processes.
  In UAI, 2004.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, 2018.
Nico Gürtler, Dieter Büchler, and Georg Martius. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with timed
  subgoals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Kristian Hartikainen, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Latent space policies for
  hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018a.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2018b.
Zhiao Huang, Fangchen Liu, and Hao Su. Mapping state space using landmarks for universal goal
  reaching. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Riashat Islam, Hongyu Zang, Anirudh Goyal, Alex M Lamb, Kenji Kawaguchi, Xin Li, Romain
  Laroche, Yoshua Bengio, and Remi Tachet des Combes. Discrete compositional representations as
  an abstraction for goal conditioned reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Maximilian Jaritz, Raoul De Charette, Marin Toromanoff, Etienne Perot, and Fawzi Nashashibi.
 End-to-end race driving with deep reinforcement learning. In 2018 IEEE International Conference
 on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2070–2075. IEEE, 2018.
Nicholas K Jong, Todd Hester, and Peter Stone. The utility of temporal abstraction in reinforcement
  learning. In International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2008.
Tom Jurgenson, Or Avner, Edward Groshev, and Aviv Tamar. Sub-goal trees a framework for
  goal-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2002.
Junsu Kim, Younggyo Seo, and Jinwoo Shin. Landmark-guided subgoal generation in hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A Al Sallab, Senthil Yogamani,
  and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2021.
Abdul Rahman Kreidieh, Glen Berseth, Brandon Trabucco, Samyak Parajuli, Sergey Levine, and
 Alexandre M Bayen. Inter-level cooperation in hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.02368, 2019.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep
  reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2016.
Guillaume Lample and Devendra Singh Chaplot. Playing fps games with deep reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Seungjae Lee, Jigang Kim, Inkyu Jang, and H Jin Kim. Dhrl: A graph-based approach for long-
  horizon and sparse hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
  visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1334–1373, 2016.
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies
 with hindsight. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies
 with hindsight. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Siyuan Li, Lulu Zheng, Jianhao Wang, and Chongjie Zhang. Learning subgoal representations with
  slow dynamics. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Siyuan Li, Jin Zhang, Jianhao Wang, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. Active hierarchical explo-
  ration with stable subgoal representation learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021a.
Siyuan Li, Lulu Zheng, Jianhao Wang, and Chongjie Zhang. Learning subgoal representations with
  slow dynamics. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. A laplacian framework for option
 discovery in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Shie Mannor, Ishai Menache, Amit Hoze, and Uri Klein. Dynamic abstraction in reinforcement
  learning via clustering. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2004.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning
  for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018a.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018b.
Ofir Nachum, Haoran Tang, Xingyu Lu, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Why does
  hierarchy (sometimes) work so well in reinforcement learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10618,
  2019.
Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-Hwee Tan, and Chai Quek. End-to-end hierarchical
  reinforcement learning with integrated subgoal discovery. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
  and Learning Systems, 2021a.
Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-hwee Tan, and Chai Quek. Hierarchical reinforcement
  learning: A comprehensive survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 54(5):1–35, 2021b.
Sujoy Paul, Jeroen Vanbaar, and Amit Roy-Chowdhury. Learning from trajectories via subgoal
  discovery. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Doina Precup, Richard S Sutton, and Satinder Singh. Theoretical results on reinforcement learning
 with temporally abstract options. In Machine Learning: ECML-98: 10th European Conference on
 Machine Learning Chemnitz, Germany, April 21–23, 1998 Proceedings 10, 1998.
Nikolay Savinov, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric topological memory for
  navigation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438,
  2015.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Gregory J Stein, Christopher Bradley, and Nicholas Roy. Learning over subgoals for efficient
  navigation of structured, unknown environments. In Conference on robot learning, 2018.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David
  Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Jan Wöhlke, Felix Schmitt, and Herke van Hoof. Hierarchies of planning and reinforcement learning
  for robot navigation. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 10682–10688. IEEE, 2021.
Amy Zhang, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Adam Lerer, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Composable
 planning with attributes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Jesse Zhang, Haonan Yu, and Wei Xu. Hierarchical reinforcement learning by discovering intrinsic
  options. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shangtong Zhang and Shimon Whiteson. Dac: The double actor-critic architecture for learning
  options. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianren Zhang, Shangqi Guo, Tian Tan, Xiaolin Hu, and Feng Chen. Generating adjacency-
  constrained subgoals in hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Tianren Zhang, Shangqi Guo, Tian Tan, Xiaolin Hu, and Feng Chen. Adjacency constraint for
  efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 2022.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
A.1      O MITTED P ROOFS

Theorem A.1 (Sub-optimal performance difference bound of HRL). The performance difference
bound C between the induced optimal hierarchical policies Π∗ and the learned one Π can be
                           "                                                                  #
                                               πh∗

                   2rmax                              g               πh ,πl           k

    C(πh , πl ) =            (1 + γ)Eg∼πh 1 +        ϵ ∗ + 2 Rmax + 2γ                          , (A.1)
                  (1 − γ)2                     πh πl ,πl        |          {z            }
                             |           {z               } (ii) subgoal reachability penalty
                                              (i) hierarchical policies’ inconsistency

where ϵgπ∗ ,πlis the distribution shift between πl∗ and πl , and Rπmax
                                                                    h ,πl
                                                                          is the maximum subgoal
         l
reachability penalty from the learned one Π, both of which are formulated as,
              ϵgπ∗ ,πl =      max          DT V (πl∗ (·|s, g)∥πl (·|s, g))                         πh ,πl
                                                                                              and Rmax    = max Riπh ,πl .
                 l         s∈S,g∼πh                                                                              i∈N


Proof. To derive the performance difference bound between Π∗ and Π, we first divide the bound into
three terms,
                     ∗                               ∗     ∗
               V Π (s0 ) − V Π (s0 ) = V πh ,πl (s0 ) − V πh ,πl (s0 )
                                                     ∗     ∗                   ∗                      ∗                   ∗
                                             = V πh ,πl (s0 ) − V πh ,πl (s0 ) + V πh ,πl (s0 ) − V πh ,πl (s0 )
                                               |             {z             } |                 {z            }
                                                                     L1                                     L2
                                                         πh ,πl∗                   πh ,πl
                                                +V                 (s0 ) − V                (s0 ) .                                   (A.2)
                                                 |                      {z                     }
                                                                       L3

Then, our proof can be obtained to by tackling L1 , L2 and L3 , respectively.

         • Derivation of L1

By adding and subtracting the same term in L1 , we obtain

                                           ∗
               ∗
              πh ,πl∗                     πh ,πl∗               k                                       π ∗
                                                                                                            ,π
     L1 = V           (s0 ) − V0      e           (s0 ) + γ E              ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                                                     π ∗ ,g         V     h    l
                                                                                                                 (sk )
                                                                     g∼πh            k      (·|s0 )

                        π ∗ ,π ∗                                                        ∗                          ∗
              + Ve0 h l (s0 ) + γ k E                     ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                                   π ∗ ,g          V πh ,πl (sk ) − V πh ,πl (s0 )
                                                    g∼πh           k      (·|s 0 )

                 ∗    ∗                                                        ∗     ∗
               π   ,π                   k                                    π    ,π
        = V0 e   h    l
                         (s0 ) + γ E               ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                           π ∗ ,g         V    h     l (sk )           ← By Lemma A.3
                                             g∼πh          k      (·|s0 )

                        π ∗ ,π ∗                                                        ∗
              − Ve0 h l (s0 ) + γ k E                     ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                                   π ∗ ,g          V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                    g∼πh           k      (·|s 0 )

                                  ∗     ∗                                                        ∗
                                π   ,π                  k                                      π   ,π
                      + V0   e    h     l
                                          (s0 ) + γ E              ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                                            π ∗ ,g          V    h    l
                                                                                                        (sk )
                                                            g∼πh            k      (·|s0 )
                                   h ∗                                                                  ∗
                                                                                                                     i
                                          π ,π
                               − Ve0 h l (s0 ) + γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                                           h        k
                                                                                               i h ∗ ∗
                                                                                                                           π ∗ ,π
                                                h ∗ ∗                            ∗
                                                                                                                                  i
             k                                        π  ,π                   π    ,π                       π ,π
        =γ E            ∗
                                 π ∗ ,g
                                  l
                                                  V h l (sk ) − V h l (sk ) + Ve0 h l (s0 ) − Ve0 h l (s0 )
                 g∼πh ,s∼Pk             (·|s0 )
           |                                       {z                                          } |                      {z        }
                                                  part a                                                         part b

                                                 ∗                                    ∗
                + γk E         π ∗ ,g
                         ∗ ,s∼P l
                                              V πh ,πl
                                                       (sk ) − E   ∗     πl ,g
                                                                g∼πh ,s∼Pk (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl
                                                                                            (sk )   .                                 (A.3)
                      g∼πh     k      (·|s0 )
                  |                                       {z                                      }
                                                                      part c

Then, we can deal with the three parts one by one to obtain the derivation of L1 . Note that, part b
represents the performance discrepancy in the first subtask, caused by different low-level policies πl∗
and πl . Thus, consider the policy shift of the low-level policies, we suppose
                                    ϵgπ∗ ,πl =        max           DT V (πl∗ (·|s, g)∥πl (·|s, g)) .                                 (A.4)
                                       l          s∈S,g∼πh


                                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, recall rmax to be the maximum environmental reward, i.e., r ≤ rmax , we have
              π ∗ ,πl∗                   π ∗ ,πl
part b = Ve0 h             (s0 ) − Ve0 h           (s0 )
            k−1
            X                                                j                 k−1
                                                                                X
                                                                                   Egk ∼π∗ ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ)

        =         E             π ∗ ,g
                        ∗ ,s,a∼P l
                                                            γ r(sj , aj , ĝ) −
                   gk ∼πh       j      (·,·|s0 )                                                     h       j
            j=0                                                                           j=0
            k−1                                        ∗
                                                       π ,g
            X
                  Egk ∼πh∗ 2 γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ) DT V Pj l (·, ·|s0 ) Pπj l ,g (·, ·|s0 )

        ≤
            j=0
                           k−1
                           X
        ≤ 2rmax                  Egk ∼πh∗ γ j jϵgπ∗ ,πl .            ←         By Lemma A.4                                        (A.5)
                                                      l
                           j=0


For part c, note that the joint value function can be bounded as V πh ,πl (s0 ) ≤ rmax /(1 − γ). We can
apply Lemma A.4 to bound the discrepancy of the low-level policies, and have

                                                       ∗                                    ∗
           part c = γ k E                ∗
                                       π ,g
                                 ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                    V πh ,πl
                                                             (sk ) − E         π ,g
                                                                         ∗ ,s∼P l (·|s )
                                                                      g∼πh            0
                                                                                         V πh ,πl
                                                                                                  (sk )
                            g∼πh       k    (·|s0 )                            k
                         Z     Z                      ∗                             ∗
                                                       π ,g
                  = γk                πh∗ (g|sk ) Pk l (s|s0 ) − Pkπl ,g (s|s0 ) V πh ,πl (s)dsdg
                                       g∈G    s∈S
                                   k
                             2γ rmax          h          ∗
                                                          π ,g
                                                                                 i
                           ≤           Eg∼πh∗ DT V Pk l (·|s0 )∥Pπk l ,g (·|s0 )
                              1−γ
                             2γ k rmax
                           ≤           Eg∼πh∗ kϵgπ∗ ,πl ,                                                                          (A.6)
                              1−γ                 l



At last, for part a, we can apply the same recursion every k steps,
                                                       h ∗ ∗                ∗
                                                                                         i
                 part a = γ k E         π ∗ ,g
                                  ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                        V πh ,πl
                                                                 (sk ) − V πh ,πl
                                                                                  (s k )
                               g∼πh     k      (·|s0 )
                                                        h ∗ ∗                  ∗
                                                                                            i
                        ≤ γ 2k E    ∗
                                          π ∗ ,g
                                           l
                                                         V πh ,πl
                                                                  (s2k ) − V πh  ,πl
                                                                                     (s 2k )
                                              g∼πh ,s∼P2k            (·|s0 )
                                                     2k−1
                                                      X                                    2γ 2k rmax
                                       + 2rmax                 Eg∼πh∗ γ j jϵgπ∗ ,πl +                 Eg∼πh∗ 2kϵgπ∗ ,πl .          (A.7)
                                                                                 l           1−γ                  l
                                                      j=k


Now, with the derivation of part a, part b and part c, we can combine these andrepeat the recursion
step for infinitely many times
            L1 = part a + part b + part c
                                  k−1
                                  X                                          2γ k rmax
               ≤ 2rmax                   Egk ∼πh∗ γ j jϵgπ∗ ,πl +                      Eg∼πh∗ kϵgπ∗ ,πl
                                   j=0
                                                                 l            1−γ                 l


                                       2k−1
                                        X                                          2γ 2k rmax
                   + 2rmax                    Eg2k ∼πh∗ γ j jϵgπ∗ ,πl +                       Eg∼πh∗ 2kϵgπ∗ ,πl
                                                                         l           1−γ                     l
                                       j=k
                                                                         h ∗ ∗                  ∗
                                                                                                            i
                                 2k
                           +γ E           ∗ ,s∼P l
                                                      π ∗ ,g               V πh ,πl (s2k ) − V πh ,πl (s2k )
                                       g∼πh     2k             (·|s0 )
                      ..
                       .
                                  ∞ k−1
                                  X X                                                           γ (i+1)k
               ≤ 2rmax                        Eg∼πh∗ γ (ik+j) (ik + j)ϵgπ∗ ,πl +                         Eg∼πh∗ (i + 1)kϵgπ∗ ,πl
                                   i=0 j=0
                                                                                      l          1−γ                       l


                                   1+γ
               ≤ 2rmax                     Eg∼πh∗ ϵgπ∗ ,πl .                                                                       (A.8)
                                  (1 − γ)2           l


Thus, we complete the derivation of L1 .


                                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • Derivation of L3

Compared with L1 , the term L3 replaces the high-level policy from πh∗ to πh . Thus, we directly can
get L3 from the results of L1 as
                                             1+γ
                                 L3 ≤ 2rmax          Eg∼πh ϵgπ∗ ,πl .                          (A.9)
                                            (1 − γ)2           l



        • Derivation of L2

Similar to the derivation of L1 , by adding and subtracting the same term in L2 , we have
                ∗
                                  h ∗                                                       ∗
                                                                                                   i
                                      π ,π
     L2 = V πh ,πl (s0 ) − Ve0 h l (s0 ) + γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                                 h     k
                  h ∗                                                           ∗
                                                                                     i               ∗
                       π   ,π
               + Ve0     h    l             k
                                (s0 ) + γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk ) − V πh ,πl (s0 )
                                                     h       k
            h ∗                                                      ∗
                                                                                i
                πh ,πl
         = V0 e                      k
                       (s0 ) + γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼P l (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                      π ,g
                                               h      k
                  h ∗                                                           ∗
                                                                                     i
                       π   ,π
               − Ve0     h    l             k
                                (s0 ) + γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                     h       k
                          h ∗                                                       ∗
                                                                                              i
                                πh ,πl
                     + V0   e                      k
                                       (s0 ) + γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk )
                                                             h    k

                                             ∗                                                ∗
                                       πh ,πl              k                           π   ,π
                              − V0   e         (s0 ) + γ E               π ∗ ,g     V    h    l (sk )
                                                               g∼πh ,s∼Pk l (·|s0 )
                                                                                          π ∗ ,π           π ,π ∗
                                            h ∗                         ∗
                                                                                  i h                             i
         = γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk ) − V πh ,πl (sk ) + Ve0 h l (s0 ) − Ve0 h l (s0 )
                       h         k
            |                                   {z                                } |                   {z        }
                                               part d                                              part e

                                                     ∗
                                                                                       πh ,πl∗
                + γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk ) − E           ∗
                                                                         π ,g        V         (sk )   .              (A.10)
                          h     k                               g∼πh ,s∼Pk l (·|s0 )
                  |                                        {z                                        }
                                                                 part f

According to Assumption A.5, we suppose r(st , at , ĝ) = Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπt l ,g rl (st , at , g)/D(g, ĝ), thus
we summate the k-step reward in the first subtask in part e as
                 k−1
                 X                              h                    i
                     Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ)
                                                j
                       j=0
                                     k−1
                                                                             j r(sj , aj , ĝ)
                                     X
                 = r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)         E            π ,g
                                             g∼πh ,s,a∼Pj l (·,·|s0 )      γ
                                     j=0
                                                                               r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)
                                     k−1
                                     X
                                                                             j rl (sj , aj , g) D(g, ĝ)
                 = r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)         E            π ,g
                                             g∼πh ,s,a∼Pj l (·,·|s0 )      γ
                                     j=0
                                                                                  D(g, ĝ) rl (s0 , a0 , g)
                                     k−1
                                     X
                                                                     j rl (sj , aj , g)
                 = r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)     Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ                      .                           (A.11)
                                   j=0
                                                   j                   rl (s0 , a0 , g)

Since the low-level policy is trained as a goal-conditioned policy, we have rl (sj , aj , g) ≤ rl (sk , ak , g).
And the summation in the first subtask can be
                           k−1
                           X                               h                    i
                                Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ)
                                                        j
                               j=0
                                               k−1
                                               X                                   rl (sk , ak , g)
                         ≤ r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)         Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j
                                               j=0
                                                               j                   rl (s0 , a0 , g)
                                               1 − γ k rl (sk , ak , g)
                         = r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)                              .                                             (A.12)
                                               1 − γ rl (s0 , a0 , g)


                                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we let the fraction Riπh ,πl = rl (sk , ak , g)/rl (s0 , a0 , g) be the subgoal reachability definition,
and the part e in L2 can be
               ∗                             ∗
             π ,π            π ,π
 part e = Ve0 h l (s0 ) − Ve0 h l (s0 )
            k−1
            X                                                      k−1
                                                                    X
                  Eg∼π∗ ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ) −
                                                                                                                      j
        =                                                              E                            π ∗ ,g           γ r(sj , aj , ĝ)
                            h          j                                                 g∼πh ,s,a∼Pj l (·,·|s0 )
            j=0                                                               j=0
                                                          k−1
                                1 − γ k πh∗ ,πl           X                       j
        ≤ r(s0 , a0 , ĝ)              R        −     E           π ∗ ,g         γ r(sj , aj , ĝ)
                                1−γ 0             j=0
                                                       g∼πh ,s,a∼Pj l (·,·|s0 )

               1 − γ k   πh ,πl    π ∗ ,π ∗

        ≤ rmax          R0      − R0 h l                           ←       Π∗ can achieve best subgoal reachability
               1−γ
               1 − γ k πh ,πl
        ≤ rmax         R      .                                                                                                 (A.13)
               1−γ 0

The penultimate inequality is based on the property of the induced optimal hierarchical policies.
Compared with the learned πh , Figure 3 shows that πh∗ can balance the subgoal reachability and the
                            π ∗ ,π
guidance, thus Rπ0 h ,πl ≥ R0 h l (note that the smaller R implies the better subgoal reachability).
                            ∗                                                      π ∗ ,π ∗   π ,π ∗
                policies Π can  achieve
And, the optimal                         the optimal subgoal   reachability, i.e. R0 h l ≤ R0 h l .
                           π ∗ ,πl         π ,πl∗                         π ∗ ,πl∗

Thus, we have R0 h                   − R0 h         ≤ Rπ0 h ,πl − R0 h               .

Then, we turn to part f in L2 . Consider the upper bound of joint value function, we have

                                                   ∗
                                                                                      πh ,πl∗
       part f = γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk ) − E             ∗
                                                                          π ,g      V         (sk )
                           h      k                            g∼πh ,s∼Pk l (·|s0 )
                   Z      Z                               h
                                                                             π ∗ ,g
                                                                                         i   rmax
              ≤ γk               [πh∗ (g|s) − πh (g|s)] Pπk l ,g (s|s0 ) − Pk l (s|s0 )             dsdg
                     g∈G s∈S                                                                1−γ
                     Z     Z
                                   rmax
              ≤ 2γ k                      dsdg
                       g∈G s∈S 1 − γ
                      2γ k rmax
               =                .                                                                                               (A.14)
                       1−γ

With the derivation of part e and part f, we deal with part d by the recursion each k-steps as
                                                      h ∗                      ∗
                                                                                      i
                  part d = γ k Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (sk ) − V πh ,πl (sk )
                                    h      k
                                                       h ∗                        ∗
                                                                                        i
                              2k
                         ≤ γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V πh ,πl (s2k ) − V πh ,πl (s2k )
                                                    h         2k

                                                         γ − γ 2k πh ,πl 2γ 2k rmax
                                                          k
                                            + rmax               R1     +           .                                           (A.15)
                                                          1−γ              1−γ

Thus, we combine the result of part d, part e and part f to obtain the results of L2 as
            L2 = part d + part e + part f
                              1 − γ k πh ,πl           γ k − γ 2k πh ,πl 2γ k rmax    2γ 2k rmax
                  ≤ rmax             R0      + rmax              R1     +           +
                              1−γ                        1−γ                1−γ         1−γ
                                                      h ∗                    ∗
                                                                                  i
                              2k                          π ,π          π ,π
                           + γ Eg∼π∗ ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|s0 ) V h l (s2k ) − V h l (s2k )
                                             h      2k

                      ..
                       .
                                ∞
                                X (1 − γ k )γ ik                        2γ (i+1)k
                  ≤ rmax                                  Rπi h ,πl +
                                 i=0
                                            1−γ                          1−γ
                        rmax
                  ≤           (Rπh ,πl + 2γ k ).                                                                                (A.16)
                      (1 − γ)2 max


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the last inequality, we define
                                                 πh ,πl
                                                Rmax    = max Riπh ,πl .                                (A.17)
                                                              i∈N

Now, we have the results of L1 , L2 and L3 . The performance difference bound between Π∗ and Π
can be obtained as
      ∗
 V Π (s0 ) − V Π (s0 ) = L1 + L2 + L3
                                1+γ                          rmax
                       ≤ 2rmax           Eg∼πh∗ ϵgπ∗ ,πl +           (Rπh ,πl + 2γ k )
                               (1 − γ) 2           l       (1 − γ)2 max
                                     1+γ
                           + 2rmax           Eg∼πh ϵgπ∗ ,πl
                                    (1 − γ)2             l


                                                            πh∗

                          2rmax                                    g           πh ,πl  k

                       =           (1 + γ)Eg∼πh 1 +               ϵ ∗ + 2 Rmax + 2γ          . (A.18)
                         (1 − γ)2                           πh πl ,πl
And the proof is complete.
Proposition A.2 (Equivalence between π ∗ and Π∗ ). With the k-step trajectory slicing and the
                                                                        ∗         ∗
alignment method, the performance of Π∗ and π ∗ is equivalent, i.e., V π (s) = V Π (s).

Proof. According to the k-step trajectory slicing and the alignment method, the induced optimal
hierarchical policies Π∗ can be generated by aligning with the k-step trajectory slice derived by π ∗ ,
thus we have
                                          ∗
           g(i+1)k ∼ πh∗ (·|sik ) = Pπk (s(i+1)k |sik )
                                                k−1
                                                Y
                                    = p(sik )         P (sik+j+1 |sik+j , aik+j )π ∗ (aik+j |sik+j ),   (A.19)
                                                j=0


                               aik+j ∼ πl∗ (·|sik+j , g(i+1)k ) = π ∗ (aik+j |sik+j ).                  (A.20)
Thus, the value function for π ∗ and the joint value function for Π∗ can be
                          ∞
                ∗         X
            V π (s0 ) =         γ t Es∼p(s′ |s,a),a∼π∗ [r(st , at , ĝ)]
                           t
                          ∞ k−1
                          X X
                      =              Es∼p(s′ |s,a),a∼π∗ γ ik+j [r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ)]
                          i=0 j=0
                                                                                            
                          ∞
                          X                     k−1
                                                 X                                           
                      =     Eg∼πh∗ γ ik       Es∼p(s′ |s,a),a∼πl∗ γ j [r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ)]
                                                                                            
                        i=0               j=0
                                                                                              
                        X∞                      k−1
                                                X
                      =     Eg∼π∗ (·|s) γ ik 
                                      h
                                                    γj E      π ∗ ,g
                                                                          l
                                                                           r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ)
                                                                    s,a∼Pik+j (·,·|s0 )
                          i=0                           j=0
                                ∗
                      = V Π (s0 )                                                                       (A.21)

Thus, through the k-step trajectory slicing and the alignment method, the performance of Π∗ and π ∗
is equivalent. And the proof is complete.

A.2       U SEFUL L EMMA AND A SSUMPTION

Lemma A.3 (Bellman Backup in HRL). Consider that the joint value function can be decomposed
by the summation of subtasks. Given the initial state sik at the i-th subtask, the Bellman Backup of
HRL defined in each subtask can be
         V πh ,πl (sik ) = Veiπh ,πl (sik ) + γ k Eg∼πh ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|sik ) V πh ,πl (s(i+1)k ) ,

                                                                                                 (A.22)
                                                                    (i+1)k


                                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Veiπh ,πl (sik ) is the the environment return of Π with the i-th subtask, formulated as
                                           k−1
                                           X
                  Veiπh ,πl (sik ) =             Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|sik ) γ j r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ) .

                                                                                                                        (A.23)
                                                                ik+j
                                           j=0


Proof. According to the decomposition of the joint value function V πh ,πl (s), we have
                                                                                         
                         ∞
                         X               k−1
                                         X
        V πh ,πl (s0 ) =   Eg∼πh γ ik      γ j Es,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s ) r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ)
                                                                                        0
                                                                            ik+j
                                 i=0                      j=0
                                 k−1
                                 X
                                       Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) γ j r(sj , aj , ĝ)

                           =
                                                      j
                                 j=0
                                                                                                                
                                   ∞
                                   X                        k−1
                                                            X
                               +         Eg∼πh γ ik               γ j Es,a∼Pπl ,g (·,·|s0 ) r(sik+j , aik+j , ĝ)
                                                                               ik+j
                                   i=1                        j=0

                           = Ve0πh ,πl (s0 ) + γ k Eg∼πh ,s∼Pπl ,g (·|sk ) [V πh ,πl (sk )] .                           (A.24)
                                                                       k

Thus, we can conclude that
              V πh ,πl (sik ) = Veiπh ,πl (sik ) + γ k Eg∼πh ,s∼Pπl ,g
                                                                                                   π ,π
                                                                                      (·|sik )    V h l (s(i+1) ) .     (A.25)
                                                                             (i+1)k


And the proof is complete.
Lemma A.4 (Markov chain TVD bound, time-varying). Suppose the expected KL-divergence between
two policy distributions is bounded as ϵgπ∗ ,πl = maxs∈S,g∼πh DT V (πl∗ (·|s, g)∥πl (·|s, g)), and the
                                            l
initial state distributions are the same. Then, the distance in the state-action marginal is bounded as,
                                      ∗
                                      π ,g
                              DT V Pt l (·, ·|s0 ) Pπt l ,g (·, ·|s0 ) ≤ tϵgπ∗ ,πl               (A.26)
                                                                                                 l



Proof. Let p(s′ |s) as the adjacent state transition probability, which can be defined as
                                              p(s′ |s) = p(s)P (s′ |s, a)π(a|s).                                        (A.27)

Replacing the policy as the low-level policy πl , we can derive the Markov chain TVD bound caused
by the different low-level policy,
                           max Es∼pt1 (s) DKL (p1 (s′ |s)∥p2 (s′ |s))
                             t
                                             a       ′            ∗
                       = max Es∼pt1 (s) p(s)Ps,s ′ (s |s, a)DKL (πl (a|s, g)||πl (a|s, g))
                               t
                       ≤ max Es∼pt1 (s) DKL (πl∗ (a|s, g)||πl (a|s, g))
                               t
                       ≤       max        DT V (πl∗ (·|s, g)∥πl (·|s, g))
                         s∈S,g∼πh

                       = ϵgπ∗ ,πl                                                                                       (A.28)
                            l



Thus, follow the Lemma B.2 in Janner et al. (2019), the distance in the state-action marginal is
bounded as,                   ∗
                               π ,g
                       DT V Pt l (·, ·|s0 ) Ptπl ,g (·, ·|s0 ) ≤ tϵgπ∗ ,πl .             (A.29)
                                                                                                 l

And the proof is complete.
Assumption A.5 (Refer to Assumption 1 in Zhang et al. (2022)). For all s ∈ S and g ∈ G, the
environmental reward can be written as
                 X
                           ′
   r(s, a, ĝ) =    a
                   Ps,s                      r(s, s′ ) = Eg∼πh ,s,a∼Pπt l ,g rl (st , at , g)/D(g, ĝ). (A.30)
                       ′ (s |s, a)πl (a|s, g)e

                  s′

where re : S × G → [0, rmax ] is a state-reachability reward function.


                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this assumption, the subgoal g generated by the high-level policy represents the desired state to
be reached, while the intermediate low-level state and action details are controlled by the low-level
policy. Therefore, consider that the subgoals are generated towards the environmental goal ĝ, when
given a low-level optimal/learned policy, it is natural to assume that the k-step stage reward only
depends on the state where the agent starts and the state where the agent arrives.

B        E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Our method BrHPO and all baselines are implemented based on PyTorch.

BrHPO. We employ the soft actor-critic (SAC) algorithm Haarnoja et al. (2018b) as the backbone
framework for both high- and low-level policies. For the high-level policy, considering that the
subtask trajectory τiπh ,πl in each subtask would be abstracted as one transition in high level, we
convert the trajectory (sik:(i+1)k−1 , aik:(i+1)k−1 , g(i+1)k , rh,ik , s(i+1)k ) into a high-level transition
tuple (sik , g(i+1)k , rh,ik , s(i+1)k ). Then, when a subtask ends, we compute the subgoal reachability
by
                                                                   rl,(i+1)k
                                         Rπi h ,πl = Erl ∼τ πh ,πl           .
                                                           i         rl,ik
Then, we can optimize the high-level policy by
                              1                                                                   2
          Qπh (s, g) = arg min Es,g∼Dh [rh (s, g) + γEs′ ∼Dh ,g′ ∼πh Qπh (s′ , g ′ ) − Qπh (s, g)] ,
                            Q 2

              πh = arg min Es∼Dh [DKL (πh (·|s)∥ exp(Qπh (s, g) − V πh (s))) + λ1 Riπh ,πl ] .
                           πh

For the low-level policy which can be trained as a goal-conditioned one, we design the reachability-
aware low-level policy as
                      r̂l (sik+j , aik+j , g(i+1)k ) = rl (sik+j , aik+j , g(i+1)k ) − λ2 Rπi h ,πl .
The training tuples for the low-level policy are formed as the per-step state-action transitions
(sik+j , g(i+1)k , aik+j , rl,ik+j , sik+j+1 , g(i+1)k )1 , which then are stored in the low-level buffer Dl .
Thus, with the training tuples, we can optimize the low-level policy as,
                            1                                                                          2
        Qπl (s, a) = arg min Es,g,a∼Dl [r̂l (s, a, g) + γEs′ ,g∼Dl ,a′ ∼πl Qπl (s′ , a′ ) − Qπl (s, a)] ,
                          Q 2

                     πl = arg min Es,g∼Dl [DKL (πl (·|s, g)∥ exp(Qπl (s, a) − V πl (s)))] .
                                 πl


Algorithm framework. We briefly give an overview of our proposed BrHPO in algorithm 1.
Notably, the mutual response mechanism effectively calculates the subgoal reachability for bilateral
information and then incorporates it into hierarchical policy optimization for mutual error correction,
promoting performance and reducing computation load.

HIRO. In this work Nachum et al. (2018b), to deal with the non-stationarity, where old off-policy
experience may exhibit different transitions conditioned on the same goals, they heuristically relabel
the subgoal g̃ as
                                                                  t+c−1
                                                                 1 X
               log µlo (at:t+c+1 |st:t+c+1 , g̃t:t+c+1 ) ∝ −            ∥ai − µlo (si , g̃i )∥22 + const.
                                                                 2 i=t
To solve this problem efficiently, they calculated the quantity on eight candidate goals sampled
randomly from a Gaussian centred at st+c − st . Then, with the correcting high-level experience,
the high-level policy can be optimized by off-policy methods. Compared with our methods, the off-
correction can be regard as a low-level domination method, which requires the high-level experience
to be modified by the subgoal reachability demonstrated at low level.
    1
        We use the absolute subgoal in this paper, that is, g(i+1)k = sik + πh (·|sik ).


                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Bidirectional-reachable Hierarchical Policy Optimization (BrHPO)
  initialize: policy networks πh , πl , Q-networks Qπh , Qπl , replay buffers for high-level Dh and
  low-level Dl
  for each training episode do
      while not done do
          sample subgoals g ∼ πh (·|s)
          for each step in a subtask do
              Sample actions a ∼ πl (·|s, g)
              Store (s, g, a, rl , s′ , g) into a temp buffer
              Update πl by (3.11) and (3.12) from Dl                 ▷ low-level policy optimization
          end for
          Calculate Rπi h ,πl by (3.7)                           ▷ subgoal reachability computation
          Compute r̂l by (3.10) and push the tuples in Dl     ▷ reachability-aware low-level reward
          Store (s, g, rh , s′ , R̂πi h ,πl ) into Dh
          Update πh by (3.8) and (3.9) from Dl                      ▷ high-level policy optimization
      end while
  end for


HIGL. In this work Kim et al. (2021), to restrict the high-level action space from the whole goal
space to a k-step adjacent region, they introduced the shortest transition distance as a constraint in
high-level policy optimization. Besides, they utilized farthest point sampling and priority queue Q to
improve the subgoal coverage and novelty. To enhance the subgoal reachability, they made pseudo
landmark be placed between the selected landmark and the current state in the goal space as follows:
                                                           gtsel − gtcur
                              gtpseudo := gtcur + δpseudo ·                 .
                                                          ∥gtsel − gtcur ∥2
To establish the adjacency constraint by the shortest transition distance, they refer to HRAC Zhang
et al. (2020) and adopt an adjacent matrix to model it. Specifically, we note that the performance of
HIGL in AntMaze task is different from the original report in their paper, mainly due to the different
scales. Thus, we set the same scale for all tasks for fairness. To ensure that HIGL performs well in
these tasks, we adjusted hyper-parameters such as "landmark coverage" and "n landmark novelty".


                                BrHPO                              HIGL

        Figure 10: Comparison of the scales in the maze tasks between BrHPO and HIGL.

CHER. This work Kreidieh et al. (2019) proposed a cooperation framework for HRL. In this work,
the HRL problem can similarly be framed as a constrained optimization problem,

                            max Jm + min λδ − λ min Jw .
                                πm            λ≤0             πw

To deal with this problem, they update the high- (πm ) and low-level (πw ) policies by
                 θw ← θw + α∇θw Jw ,         and,    θm ← θm + α∇θw (Jw + λJw ).
Compared to CHER, our BrHPO method distinguishes itself in several key aspects. In CHER,
hierarchical cooperation is achieved solely through high-level policy optimization, while the low-level


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


policy is trained as a generally goal-conditioned policy without further improvement. Moreover,
the high-level optimization in CHER introduces Jw as (Jw + λJw ), necessitating a focus on the
step-by-step behavior of the low-level policy.
In contrast, our BrHPO method incorporates the concept of subgoal reachability, which considers the
initial and final states of the subtasks. This design choice empowers the high-level policy to relax the
exploration burden on the low-level policy. By leveraging subgoal reachability, our approach enables
more efficient exploration for the low-level policy and facilitates effective hierarchical cooperation
between the high-level and low-level policies.

RIS. In this work Chane-Sane et al. (2021), based on hindsight method, they collected feasible
state trajectories and predicted an appropriate distribution of imagined subgoals. They first defined
subgoals sg as midpoints on the path from the current state s to the goal g, and further minimized the
length of the paths from s to sg and sg to g. Thus, the high-level policy can be updated as
                         H
                        πk+1 = arg min E(s,g)∼D,sg ∼πH (·|s,g) [Cπ (sg |s, g)].
                                      πH

Then, with the imagined subgoals, the low-level policy can be trained by
                                                 h                               i
          πθk+1 = arg max E(s,g)∼D Ea∼πθ (·|s,g) Qπ (s, a, g) − αDKL πθ ∥πkprior .
                          θ


B.2   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

For the hierarchical policy network, we employ SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018b) as both the high-level
and the low-level policies. Each actor and critic network for both high level and low level consists
of 3 fully connected layers with ReLU nonlinearities. The size of each hidden layer is (256, 256).
The output of the high- and low-level actor are activated using the linear function and is scaled to the
range of corresponding action space.
We use Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) for all networks in BrHPO.

B.3   E NVIRONMENTAL S ETUP

We adopt six challenging long-term task to evaluate BrHPO, which can be categorized into the
dense case and the sparse case. For the maze navigation
                                                  p         tasks, a simulated ant starts at (0, 0) and
the the environment reward is defined as r = − (x − gx )2 + (y − gy )2 (except for AntFall, r =
  p
− (x − gx )2 + (y − gy )2 + (z − gz )2 ). While in the robotics manipulation tasks, a manipulator
is initialized with horizontal stretch posture. The environmental reward is defined as a binary one,
determined by the distance between the end-effector (or the object in Pusher) to the target point

                                               −1, d > 0.25,
                                        r=                                                        (B.1)
                                               0,    d ≤ 0.25.
And, the success indicator is defined as whether the final distance is less than a pre-defined threshold,
where the maze navigation tasks require d < 5 and the robotics manipulation tasks require d < 0.25.

AntMaze. A simulated eight-DOF ant starts from the left bottom (0, 0) and needs to approach the
left top corner (0, 16). At each training episode, a target position is sampled uniformly at random from
gx ∼ [−4, 20], gy ∼ [−4, 20]. At the test episode, the target point are fixed at (gx , gy ) = (0, 16).

AntBigMaze. Similar to AntMaze task, we design a big maze to evaluate the exploration capability
of BrHPO. Specially, the target position is chosen randomly from one of (gx , gy ) = (32, 8) and
(gx , gy ) = (66, 0), which makes it harder to find feasible path.

AntPush. A movable block at (0, 8) is added into this task. The ant needs to move to the left side
of the block and push it into the right side of the room, for a chance to reach the target point above,
which requires the agent to avoid training a greedy algorithm. At each episode, the target position is
fixed to (gx , gy ) = (0, 19).


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AntFall. In this task, the agent is initialized on a platform of height 4. Like AntPush environment,
the ant has to push a movable block at (8, 8) into a chasm to create a feasible road to the target, which
is at the opposite side of the chasm, while a greedy policy would cause the ant to walk towards target
and fall into the chasm. At each episode, the target position is fixed to (gx , gy , gz ) = (0, 27, 4.5).

Reacher3D. A simulated 7-DOF robot manipulator needs to move its end-effector to a desired
position. The initial position of the end-effector is at (0, 0, 0) while the target is sampled from a
Normal distribution with zero mean and 0.1 standard deviation.

Pusher. Pusher additionally includes a puck-shaped object based on the Reacher3D task, and the
end-effector needs to find the object and push it to a desired position. At the initialization, the object
is placed randomly and the target is fixed at (gx , gy , gz ) = (0.45, −0.05, −0.323).
We summary these six tasks in Table 1.

                             Table 1: Overview on Environment settings.


   Environment       state    action     environment reward         episode step     success indicator
     AntMaze          32        8        negative x-y distance           500            rfinal ≥ −5
   AntBigMaze         32        8        negative x-y distance          1000            rfinal ≥ −5
     AntPush          32        8        negative x-y distance           500            rfinal ≥ −5
      AntFall         33        8       negative x-y-z distance          500            rfinal ≥ −5
    Reacher3D         20        7       negative x-y-z distance          100           dfinal ≤ 0.25
      Pusher          23        7       negative x-y-z distance          100           dfinal ≤ 0.25


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4     H YPER - PARAMETERS

Table 2 lists the hyper-parameters used in training BrHPO over all tasks.

                        Table 2: The hyper-parameters settings for BrHPO.


                     AntMaze      AntBigMaze           AntPush     AntFall   Reacher3D     Pusher
     Q-value
  network (both                              MLP with hidden size 256
  high and low)
  policy network
  (both high and                        Gaussian MLP with hidden size 256
       low)
      discounted
                                                           0.99
       factor γ
      soft update
                                                          0.005
        factor τ
    Q-network
                                                          0.001
   learning rate
  policy network
                                                          0.0001
   learning rate
    automatic
  entropy tuning                False                        True                  False
   (high-level)
     automatic
  entropy tuning                                           False
    (low-level)
      batch size                                           128
  update per step                                           1
   target update
                                                            2
      interval
     high-level
                                                           1e5
   replay buffer
     low-level
                                                           1e6
   replay buffer
      start steps                                          5e3
       subtask
                                             20                                     10
       horizon
   reward scale                                             1
      high-level
      responsive                  2                          0.5                    2
       factor λ1
       low-level
      responsive                             10                                     5
       factor λ2


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

Mutual response mechanism in complex en-
vironment. In our main experiment, AntBig-
Maze uses a more complex maze than AntMaze,                                                 %U+32
which requires more guidance ability from the
                                                                                               +,52
                                                                                            +,*/
                                                                                               &+(5


                                                      6XFFHVV UDWH
high-level policy. Conversely, given simpler
maze, we consider a more complex robot which                                                5,6
is controlled by the low-level policy, to further                                              6$&
evaluate the mutual response mechanism. In
the HumanoidMaze task, the simulated ant is
replaced by a high-dimensional simulated hu-
manoid. At each episode, the target point is set
at (gx , gy ) = [6, 6] which is the up-right corner
of the maze.
We need to specify that, the simulated humanoid,                                                            7LPHVWHSV         H

where the state space contains 274 dimensions
and the action space is 17, needs to maintain Figure 11: The performance comparison between
body balance while being guided by the subgoal BrHPO and baselines by HumanoidMaze. Mean
from the high-level policy. Consequently, the and std by 4 runs.
low-level policy necessitates extensive training to facilitate the humanoid’s ability to learn how
to walk proficiently. This training process requires the high-level policy to exhibit “patience”,
gradually adjusting the subgoals to guide the humanoid’s progress effectively. Figure 11 demonstrates
the performance comparison, which showcases the superior advantage of BrHPO over HIRO. We
additionally visualize the trajectory by Figure 12. We find that, our mutual response mechanism can
encourage cooperation between the high- and the low-level policies, while the erroneous guidance
from HIRO makes it difficult for humanoid to maintain balance and easily fall, thus failing the task.


                                      (a) HumanoidMaze by BrHPO


                                       (b) HumanoidMaze by HIRO

      Figure 12: The performance comparison of HumanoidMaze task by BrHPO and HIRO.


                                                      25
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Additional Metrics. We report additional (aggregate) performance metrics of BrHPO and other
   baselines on the six tasks using the rliable toolkit Agarwal et al. (2021). As show in Figure 13,
   BrHPO outperforms other baselines in terms of Median, interquantile mean (IQM), Mean and
   Optimality Gap results.

                                                                 Median                                                                  IQM                                        Mean                                                      Optimality Gap
                                    RIS

                           HIRO

                     CHER

                             HIGL

                               SAC

               BrHPO

                                          0.0                        0.5                 0.0                                               0.5                               0.25        0.50                          0.75                          0.5                  1.0


   Figure 13: Median, IQM, MeanNormalized  Score
                                  (higher values   are better) and Optimality Gap (lower values are
   better) performance of BrHPO and all baselines on six tasks.


   Subgoal reachability report. We report the average subgoal reachability Rπi h ,πl of each environ-
   ment by Table 3. Note that, the value Rπi h ,πl → 0 means the final distance D(ψ(s(i+1)k ), g(i+1)k ) →
   0, thus implying the better subgoal reachability. From the results, our implementation is simple yet
   effective, which can improve subgoal reachability significantly. Besides, the results shows that when
   there are contact dynamics in the environment, such as AntPush, AntFall and Pusher, the subgoal
   reachability may be decreased, which inspires us to further develop investigation in these cases.

                                                                               Table 3: The average subgoal reachability of BrHPO.


                              Environment                                    AntMaze                                AntBigMaze                                 AntPush                   AntFall                                     Reacher3D                     Pusher
                                  subgoal
                                                                               0.22                                                     0.29                          0.33                0.32                                             0.13                     0.18
                                reachability


  Ablation by the sparse environment. Additionally, we provide ablation studies conducted on
  Reacher3D task (sparse) instead of the AntMaze task (dense). We investigate the effectiveness of
  mutual response mechanism by 1) the three variants of BrHPO, containing Vanilla, NoReg and
  NoBonus, and 2) the weighted factors λ1 and λ2 . We show the results in Figure 14. Overall, we
  find that the tendency from the Reacher3D task are similar to the AntMaze task, which verifies the
  effectiveness of our BrHPO in the sparse reward case.

                                      %U+32                                                                                   1=2                                                                                      2=5
                                         1R%RQXV                                                                                  1 = 0.1                                                                                     2=2
                                      1R5HJ                                                                                   1 = 10                                                                                   2=1
6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                               6XFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                                                                                                            6XFFHVV UDWH


                                         9DQLOOD


                                                          7LPHVWHSV           H
                                                                                                                                                   7LPHVWHSV            H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7LPHVWHSV             H



                                           (a) Diff. variants                                                                                   (b) Diff. λ1                                                                               (c) Diff. λ2

   Figure 14: The ablation of mutual response mechanism by Reacher3D task. Mean and std by 4 runs.


                                                                                                                                                          26
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Empirical study in stochastic environments. To empirically verify the stochasticity robustness
 of BrHPO, we utilize it the a set of stochastic tasks, including stochastic AntMaze, AntPush and
 Reacher3D, which are modified from the original tasks. Referring to HRAC Zhang et al. (2020), we
 interfere with the position of the ant (x,y) and the position of the end-effector (x,y,z) with Gaussian
 noise of different standard deviations, including σ = 0.01, σ = 0.05 and σ = 0.1, to verify the
 robustness against the increasing environmental stochasticity. As shown in Figure 15, BrHPO can
 achieve similar asymptotic performance with different noise magnitudes in stochastic AntMaze,
 AntPush and Reacher3D, which shows the robustness to stochastic environments.

                                               =0                                                                                                      =0
                                               = 0.01                                                                                               = 0.01
                                            = 0.05                                                                                                  = 0.05
                                               = 0.1                                                                                                = 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VXFFHVV UDWH
VXFFHVV UDWH


                                                                                                        VXFFHVV UDWH



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         = 0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         = 0.1

                                                              VWHSV                       H                                                                  VWHSV                      H                                                               VWHSV                      H



                                         (a) Stochastic AntMaze                                                                                  (b) Stochastic AntPush                                                                               (c) Stochastic Reacher3D

  Figure 15: The empirical evaluation of BrHPO by stochastic environments. Mean and std by 4 runs.


  B.6                                     C OMPUTING I NFRASTRUCTURE AND T RAINING T IME

  For completeness, we list the computing infrastructure and benchmark training times for BrHPO and
  all baselines by Table 4. As discussed in section 4.3, the training complexity of BrHPO is much less
  than other HRL methods, which can be comparable to the flat policy.

                                                     Table 4: Computing infrastructure and training time on each task (in hours).

                                                                                    AntMaze                                          AntBigMaze                               AntPush                    AntFall                                          Reacher3D                   Pusher
                                                    CPU                                                                                                              AMD EPYC™ 7763
                                                    GPU                                                                                                     NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090
                                                HIRO                                 16.66                                                       23.14                            18.29                       25.43                                         3.42                          4.25
                                                HIGL                                 31.59                                                       48.45                            30.95                       49.60                                         5.96                          7.05
                                              CHER                                   15.38                                                       20.53                            16.71                       21.37                                         2.96                          3.16
                                                    RIS                              40.83                                                       53.49                            38.46                       57.05                                         8.63                          9.88
                                                    SAC                              10.57                                                       11.36                            11.75                       15.64                                         2.35                          2.68
                                            BrHPO                                    12.75                                                       18.74                            13.43                       19.17                                         2.73                          3.53
                                          comparison
                                                                                     2.18                                                         7.38                            1.68                        3.53                                          0.38                          0.85
                                         (Ours - SAC)


                                                                                                                                                                     27
