Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR B IOMEDICAL
K NOWLEDGE G RAPH C ONSTRUCTION

                                       Anonymous authors
                                 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The automatic construction of knowledge graphs (KGs) is an important research
         area in medicine, with far-reaching applications spanning drug discovery and
         clinical trial design. These applications hinge on the accurate identification of
         interactions among medical and biological entities. In this study, we propose an
         end-to-end machine learning solution based on large language models (LLMs) that
         utilize electronic medical record notes to construct KGs. The entities used in the KG
         construction process are diseases, factors, treatments, as well as manifestations that
         coexist with the patient while experiencing the disease. Given the critical need for
         high-quality performance in medical applications, we embark on a comprehensive
         assessment of 12 LLMs of various architectures, evaluating their performance and
         safety attributes. To gauge the quantitative efficacy of our approach by assessing
         both precision and recall, we manually annotate a dataset provided by the Macula
         and Retina Institute. We also assess the qualitative performance of LLMs, such as
         the ability to generate structured outputs or the tendency to hallucinate. The results
         illustrate that in contrast to encoder-only and encoder-decoder, decoder-only LLMs
         require further investigation. Additionally, we provide guided prompt design to
         utilize such LLMs. The application of the proposed methodology is demonstrated
         on age-related macular degeneration.


1    I NTRODUCTION

There are several biomedical data corpora available that provide valuable knowledge, and one such
source is PubMed Kilicoglu et al. (2012). PubMed is a search engine that accesses MEDLINE Kil-
icoglu et al. (2012), which is a database of abstracts of medical publications and references. Moreover,
the widespread adoption of electronic medical records (EMR) has brought various opportunities for
medical knowledge discovery. Knowledge graphs (KG) are often used for knowledge discovery,
because graph-based abstraction offers numerous benefits when compared with traditional representa-
tions. They have been applied to various areas of healthcare, including identifying protein functions
Santos et al. (2022), drug repurposing Drancé et al. (2021), and detecting healthcare misinformation
Cui et al. (2020). Another application may be a clinical trial design Skelly et al. (2012), during
which identification of confounding variables is an important step. Confounding variables may mask
an actual association, or, more commonly falsely demonstrate an apparent association between the
treatment and outcome when no real association between them exists.
KGs are a powerful tool for organizing and representing knowledge in a graph structure, where
nodes represent entities within a specific domain, while edges symbolize relationships between these
entities. The type of relationships may vary depending on the domain, allowing for the use of directed
or undirected graphs. For example, in Nordon et al. (2019), they employed a directed graph to
encode causal relationships between diseases. Other KGs may utilize both symmetric and asymmetric
relationships. In our work, we specifically focus on using directed graphs to represent relationships
between diseases and various factors, treatments, and manifestations that coexist with a patient while
experiencing the disease (referred to as ’coexists with’).
Recent advancements in large language models (LLM) offer an opportunity to think about their
ability to learn valuable representations from the knowledge encoded in medical corpora. Effectively
analyzing textual data and KG construction requires extensive domain knowledge and is often a


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


time-consuming process for medical experts. To address this challenge, we propose an end-to-end
method for automatically constructing knowledge graphs from electronic medical record (EMR)
notes using LLMs, specifically through relation extraction.
Previous studies have suggested the utilization of specific LLMs for clinical relation extraction
Agrawal et al. (2022); Sushil et al. (2022). However, due to the inherent safety-critical nature of
healthcare, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the performance and safety attributes of
LLMs with varying architectures. To evaluate and assess their potential for medical applications
and to address potential safety concerns, we introduced a manually annotated, private dataset and
benchmarked the performance of 12 distinct LLMs. We have not performed an analysis on publicly
available EMR datasets, such as MIMIC-IIIJohnson et al. (2016), because some of the models have
used these datasets for training or fine-tuning. Our analysis revealed that in contrast with encoder-only
and encoder-decoder models, decoder-only models need further guidance to output in a structured
manner, which is required for relation extraction to construct the KG. We, therefore, introduced a
guided prompt design that helped to utilize some of such LLMs for our task and analyzed issues that
are making others unsuitable. This rigorous assessment forms a critical foundation for the safe and
effective deployment of LLMs in the healthcare domain. Our work takes the form of the following
contributions:

       • We present a end-to-end method leveraging LLMs for the automatic construction of KGs
         from EMR notes
       • We conduct an extensive and rigorous evaluation of the performance of 12 LLMs of various
         architectures specifically tailored for clinical relation extraction
       • We provide guided prompt design to utilize decoder-only LLMs for relation extraction to
         construct KG between aforementioned medical entities


2    R ELATED W ORK

One notable success in the construction of knowledge bases (KBs) from biomedical textual data is
SemRep Rindflesch & Fiszman (2003). SemRep is a rule-based system that combines syntax and
semantics with biomedical domain knowledge contained in the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) Bodenreider (2004) for semantic relation extraction. The range of predicates in SemRep is
diverse, including molecular interactions, disease etiology, and static relations.
SemRep operates through a pipeline of five steps. Firstly, pre-linguistic analysis is performed,
which includes sentence splitting, tokenization, and acronym detection. SemRep heavily relies on
MetaMap Aronson (2001) for this step. Secondly, lexical/syntactic analysis is performed, which
involves part-of-speech tagging, subcategorization, and grammatical number identification. SemRep
heavily relies on the UMLS SPECIALIST Lexicon Lu et al. (2020) for this step. Thirdly, referential
analysis identifies named entities and maps them to ontological concepts. Fourthly, post-referential
analysis filters out semantically empty words/phrases and establishes semantic dependencies between
noun phrases (NP). Lastly, relational analysis generates predications based on lexical, semantic, and
syntactic knowledge. Shalit et al. Nordon et al. (2019) further improve the precision of SemRep by
adding three additional filtration steps.
As one may observe, SemRep utilizes various levels of language modeling. It has been experimentally
demonstrated that LLMs intrinsically learn these levels of language specification, without explicit
programming Søgaard (2021). In Sung et al. (2021), BERT-based models with probing are used to
extract relations between biomedical entities. The authors observe that, although LLMs can extract
biomedical knowledge, they are biased towards frequently occurring entities present in prompts. We
do not argue about the bias of LLMs, but rather the complexity of extracting relations via probing.
We propose providing larger context information than that which is solely present in the prompt.
Trajanoska et al. (2023) makes connection between LLMs and semantic reasoning to automatically
generate a Knowledge Graph on the topic of sustainability. It further populates it with concrete
instances using news articles from the internet. It experiments with REBEL Huguet Cabot & Navigli
(2021) and ChatGPT and shows that ChatGPT OpenAI (2023) is able to automatically create KGs
from unstructured text, if reinforced with detailed instructions.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The paper on few-shot clinical extraction using LLMs Agrawal et al. (2022) discusses the challenge
of extracting important variables from clinical data and presents an approach that leverages large lan-
guage models, specifically InstructGPT Ouyang et al. (2022), for zero-shot and few-shot information
extraction from clinical text. The authors demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in several
NLP tasks that require structured outputs, such as span identification, token-level sequence classifica-
tion, and relation extraction. To evaluate the performance of the system, the authors introduce new
datasets based on a manual reannotation of the CASI dataset Moon et al. (2014).
We argue that our setup is more complex as we do not consider clean, well-written, academic
corpora such as PubMed Kilicoglu et al. (2012) and CASI Moon et al. (2014). The EMR corpus
contains a significant amount of grammatical errors (”there is some heme OD .. ?”). Practitioners
use abbreviations and notations (”RTO”) not defined in the context, obfuscating the underlying
information even further. Our study benchmarks different LLMs of varying architectures and training
procedures on this challenging dataset.


3     DATASET

For this cohort study, data was obtained from the EMR of the Macula & Retina Institute, an
independent health system in Glendale, California, USA. The dataset included approximately 10,000
patient records of individuals with retina-related eye diseases who had visited the institute between
2008 and 2023. The study focused on extracting knowledge from the clinical notes, which are records
of observations, plans, and other activities related to patient care. These notes contain a patient’s
medical history and reasoning and can be used to identify complex disease-related patterns such as
potential treatments, causes, and symptoms. In total, the study analyzed 360,000 notes relating to
122 unique eye diseases.

3.1   DATASET PREPROCESSING

Clinical notes frequently have repetitive segments conforming to a standardized template utilized
by medical practitioners. The preprocessing step primarily involved computing the cosine similarity
between note pairs. If the similarity score exceeds threshold (denoted threshold preprocessing, more
in Appendix F), the one with a higher word count is prioritized to preserve more informative content.
Additionally, notes comprising fewer than 5 words are excluded from further analysis.


4     P ROPOSED METHOD

Our proposed approach constructs a KG of diseases and their factors, treatments, and manifestations
that the patient exhibits while undergoing the disease. To achieve this, the system initially identifies
disease-specific notes as described in Subsection 4.1. Next, for each category of medical entity,
we design set of questions (Subsection 4.5). We leverage an LLM to answer a pre-designed set
of questions, taking into consideration the aforementioned disease-specific notes as contexts as
described in Subsections 4.3 and 4.6. The list of LLMs that we experimented with are available
in Subsection 4.2. The Subsection 4.7 discuss postprocessing techniques utilized to get the final
relations to construct the KG.

4.1   D ISEASE - SPECIFIC NOTES IDENTIFICATION

In clinical records, a single disease, denoted as cinput , may be expressed in multiple ways. The
set of such expressions is denoted as C. These expressions may vary between clinics as well. To
identify all instances of cinput in the records, we employ the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) Metathesaurus Bodenreider (2004), a comprehensive repository of biomedical terminologies
and ontologies containing over 3 million concepts and their corresponding aliases, such as diseases,
drugs, and procedures. We first check if any of the expressions in ci ∈ C appear in the record, and
if so, we add the record to a list of disease-specific records for cinput . Moreover, clinicians may
make typographical errors when recording the condition in the notes. To account for this, we use the
BioBERT NER model to extract a list of diseases, denoted as Cnote , present in the record. We then
calculate the cosine similarity between each expression cnotei ∈ Cnote and cinput . If the similarity is


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


above threshold (denoted threshold notes identification, more in Appendix F), we add the record to
the result list. Refer to Appendix C.1 for more details on the algorithm.

4.2   M ODELS

                       Architecture              Model            Size     PTT
                       Encoder-only       BioBERT-SQuAD-v2        110M    137B
                                           BERT-SQuAD-v2          110M    137B
                                          RoBERTa-SQuAD-v2        125M    2.2T
                       Decoder-only            BioGPT             349M      -
                                                 OPT               30B    180B
                                            OPT-IML-MAX            30B    180B
                                               Llama 2             70B     2T
                                                 Vicuna            33B     2T
                                                BLOOM             176B    366B
                                               WizardLM            70B      2T
                       Encoder-decoder       FLAN-T5-XXL           11B     34B
                                              FLAN-UL2             20B      1T


Table 1: We show all the models used in this paper, as well as their size, architecture and the number
of pretraining tokens. We focus only on pretraining data, and ignore any finetuning data. PTT stands
for pretraining tokens.


Table 1 shows all the models that we used in this paper. Our main objective revolves around
experimenting with various architectures of LLMs and analyzing their performance through a com-
prehensive evaluation that brings forward potential edge cases and safety attributes. To accomplish
this, we conducted experiments using different LLM models categorized under three architectures:
encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder. Our next objective was to include as much diverse
LLMs as possible encompassing variations in size as well as the number of pretraining tokens. For
more detailed insights into each individual model, please refer to Appendix A.

4.3   A LIGNING LLM S FOR RELATION EXTRACTION

In this work, we assume only query access to a large language model (i.e., no gradients). The task is
to identify relations by finding answers to specific queries. We explore two distinct approaches for
aligning large language models to the task: open-book QA Gholami & Noori (2021) and in-context
learning Brown et al. (2020). QA tries to find an answer to a given query. In the case of open-book
QA, a query consists of a question and a context. An LLM tries to find an answer to the question
from the context. the context serves as a specific, external information source from which the model
is expected to extract answers to the posed questions. The context is typically a passage, document,
or a set of information separate from the model’s pre-existing knowledge. The model’s task is to
directly reference and pull information from this provided context to respond to the query. Thus,
the context in open-book QA acts as a discrete reference material that the model consults to find
answers. While it is commonly associated with encoder-only language models, in-context learning
is specifically tailored for decoder-only and encoder-decoder models. For in-context learning, we
give the LLM a prompt that consists of a list of input-output pairs that demonstrate a task. While
in-context learning also involves a question and a context, the usage and purpose of the context differ
significantly. Here, the context is not an external source of information but an integral part of the
model’s prompt. It includes a series of input-output pairs that serve as examples to guide the model
in understanding the nature of the task. These examples demonstrate how to process and respond to
similar queries. Therefore, the context in in-context learning is instructional and part of the learning
material embedded within the prompt, guiding the model’s response generation process based on
demonstrated patterns, rather than serving as a source from which to extract direct answers. In this


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


study we focused on zero-shot Wei et al. (2022), few-shot Brown et al. (2020), and instruction-based
prompting Ye et al. (2023).

4.4   P ROMPT DESIGN


Figure 1: Guided instruction-based prompting. Each prompt design element is denoted by specific
annotations. In the top left, a simple prompt structure includes a retrieval message and sentence
introduction. The bottom left showcases an instruction prompt, featuring an overall task instruction
and retrieval message. On the right, guided instruction prompt is detailed, containing overall task
instructions, a retrieval message, and specific input-output formatting instructions. Different colors
indicate different prompt design elements: orange for overall task instructions, red for sentence
introduction, purple for the retrieval message portion and green for the LLM response

We conduct a comparison of three prompting techniques: zero-shot, few-shot, and instruction-based.
In the case of zero-shot and few-shot approaches, we simply append entity-related questions to the
input. Additionally, for the few-shot approach, we provide an example input/output.
Regarding the instruction-based prompting, we follow a systematic and task-agnostic process to
construct prompts as outlined in Jimenez Gutierrez et al. (2022). As depicted in the left examples
in Figure 1, this method identifies three key components of a prompt: overall task instructions, a
sentence introduction, and a retrieval message. Building upon this, we introduce guided instruction-
based prompting, denoted as ’guided’ in the forthcoming sections. This refined prompt structure
incorporates three fundamental elements:

       • Contextual Task Instruction: This aspect furnishes explicit and comprehensive guidance,
         emphasizing the model’s role in extracting information solely from the provided context. It
         establishes a clear framework for understanding the task at hand.
       • Input Format Guidance: To mitigate issues of relations extracted out of context, we
         introduced explicit instructions on how the model should interpret and process input. This
         includes specifying the acceptable types and formats for questions and contexts.
       • Output Format Guidance: We refined the retrieval message to include the entity type and
         explicitly instruct the model on the desired format for its responses.

For a detailed visualization of guided prompt structure and its components, please refer to Figure 1.

4.5   Q UESTION DESIGN

We define template questions like ”What treats %s”. The ”%s” in the questions represents a place-
holder for a disease. All the predicates (e.g. treats, affect, cause, factor) are taken from SemRep
Rindflesch & Fiszman (2003). The questions are categorized into three types: treatment-related,
factor-related, and coexists with-related questions. The treatment-related questions inquire about
methods to slow down the progression, decrease the chance, or reduce the risk of a specific condition.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The factor-related questions aim to identify the causes, factors, or risks associated with a condition.
The coexists with-related questions explore any symptoms, effects, diseases, clinical tests, or behav-
iors that may manifest in the patient while experiencing the disease. The full list of questions for the
LLM queries is available in Appendix B.

4.6   R ELATION EXTRACTION

Our relation extraction method uses an LLM to answer a question given a related context. The design
of the questions is described in Subsection 4.5. Questions are defined relative to a disease d from the
set of diseases D and denoted as q(d) by replacing the placeholder of the question with d. A context
of a disease d is a clinical note that contains d. The set of all clinical notes identified by Subsection 4.1
for a disease d is denoted by C(d). The set of questions of the category (e.g. treatment) t is denoted
by Qt (d) for a disease d. Algorithm 1 describes the process of querying the LLM for diseases and
clinical notes with the defined questions.

Algorithm 1 Querying LLM
Ensure: result
  result := {}
  for d ∈ D do
      for t ∈ {treatment, f actor, coexists with} do
          for q(d) ∈ Qt (d) do
              tmp := ⟨LM (⟨c, q(d)⟩), d, t⟩       ▷ Where LM returns a list of possible answers
                                                                    ▷ with their probabilities.
              result.insert(tmp)
          end for
      end for
  end for

The list of scores collected from Algorithm 1 is denoted as result. One may notice that entries of
result are triplets where the first element is a list. The result is expanded by its first dimension.
For example, if result = {⟨{a, b}, d, t⟩} then it becomes result = {⟨a, d, t⟩, ⟨b, d, t⟩} after the
expansion. A single probability estimate may be unreliable for a relation of type t between e and
d. This is strongly highlighted in Nordon et al. (2019) where text methods exhibit low precision by
overestimating the probabilities for untrue relations. Motivated by this, we average over multiple
occurrences of the relation of the type t between e and d. We then keep the relations that have
occurred more than relation occurrence number times and that have an average probability higher
than relation probability (more on relation occurrence number and relation probability in Appendix
F). The numbers are chosen arbitrarily and they may be tuned for a dataset. Finally, the relation
with the highest probability is chosen as the final prediction for an ordered pair of entities. Refer to
Appendix C.2 for more details.

4.7   P OSTPROCESSING

To map the model’s output to a list of values for each medical entity, we initially filtered out
the predictions with a probability score lower than 0.08. Subsequently, to remove meaningless
information, stop words and punctuation were excised from each predicted text.
In addition to these steps, our approach included handling instances where the model explicitly
expressed uncertainty or lack of sufficient context. In scenarios where the large language model
(LLM) responds with variations of ”I do not know” due to insufficient or ambiguous context, these
responses were identified and systematically filtered out. This is crucial, as it ensures that our
knowledge graph is built only on reliable, contextually supported information rather than on uncertain
or speculative model outputs.
Further analysis revealed that models tend to generate the same answers in various forms depending on
the given context. For instance, predictions such as ”areds” and ”areds-2 vitamins” essentially refer to
the same value for a specific medical entity, but are expressed differently. To address these variations,
we employed normalized cosine similarity for the tokens in the model’s predictions. Specifically, for
each medical entity, we calculated the cosine similarity between each pair of predictions. Predictions


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with a similarity score exceeding 0.8 were considered equivalent and subsequently grouped together.
From each group, the prediction with the highest initial probability score assigned by the model was
selected. Finally, the refined output was converted into a list of values, selecting spans of text directly
from the LLM output. A qualitative example illustrating this process is provided in Appendix D.


5    R ESULTS

We now describe our experimental study over our techniques for constructing the KG.
Setup We construct a KG for age-related macula degeneration (AMD), which is a progressive eye
disease mainly occurring in older people with a high incidence rate.
The absence of absolute ground truth leave us to compare the results with the knowledge of medical
practitioners, which may be incomplete. Moreover, new knowledge is likely to be discovered when
using large textual and EMR repositories Nordon et al. (2019). To evaluate the LLMs, we needed
to review all clinical notes related to AMD and extract all factors, treatments and coexists with
terms. The evaluation is done based on precision and recall, with the groundtruth for comparison
being the entity values available in the notes. We refer to this extraction process as an annotation.
This annotation was carried out by two of the authors, a retina specialist, and a clinical research
coordinator. To establish a consistent annotation schema, a set of examples was jointly annotated.
Following this, each annotator independently annotated the same set of examples, and the two sets of
annotations were then combined via a joint manual adjudication process. The AMD related notes
have been identified according to Subsection 4.1 and preprocessed as described in Subsection 3.1.
These steps leave us with 320 clinical notes.

                                                Treatment               Factor             Coexists with
Architecture      Model                     Precision    Recall    Precision   Recall    Precision   Recall
Encoder-only      RoBERTa-SQuAD-v2            0.25       0.54        0.21         0.75      0.3       0.14
                  BioBERT-SQuAD-v2            0.13       0.9         0.25         0.75     0.45       0.71
                  BERT-SQuAD-v2               0.17       0.45        0.17         0.45     0.17       0.57
Encoder-decoder   FLAN-T5-XXL: 0-shot         0.55       0.75        0.54         0.69     0.64       0.89
                  FLAN-T5-XXL: few-shot       0.45       0.9         0.66         0.8      0.72       0.88
                  FLAN-T5-XXL: instruct       0.86       0.9          0.8         0.8      0.83       0.97
                  FLAN-T5-XXL: guided         0.88         1         0.82        0.875     0.76      0.875
                  FLAN-UL2: 0-shot            0.43       0.9         0.16         0.62     0.74       0.85
                  FLAN-UL2: few-shot          0.55       0.9         0.36         0.75     0.78       0.89
                  FLAN-UL2: instruct          0.98         1          0.8         0.8      0.98         1
                  FLAN-UL2: guided            0.98        1          0.84        0.875     0.98         1
Decoder-only      Vicuna-33B: guided          0.63         1          0.5        0.75      0.46       0.75
                  Llama-2-70B: guided         0.65         1         0.38         0.75      0.4      0.875
                  WizardLM-70B: guided        0.78         1         0.61        0.875      0.5      0.875



Table 2: We are comparing the performance of LLMs with various architectures across all three
medical entities. The evaluation is based on precision and recall measurements for each medical
entity within the final KG. The baseline for comparison are the entity values available in the notes.
’guided’ refers to the guided instruction-based prompting described in Subsection 4.4.

Precision and recall results
Table 2 shows the precision and recall results of different LLMs of various architectures. The
best performance is consistently achieved with encoder-decoder LLMs for most medical entities.
Specifically, FLAN-UL2, when used with instruction-based prompting, outperforms the other mod-
els. Furthermore, we observe that encoder-decoder models using 0-shot and few-shot prompting
techniques are comparable to encoder-only and decoder-only models in some cases; however, when
instruction-based prompting is employed, they significantly outperform the others.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quantitative results for decoder-only models using 0-shot, few-shot, and instruction-based prompting
techniques are not available. These models did not produce structured outputs, rendering them
unsuitable for our task. Additional information can be found in Decoder-only models.
Unlike other prompting techniques, guided instruction-based prompting (as described in Subsection
4.4), has shown significant improvements. This advancement has enabled us to utilize three decoder-
only models for this task out of the seven we experimented with. These models are Llama 2
Touvron et al. (2023), Vicuna-33B Zheng et al. (2023), and WizardLM-70B Xu et al. (2023).
Notably, WizardLM-70B achieves the highest recall for factors and treatments, demonstrating that
the incorporation of additional guidance has enhanced the understanding of the task by some of the
decoder-only models, resulting in more precise and accurate answers. We believe that further research
is required to explore the potential of decoder-only models for challenging relation extraction tasks,
and future investigations may enhance their reliability. See prediction examples in Appendix E.
Decoder-only models
Here we describe the challenges that make some of these models unsuitable for clinical relation
extraction, thus KG construction. Some of the models are prone to ”hallucinating”, a term commonly
used to refer to the models generating responses that are factually incorrect or nonsensical. See such
examples in Appendix E.2.1.
Furthermore, we observed cases where some models generated correct responses, but these responses
did not originate from the given context. Another concern was the generation of excessively verbose
or repetitive responses. Despite being contextually correct, the lengthy and redundant nature of these
outputs complicated the postprocessing phase, making the integration of such responses into our KG
construction pipeline impossible. See such examples in Appendix E.2.2.
Qualitative Example: AMD
We continue using AMD as a qualitative example. AMD is a progressive eye disease affecting
the retina, specifically the macula. The risk factors for AMD have been studied extensively and
have widely been known to include age, race, smoking status, diet, and genetics Holz et al. (2014);
Heesterbeek et al. (2020). The exact reasons and mechanisms behind AMD are not yet fully
researched. There are multiple pathways and factors for drusen formation and AMD progression,
so it is hard to disentangle them. Large and numerous drusen are associated with an increased
risk of developing advanced AMD Schlanitz et al. (2019). The pathophysiologic landscape of
AMD potentially involves degenerative transformations within several ocular components, including
the outer retinal layers, the photoreceptors, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) characterized by the
loss of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) and atrophic changes, accumulation of subretinal/submacular fluids,
perturbations in Bruch’s membrane leading to choroidal neovascularization (CNVM), and areas of
choriocapillaris nonperfusion resulting in macular atrophy and fibrosis Holz et al. (2014); Boyer
et al. (2017). Medical evaluators annotated drusen, genetics, CNVM, smoking, RPE irregularities,
submacular/subretinal fluid, fibrosis, and loss of EZ zone as risk factors for AMD. The KG constructed
with the utilization of FLAN-UL2 with instruction-based prompting that have relatively the best
quantitative performance, is visually presented in Table 3.



          Treatment                Factor                          Coexists with
          AREDS vitamins           Drusen                          Poor visual acuity
          Avastin                  Genetics / Family history       Metamorphopsia
          Lucentis                 Peripheral CNVM/CNVM            Visual changes
          PDT                      Smoking                         Macula Risk genetic testing
          WACS vitamins            RPE irregularity                Wet AMD
          Amsler grid testing      Submacular fibrosis and fluid   Dry AMD/GA
          Spinach                  Loss of EZ zone                 ForeseeHome
          Fish                     Diabetes                        Drusen
          Omega-3 fatty acids      Glaucoma                        Amblyopia
          Anti-VEGF                Subretinal fluid
          Green Leafy Vegetables
          Lack drusen


Table 3: KG for AMD constructed using FLAN-UL2 model with instruction-based prompting. Red
color indicates an incorrect values. Orange color indicates a values missed by the model.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notably, besides factors, the graph also highlights a spectrum of terms that are linked to potential
treatments and symptoms associated with AMD. Among the treatment entities are AREDS/WACS
vitamins, dietary interventions, and Anti-VEGF treatments including Avastin and Lucentis. Other
treatments indicated include PDT (Photodynamic Therapy), the utilization of Amsler grid, supplemen-
tation of Omega-3 fatty acids, and consumption of specific foods such as fish, spinach, and green leafy
vegetables. The symptomatic aspects of AMD encompass a range of visual impairments and clinical
manifestations. Patients afflicted with AMD often experience poor visual acuity, metamorphopsia
(distorted vision), and can be diagnosed with either dry or wet AMD. Additionally, the management
of the condition often involves undergoing assessments such as ForeseeHome and Macula Risk
genetic testing, which play a pivotal role in monitoring the progression and development of AMD.
Each of these terms is identified as values to the ’Coexists with’ entity within the graph.

            Treatment                          Factor               Coexists with
            Injection procedure                Blind Vision         Visual impairment
            Photochemotherapy                  Antioxidants         Massive hemorrhage
            Antioxidants                       Oxidative Stress     Autofluorescence
            Bevacizumab                                             Blindness
            Eye care                                                Legal, Disability NOS
            Homocysteine thiolactone
            Operative Surgical Procedures

                        Table 4: KG for AMD constructed using SemMedDB.


We also show the KG constructed by SemMedDB Kilicoglu et al. (2012) in Table 4. SemMedDB is
a repository of semantic predictions extracted from the titles and abstracts of all PubMed citations.
It is evident that our approach has identified terms not found in the SemMedDB. Our method may
not forge new terms where none existed in the original medical literature repository. However, the
feedback from our medical evaluators underscores its potential to contribute to novel discoveries by
highlighting existing but overlooked information.

6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose an end-to-end approach that harnesses LLMs for the automatic generation
of KGs from EMR notes. KGs hold significant value in numerous healthcare domains, including drug
discovery and clinical trial design. The entities involved in the KG construction process encompass
diseases, factors, treatments, and manifestations that co-occur with patients experiencing these
diseases. Through extensive evaluation across various LLM architectures, we have demonstrated
that encoder-decoder models outperform others in clinical relation extraction. Furthermore, we
emphasize the need for additional investigation into the suitability of decoder-only models for
medical applications, particularly given their critical safety implications. We believe that an automated
knowledge extraction method may deliver substantial benefits to the medical community and facilitate
further research in the field.

R EFERENCES
Monica Agrawal, Stefan Hegselmann, Hunter Lang, Yoon Kim, and David Sontag. Large language
 models are few-shot clinical information extractors. In Proc. of EMNLP, pp. 1998–2022, Abu
 Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.130.
Alan R Aronson. Effective mapping of biomedical text to the umls metathesaurus: the metamap
  program. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, pp. 17. American Medical Informatics
  Association, 2001.
Olivier Bodenreider. The unified medical language system (umls): integrating biomedical terminology.
  Nucleic acids research, 32(suppl 1):D267–D270, 2004.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David S Boyer, Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth, Menno van Lookeren Campagne, Erin C Henry, and
  Christopher Brittain. The pathophysiology of geographic atrophy secondary to age-related macular
  degeneration and the complement pathway as a therapeutic target. Retina (Philadelphia, Pa.), 37
  (5):819, 2017.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
 ArXiv preprint, abs/2210.11416, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416.
Limeng Cui, Haeseung Seo, Maryam Tabar, Fenglong Ma, Suhang Wang, and Dongwon Lee. DE-
  TERRENT: knowledge guided graph attention network for detecting healthcare misinformation.
  In Rajesh Gupta, Yan Liu, Jiliang Tang, and B. Aditya Prakash (eds.), KDD ’20: The 26th ACM
  SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, Au-
  gust 23-27, 2020, pp. 492–502. ACM, 2020. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
  3394486.3403092.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proc. of NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–4186,
  Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Martin Drancé, Marina Boudin, Fleur Mougin, and Gayo Diallo. Neuro-symbolic xai for computa-
 tional drug repurposing. In KEOD, pp. 220–225, 2021.
Sia Gholami and Mehdi Noori. Zero-shot open-book question answering.                ArXiv preprint,
  abs/2111.11520, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.11520.
Thomas J Heesterbeek, Laura Lorés-Motta, Carel B Hoyng, Yara TE Lechanteur, and Anneke I den
  Hollander. Risk factors for progression of age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmic and
  Physiological Optics, 40(2):140–170, 2020.
Frank G Holz, Erich C Strauss, Steffen Schmitz-Valckenberg, and Menno van Lookeren Campagne.
  Geographic atrophy: clinical features and potential therapeutic approaches. Ophthalmology, 121
  (5):1079–1091, 2014.
Pere-Lluı́s Huguet Cabot and Roberto Navigli. REBEL: Relation extraction by end-to-end language
  generation. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih
  (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2370–2381,
  Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.204. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  findings-emnlp.204.
Srinivasan Iyer, Xi Victoria Lin, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Todor Mihaylov, Daniel Simig, Ping Yu,
  Kurt Shuster, Tianlu Wang, Qing Liu, Punit Singh Koura, et al. Opt-iml: Scaling language model
  instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization. ArXiv preprint, abs/2212.12017, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.12017.
Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez, Nikolas McNeal, Clayton Washington, You Chen, Lang Li, Huan Sun,
  and Yu Su. Thinking about GPT-3 in-context learning for biomedical IE? think again. In
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 4497–4512, Abu


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.329.
Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. PubMedQA: A dataset
  for biomedical research question answering. In Proc. of EMNLP, pp. 2567–2577, Hong Kong,
  China, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1259. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1259.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a
  freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Halil Kilicoglu, Dongwook Shin, Marcelo Fiszman, Graciela Rosemblat, and Thomas C Rindflesch.
  Semmeddb: a pubmed-scale repository of biomedical semantic predications. Bioinformatics, 28
  (23):3158–3160, 2012.
Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo
   Kang. Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining.
   Bioinformatics, 36(4):1234–1240, 2020.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
  ArXiv preprint, abs/1907.11692, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
Chris J Lu, Amanda Payne, and James G Mork. The unified medical language system specialist
  lexicon and lexical tools: development and applications. Journal of the American Medical
  Informatics Association, 27(10):1600–1605, 2020.
Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan Liu.
  Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining. Briefings in
  Bioinformatics, 23(6):bbac409, 2022.
Sungrim Moon, Serguei Pakhomov, Nathan Liu, James O Ryan, and Genevieve B Melton. A
  sense inventory for clinical abbreviations and acronyms created using clinical notes and medical
  dictionary resources. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 21(2):299–307,
  2014.
Galia Nordon, Gideon Koren, Varda Shalev, Benny Kimelfeld, Uri Shalit, and Kira Radinsky.
  Building causal graphs from medical literature and electronic medical records. In The Thirty-Third
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications
  of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational
 Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February
 1, 2019, pp. 1102–1109. AAAI Press, 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011102. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011102.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Proc. of EMNLP, pp. 2383–2392, Austin, Texas, 2016.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/D16-1264.
Thomas C Rindflesch and Marcelo Fiszman. The interaction of domain knowledge and linguistic
  structure in natural language processing: interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text.
  Journal of biomedical informatics, 36(6):462–477, 2003.
Alberto Santos, Ana R Colaço, Annelaura B Nielsen, Lili Niu, Maximilian Strauss, Philipp E Geyer,
  Fabian Coscia, Nicolai J Wewer Albrechtsen, Filip Mundt, Lars Juhl Jensen, et al. A knowledge
  graph to interpret clinical proteomics data. Nature biotechnology, 40(5):692–702, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. ArXiv preprint, abs/2211.05100, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05100.
Ferdinand Schlanitz, Bernhard Baumann, Stefan Sacu, Lukas Baumann, Michael Pircher, Christoph K
  Hitzenberger, and Ursula Margarethe Schmidt-Erfurth. Impact of drusen and drusenoid retinal
  pigment epithelium elevation size and structure on the integrity of the retinal pigment epithelium
  layer. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 103(2):227–232, 2019.
Andrea C Skelly, Joseph R Dettori, and Erika D Brodt. Assessing bias: the importance of considering
  confounding. Evidence-based spine-care journal, 3(01):9–12, 2012.
Anders Søgaard. Explainable natural language processing. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2021.
Mujeen Sung, Jinhyuk Lee, Sean Yi, Minji Jeon, Sungdong Kim, and Jaewoo Kang. Can language
 models be biomedical knowledge bases? In Proc. of EMNLP, pp. 4723–4734, Online and Punta
 Cana, Dominican Republic, 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 2021.emnlp-main.388. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.388.
Madhumita Sushil, Dana Ludwig, Atul J Butte, and Vivek A Rudrapatna. Developing a general-
 purpose clinical language inference model from a large corpus of clinical notes. ArXiv preprint,
 abs/2210.06566, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06566.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model, 2023.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q Tran, Xavier Garcia, Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Hyung Won
  Chung, Dara Bahri, Tal Schuster, Steven Zheng, et al. Ul2: Unifying language learning paradigms.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. ArXiv preprint, abs/2307.09288, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2307.09288.
Milena Trajanoska, Riste Stojanov, and Dimitar Trajanov. Enhancing knowledge graph construction
 using large language models, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
  Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In
  Proc. of ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gEZrGCozdqR.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin
  Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. ArXiv
  preprint, abs/2304.12244, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12244.
Seonghyeon Ye, Hyeonbin Hwang, Sohee Yang, Hyeongu Yun, Yireun Kim, and Minjoon Seo.
  In-context instruction learning. ArXiv preprint, abs/2302.14691, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2302.14691.
Yitayal Yitayew. Flan-ul2: A new open source flan 20b with ul2. https://www.yitay.net/
  blog/flan-ul2-20b, 2023.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. ArXiv preprint, abs/2205.01068, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  01068.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. ArXiv preprint, abs/2306.05685, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2306.05685.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    M ODELS

Encoder-only models
Our approach utilizes a fine-tuned question-answering model based on BERT Devlin et al. (2019),
specifically fine-tuned on the SQuAD v2 dataset Rajpurkar et al. (2016). This model, which we refer
to as BERT-SQuAD-v2, benefits from the core principles of BERT, including random token masking
during pretraining to encourage contextual understanding.
Inspired by advancements in the BERT family, we also incorporate RoBERTa Liu et al. (2019), which
is improved upon Bert by introducing a new pretraining recipe that includes training for longer and on
larger batches, randomly masking tokens at each epoch instead of just once during preprocessing, and
removing the next-sentence prediction objective. We also consider BioBERT Lee et al. (2020), which
is a pre-trained BERT model which is trained on different combinations of general & biomedical
domain corpora.
Decoder-only models
BioGPT Luo et al. (2022), a generative Transformer model tailored for biomedical literature, has
shown remarkable results on several biomedical NLP benchmarks, including an impressive 78.2%
accuracy on PubMedQA Jin et al. (2019). However, our efforts to employ BioGPT for relation
extraction were met with challenges. The model frequently hallucinated during inference, making it
unsuitable for our specific application in relation extraction.
Open Pretrained Transformers (OPT) Zhang et al. (2022) represents a comprehensive suite of decoder-
only transformers designed for large-scale research. OPT-30B, a particular model from this suite, has
been pre-trained predominantly on English text with some multilingual data from CommonCrawl.
Sharing similarities with GPT-3, it uses a causal language modeling (CLM) objective. OPT-IML
Iyer et al. (2022) represents an advanced version of the OPT model, enhanced with Instruction Meta-
Learning. It’s been trained on an extensive collection known as the OPT-IML Bench, comprising
roughly 2000 NLP tasks from 8 different benchmarks. Two variations exist: the standard OPT-IML
trained on 1500 tasks, and OPT-IML-Max that covers all 2000 tasks.
BLOOM Scao et al. (2022) stands as a sophisticated autoregressive Large Language Model (LLM),
designed to produce coherent text across 46 languages and 13 programming languages, replicating
human-like text generation capabilities.
Llama 2 Touvron et al. (2023) is a distinguished collection of generative text models, with models
ranging from 7 billion to 70 billion parameters. Presented by Meta, this repository encompasses the
70B variant, made compatible with the Hugging Face Transformers framework. Within the Llama 2
family lies a specialized series called Llama-2-70B-Chat, meticulously fine-tuned for dialogue-centric
applications. This model excels, outstripping many open-source chat models in benchmarks and
rivalling prominent closed-source counterparts like ChatGPT and PaLM in terms of helpfulness and
safety.
Emerging from the wave of advanced chatbots, Vicuna-33B Zheng et al. (2023) stands out as an open-
source contribution, fine-tuned using the LLaMA framework based on dialogues from ShareGPT.
Notably, when evaluated using GPT-4, Vicuna-33B not only showcased a commendable performance,
rivaling the likes of OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google Bard (achieving over 90%* quality), but also
surpassed counterparts like LLaMA and Stanford Alpaca Taori et al. (2023) in over 90%* of the tests.
This exceptional achievement comes at a modest training cost of around $300, making Vicuna-33B an
attractive proposition. Additionally, its code, weights, and a live demo are accessible for the research
community, albeit restricted to non-commercial applications.
WizardLM-70B Xu et al. (2023) is a Large Language Model (LLM) built on the foundation of
LLaMA, incorporating a novel training approach known as Evol-Instruct. This method involves
leveraging artificial intelligence to evolve complex instruction data, setting WizardLM apart from
LLaMA-based LLMs trained on simpler instructions. As a result it outperforms counterparts in tasks
that demand intricate understanding and execution of instructions.
Encoder-decoder models


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FLAN-T5-XXL Chung et al. (2022) is a encoder-decoder model that has been pre-trained on a
multi-task mixture of unsupervised and supervised tasks and for which each task is converted into a
text-to-text format. It performs well on multiple tasks including question answering.
FLAN-UL2 Yitayew (2023) is an encoder-decoder model based on the T5 architecture. It uses the
same configuration as the UL2 Tay et al. (2022) model released earlier last year and was fine-tuned
using the “Flan” prompt tuning and dataset collection Wei et al. (2022). According to the original
blog, there are some notable improvements over the original UL2 model. The Flan-UL2 checkpoint
uses a receptive field of 2048 which makes it more usable for few-shot in-context learning. This
Flan-UL2 checkpoint does not require mode tokens anymore.
In comparison to FLAN-T5, FLAN-UL2 outperforms FLAN-T5 XXL on all four setups with an
overall decent performance lift of +3.2% relative improvement. Most of the gains seem to come from
the CoT setup while performance on direct prompting (MMLU and BBH) seems to be modest at best.

B    Q UESTION LIST

                   Medical entity   Question
                   Treatment        What can slow the progression of %s? (T1)
                                    What can decrease the chance of %s? (T2)
                                    What can reduce the risk of %s? (T3)
                                    What is a treatment for %s? (T4)
                                    What treats %s? (T5)
                   Factor           What does cause %s? (F1)
                                    What is the cause of %s? (F2)
                                    What is the factor for %s? (F3)
                                    What can increase the risk of %s? (F4)
                                    What can convert to %s? (F5)
                   Effect           What can %s convert to? (E1)
                                    What is the effect of %s? (E2)
                                    What does %s lead to? (E3)
                                    What can %s become? (E4)
                                    What does %s affect? (E5)


Table 5: List of questions categorized by the medical entity. The ”%s” in the questions represents a
placeholder for a disease.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A LGORITHMS


C.1   D ISEASE - SPECIFIC NOTES IDENTIFICATION


Algorithm 2 Disease-specific notes identification
Ensure: result
  result := {}
  C = UMLS Metathesaurus API(c input)
  for note in clinical notes do
      Cnote = BioBERT NER(note)
      if note contains ci then
          result.append(note)
      else
          similarity score := calculate cosine similarity(cinput , cnotei )
          if similarity score > threshold then
              result.append(note)
          end if
      end if
  end for


C.2   R ELATION EXTRACTION


Algorithm 3 Relation extraction
Require: result from Algorithm 1
  relation := {}
Ensure: relations
  for unique ⟨e, d, t⟩ in result do
      temp := ⟨average(result[e, d, t].score), count(result[e, d, t])⟩
      if temp.average ≥ 0.1 and temp.count ≥ 10 then
           stat ← ⟨temp.average, e, d, t⟩
      end if
  end for
  for unique e, d in stat do
      relations ← ⟨d, arg maxt stat[e, d], e⟩
  end for


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       P OSTPROCESSING

                 Raw                                Filtered                        Grouped                  Final


       new clinical trial (0.01)                 areds (0.56)                  healthy diet (0.48)     healthy diet (0.48)


             areds (0.56)                      areds+wacs (0.6)                   areds vitamins,     areds vitamins (0.67)
                                                                               fish, spinach (0.67)

          areds+wacs (0.6)                  areds-2 vitamins (0.14)                                        fish (0.67)


       areds-2 vitamins (0.14)           eating spinach and fish (0.24)                                  spinach (0.67)


    eating spinach and fish (0.24)            healthy diet (0.48)


         healthy diet (0.48)                spinach and fish (0.25)


       spinach and fish (0.25)                   areds vitamins,
                                              fish, spinach (0.67)

            areds vitamins,
         fish, spinach (0.67)


Figure 2: Qualitative example of the postprocessing steps. Every orange node illustrates the predic-
tions made by an LLM, along with an associated probability enclosed in parentheses.


E       P ROMPTS AND SAMPLE OUTPUTS
E.1       E NCODER - ONLY MODELS

E.1.1         E XAMPLES OF WRONG PREDICTIONS

                                      Listing 1: BERT-SQuAD-v2: wrong prediction
Question: What can slow the progression of macular degeneration?
Context: Macular Degeneration: Discussed the nature of dry macular
    degeneration. Discussed Age Related Eye Disease Study and recommended
     AREDs vitamins for prevention purposes. Patient given Amsler grid to
     monitor for metamorphopsias or changes in central vision.
Answer:
dry macular degeneration

                                     Listing 2: RoBERTa-SQuAD-v2: wrong prediction
Question: What does cause Macular Degeneration?
Context: Macular Degeneration: Discussed the nature of dry macular
    degeneration. Discussed Age Related Eye Disease Study and recommended
     AREDs vitamins for prevention purposes. Patient given Amsler grid to
     monitor for metamorphopsias or changes in central vision.
Answer:
dry macular degeneration


E.1.2         E XAMPLES OF RIGHT PREDICTIONS

                                       Listing 3: BERT-SQuAD-v2: right prediction
Question: What can slow the progression of myopic macular degeneration?
Context: Myopic Macular Degeneration - Explained that there is no
    specific treatment at this time. AREDS and WACS vitamins MAY help
    slow down the progression of the degeneration. Monitor closely. All
    questions were answered to the patient’s satisfaction.
Answer:
AREDS and WACS vitamins


                                                                          16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Listing 4: BioBERT-SQuAD-v2: right prediction
Question: What does cause ARMD?
Context: Macular Degeneration: Discussed the nature of dry macular
    degeneration. Patient encouraged to use an Amsler grid to monitor
    macular function by looking for metamorphopsias or visual changes.
Answer:
metamorphopsias or visual changes

                        Listing 5: RoBERTa-SQuAD-v2: right prediction
Question: What does cause amd?
Context: Smoking is the largest ‘modifiable’ risk factor for AMD - by
    stopping smoking a patient can reduce the chance of getting AMD and
    of AMD progressing.There is a very strong association between smoking
     and macular disease. Smokers are up to four times more likely than
    non-smokers to develop age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and
    smokers with a genetic predisposition to AMD are eight times more
    likely to get the condition. Some research suggests people with
    certain genes can be 20 times more likely to get macular degeneration
     if they smoke.
Answer:
Smoking


E.2     D ECODER - ONLY MODELS

E.2.1    E XAMPLES OF HALLUCINATIONS
               Listing 6: BLOOM with instruction-based prompting: hallucination
I want you to act as a question answering machine. I will provide you
    with a questions and a context and you will reply with the answers.
Question: What can slow the progression of armd?
Instruction: If the answer is not in context answer "i do not know".
Context: Wet ARMD- Patient educated on condition. Discussed diet and use
    of Macular Degeneration vitamins. All questions were answered to the
    patient’s satisfaction.
Answer:
i do not know
    a:
    i think the question is a bit vague. it is not clear what the
    question is about. it is not clear what the context is. it is not
    clear what the answers are. it is not clear what the question is
    asking. it is not clear what the question is asking the answerer to
    do. it is not clear what the question is asking the answerer to do.
    it is not clear what the question is asking the answerer to do. it
    is not clear what the

            Listing 7: BLOOM with guided instruction-based prompting: hallucination

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.


                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: coexists_with
question: What does armd lead to?
context: Acute Exudative ARMD OU - chronic leakage OU. No significant
    changes OU. Recommend treating with Anti-VEGF injections. Discussed
    with patient the gravity of this disease, including the potential for
     vision loss and guarded recovery. Reviewed treatment options -
    Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.

### Response
effect:
    If the question contains multiple entities, extract all of them,
    separated with commas. For example, if you have following question
    Question 1:


            Listing 8: BioGPT with guided instruction-based prompting: hallucination

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: factor


                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


question: What is the factor for armd?
context: 2 small Druse OD- clinically does not look like ARMD. Patient
    has a family history of ARMD, recommend starting on AREDS + WACS
    vitamins. Eat green leafy vegetables like Spinach 5 times a week and
    fish at least 2 times a week.

### Response
I do not include any other entities to answer the question.


           Listing 9: OPT-30B with guided instruction-based prompting: hallucination

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: coexists_with
question: What can amd convert to?
context: Explained to patient that he does have AMD but it is mild and
    not the cause of his blurred vision.

### Response
effect: [ENTITY 1], [ENTITY 2], [ENTITY 3]...
    If the question is not related to the context, or if the context
    contains a missing information to answer to the question, answer Ï do
    not know.änd nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format
    ### Response
    I do not know.
    ### Input
    question type: factor
    question: What can amd convert to?
    context: Explained to patient that he does have AMD but it is mild
    and not the cause of his blurred vision.
    ### Response
    factor: [ENTITY 1], [ENTITY 2], [ENTITY 3]...


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    If the question is not related to the context, or if the context
    contains a missing information to answer to the question, answer Ï do
    not know.änd nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format
    ### Response
    I do not know.
    ### Input
    question type: treat
    question: What can amd convert to?
    context: Explained to patient that he does have AMD but it is mild
    and not the cause of his blurred vision.
    ### Response
    treat: [ENTITY 1], [ENTITY 2], [ENTITY 3]...
    If the question is not related to the context, or if the context
    contains a missing information to answer to the question, answer Ï do
    not know.änd nothing more.
    No explanations.
    If the context does not contain the answer to the question, answer
    with the following format
    ### Response
    I do not know.
    ### Input
    question type: factor
    question: What can amd convert to?
    context: Explained to patient that he does have AMD but it is mild
    and


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.2   E XAMPLES OF WRONG PREDICTIONS

  Listing 10: OPT-IML-MAX-30B with guided instruction-based prompting: wrong prediction

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: coexists_with
question: What can armd convert to?
context: Dry ARMD - Explained that there is no specific treatment at this
     time. Can convert to wet ARMD, which is treatable. Eating a healthy
    diet that includes green leafy vegetables, fish, taking AREDS + WACS
    eye vitamins and Omega-3 fatty acids has been shown to significantly
    decrease the progression of the disease. Monitor closely, daily use
    of amsler grid. All questions were answered to the patient’s
    satisfaction

### Response
I do not know


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Listing 11: OPT-IML-MAX-30B with guided instruction-based prompting: wrong prediction

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: coexists_with
question: What does armd lead to?
context: Acute Exudative ARMD OU - chronic leakage OU. No significant
    changes OU. Recommend treating with Anti-VEGF injections. Discussed
    with patient the gravity of this disease, including the potential for
     vision loss and guarded recovery. Reviewed treatment options -
    Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.

### Response
I do not know


          Listing 12: Vicuna-33B with instruction-based prompting: wrong prediction

Instruction: I want you to act as a medical question answering machine. I
     will provide you with
questions and a context, and you will reply with the answers. If the
    answer is not in context, answer "I do not know."
question: What can decrease the chance of armd?
context: Acute Exudative ARMD OS - Subertinal blood/exudates OU-Discussed
     with patient the gravity of this disease, including the potential
    for vision loss and guarded recovery. Reviewed treatment options -
    Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.

Answer:
In the context provided, the question is about decreasing the chance of
    ARMD (Age-Related Macular Degeneration). While I am not a doctor, I
    can provide some general information on this topic.There are certain
    risk factors for ARMD that you may not be able to change, such as age,
    family history, and genetics. However, there are some lifestyle
    changes that may help decrease the risk of ARMD or slow its
    progression:Maintain a healthy diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and
    whole grains. Foods high in antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E,


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    zinc, and lutein, may be particularly beneficial.Exercise regularly,
    as studies have shown that physical activity may reduce the risk of
    ARMD.Maintain a healthy weight, as obesity has been linked to a higher
    risk of ARMD.Quit smoking, as smoking is a risk factor for ARMD and
    can exacerbate the condition.Regularly check your vision and have
    annual eye exams, especially if you have a family history of ARMD or
    other risk factors. Early detection and treatment can help manage
    the condition more effectively.It is important to discuss these
    options with a healthcare professional to determine the best course
    of action for your specific situation.


       Listing 13: LLama-2-70B-chat with instruction-based prompting: wrong prediction
Instruction: I want you to act as a medical question answering machine. I
     will provide you with
questions and a context, and you will reply with the answers. If the
    answer is not in context, answer "I do not know."
question: What can heal amd? # TODO change heal to our question
context: Wet ARMD (Inactive) OD - Improved, no active leakage was seen
    during dilated eye exam and diagnostic testing. Patient is advised to
     continue AREDS + WACS vitamins. Eat green leafy vegetables like
    Spinach 5 times a week and fish at least 2 times a week.Recommend
    close monitoring and treatment as indicated. Patient will return to
    office in 1 month for IVFA to monitor AMD.
Answer:
I cannot provide medical advice or recommend treatments for specific
    individuals. However, I can provide some general information about
    age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and its treatment options.AMD
    is a chronic eye condition that affects the macula, the part of the
    retina responsible for central vision. There are two main types of
    AMD: dry and wet. Wet AMD is characterized by the growth of new
    blood vessels under the retina, which can leak fluid and cause vision
    loss.While there is no cure for AMD, there are several treatment
    options available to slow down its progression and manage its
    symptoms. For wet AMD, anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
    injections are commonly used to prevent further vision loss. These
    medications work by blocking the growth of new blood vessels and
    reducing the amount of fluid in the retina.In addition to medication,
    a healthy lifestyle can also help manage AMD. A diet rich in fruits,
    vegetables, and omega-3 fatty acids, along with regular exercise and
    not smoking, can reduce the risk of AMD progression.It’s important to
    note that the best course of treatment for AMD will depend on the
    individual patient and the severity of their condition. Regular eye
    exams and consultations with an eye care professional are necessary
    to determine the most appropriate treatment plan.In the context of
    the patient you described, the recommended treatment plan includes
    continuing AREDS + WACS vitamins, eating a healthy diet, and close
    monitoring with regular eye exams. IVFA (intravitreal fusion) may
    also be recommended to monitor the progression of AMD and determine
    if additional treatment is needed. However, it’s important to
    consult with an eye care professional for personalized medical
    advice.



       Listing 14: LLama-2-70B-chat with instruction-based prompting: wrong prediction

Instruction: I want you to act as a medical question answering machine. I
     will provide you with
questions and a context, and you will reply with the answers. If the
    answer is not in context, answer "I do not know."
question: What can reduce the risk of armd?
context: Acute Exudative ARMD OS - ICG/IVFA shows active bleeding.
    Discussed with patient the gravity of this disease, including the
    potential for vision loss and guarded recovery. Reviewed treatment
    options - Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.
Answer:
I do not know.The question asked is not in context with the given
    situation. The patient has acute exudative age-related macular
    degeneration (ARMD) with active bleeding, and the doctor has already
    discussed the severity of the disease and the potential treatment
    options with the patient. The question about what can reduce the
    risk of ARMD is not relevant to the current situation.



                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.3    E XAMPLES OF RIGHT PREDICTIONS

        Listing 15: WizardLM-70B with guided instruction-based prompting: right prediction

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: factor
question: What can increase the risk of armd?
context: 2 small Druse OD- clinically does not look like ARMD. Patient
    has a family history of ARMD, recommend starting on AREDS + WACS
    vitamins. Eat green leafy vegetables like Spinach 5 times a week and
    fish at least 2 times a week.

### Response
factor: factor:         family history, diet, lifestyle


         Listing 16: Vicuna-33B with guided instruction-based prompting: right prediction

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.


                                               24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: treat
question: What can decrease the chance of armd?
context: Acute Exudative ARMD OS - Subertinal blood/exudates OU-Discussed
     with patient the gravity of this disease, including the potential
    for vision loss and guarded recovery. Reviewed treatment options -
    Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.

### Response
treat: Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT

    Listing 17: LLama-2-70B-chat with guided instruction-based prompting: right prediction

You are a helpful medical knowledge extractor assistant. Your task is to
    answer to the question, using only and only the provided context. Do
    not use any other sources. Do not use your knowledge. Answer to the
    question using the context. Do not write explanation. Do not write
    long sentences. Answer with extracted entities, separated with commas.
     I will provide the inputs in the following format

### Input
question_type: treat/coexists_with/factor
question: [QUESTION]
context: [CONTEXT]

I want you to answer to the question in the following format, depending
    on the [ENTITY_TYPE] which can be either [TREAT], [COEXISTS_WITH], [
    FACTOR]. Do not include other entity types. Do not include treatment
    if not asked. Only extract entities for that type.

### Response

[ENTITY_TYPE]: [ENTITY_1], [ENTITY_2], [ENTITY_3]...

If the question is not related to the context, or if the context contains
     a missing information to answer to the question, answer "I do not
    know." and nothing more. No explanations. If the context does not
    contain the answer to the question, answer with the following format

### Response
I do not know.

### Input

question_type: treat
question: What can slow the progression of armd?
context: Dry ARMD OU- Explained that there is no specific treatment at
    this time. Can convert to wet ARMD, which is treatable. Eating a
    healthy diet that includes green leafy vegetables, fish, taking AREDS
     + WACS eye vitamins and Omega-3 fatty acids has been shown to


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      significantly decrease the progression of the disease. Monitor
      closely. All questions were answered to the patient’s satisfaction.

### Response
treat: AREDS + WACS eye vitamins, Omega-3 fatty acids, healthy diet
    including green leafy vegetables, fish


E.3     E NCODER - DECODER MODELS

E.3.1    E XAMPLES OF WRONG PREDICTIONS

        Listing 18: FLAN-UL2 with instruction-based few-shot prompting: wrong prediction
Instruction: I want you to act as a question answering machine. I will
    provide you with a question and a context, and you will reply with
    the answers.
Question: What can slow the progression of AMD?
Context: Macular Dystrophy vs. Early Dry AMD OU - Explained that there is
     no specific treatment at this time. Patient educated on condition.
    Eating a healthy diet that includes green leafy vegetables, fish,
    taking AREDS + WACS eye vitamins and Omega-3 fatty acids has been
    shown to significantly decrease the progression of the disease.
Answer: Eating a healthy diet that includes green leafy vegetables.

Question: What can slow the progression of myopic macular degeneration?
Context: Myopic Macular Degeneration - Explained that there is no
    specific treatment at this time. AREDS and WACS vitamins MAY help
    slow down the progression of the degeneration. Monitor closely. All
    questions were answered to the patients satisfaction.
Answer: AREDS and WACS vitamins

Question: What can myopic macular degeneration convert to?
Context: Myopic Macular Degeneration - Explained that there is no
    specific treatment at this time. AREDS and WACS vitamins MAY help
    slow down the progression of the degeneration. Monitor closely. All
    questions were answered to the patients satisfaction.
Answer: AREDS + WACS eye vitamins


E.3.2    E XAMPLES OF RIGHT PREDICTIONS

           Listing 19: FLAN-T5-XXL with instruction-based prompting: right prediction
I want you to act as a question answering machine. I will provide you
    with a questions and a context and you will reply with the answers.
Question: What can slow the progression of armd?
Instruction: If the answer is not in context answer "i do not know".
Context: Wet ARMD- Patient educated on condition. Discussed diet and use
    of Macular Degeneration vitamins. All questions were answered to the
    patient’s satisfaction.
Answer:
vitamins


               Listing 20: FLAN-T5-XXL with few-shot prompting: right prediction
question: What can slow the progression of macular disease?
context: very strong association between smoking and macular disease.
    Smokers are up to four times more likely than non-smokers to develop
    age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and smokers with a genetic
    predisposition to AMD are eight times more likely to get the
    condition. Some research suggests people with certain genes can be 20
     times more likely to get macular degeneration if they smoke.
target: the answer to the question given the context is smoking.



                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


question: What can slow the progression of amd?
context: Macular Dystrophy vs. Early Dry AMD OU - Explained that there is
     no specific treatment at this time. Patient educated on condition.
    Eating a healthy diet that includes green leafy vegetables, fish,
    taking AREDS + WACS eye vitamins and Omega-3 fatty acids has been
    shown to significantly decrease the progression of the disease.
    Stressed the need for follow up exams. All questions were answered to
     the patient’s satisfaction.
target: the answer to the question given the context is Eating a healthy
    diet that includes green leafy vegetables.

question: What can slow the progression of myopic macular degeneration?
context: D/w pt: Myopic macular degeneration. Diagnosis discussed with
    patient. Possible treatments explained including glasses, refractive
    surgery, contact lenses or doing nothing. All questions were answered
     to patients satisfaction.
target: the answer to the question given the context is glasses


               Listing 21: FLAN-UL2 with few-shot prompting: right prediction
very strong association between smoking and macular disease. Smokers are
    up to four times more likely than non-smokers to develop age-related
    macular degeneration (AMD) and smokers with a genetic predisposition
    to AMD are eight times more likely to get the condition. Some
    research suggests people with certain genes can be 20 times more
    likely to get macular degeneration if they smoke.
Create a bulleted list of what can slow the progression of macular
    disease?
- not smoking

Macular Dystrophy vs. Early Dry AMD OU - Explained that there is no
    specific treatment at this time. Patient educated on condition.
    Eating a healthy diet that includes green leafy vegetables, fish,
    taking AREDS + WACS eye vitamins and Omega-3 fatty acids has been
    shown to significantly decrease the progression of the disease.
    Stressed the need for follow up exams. All questions were answered to
     the patient’s satisfaction. target: the answer to the question given
     the context is Eating a healthy diet that includes green leafy
    vegetables.
Create a bulleted list of what can slow the progression of amd?
- Eating a healthy diet
- Green leafy vegetables

Myopic Macular Degeneration - Explained that there is no specific
    treatment at this time. AREDS and WACS vitamins MAY help slow down
    the progression of the degeneration. Monitor closely. All questions
    were answered to the patient’s satisfacti
Create a bulleted list of What can slow the progression of myopic macular
     degeneration?.
- AREDS
- WACS vitamins


              Listing 22: FLAN-UL2 with instruction prompting: right prediction
Instruction: I want you to act as a medical question answering machine. I
     will provide you with
questions and a context, and you will reply with the answers.
Question: What does armd affect?
Instruction: If the answer is not in context, answer "I do not know."
Context: Acute Exudative ARMD/ CSCR OD - appears slightly worse on OCT
    and exam. Reviewed treatment options - Avastin, Lucentis, Eylea, PDT.
Answer: I do not know



                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

                              Hyperparameter                   Value
                              threshold preprocessing           0.8
                              threshold notes identification    0.8
                              relation occurrence number        10
                              relation probability              0.1


           Table 6: Hyperparameters of the system. They may be tuned for a dataset.


                                                28
