Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TASK STRUCTURE AND NONLINEARITY JOINTLY DE -
TERMINE LEARNED REPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY

 Matteo Alleman∗, Jack Lindsey∗ & Stefano Fusi
 Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University
 ma3811@columbia.edu, jackwlindsey@gmail.com, sf2237@columbia.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

             The utility of a learned neural representation depends on how well its geometry
             supports performance in downstream tasks. This geometry depends on the struc-
             ture of the inputs, the structure of the target outputs, and the architecture of the
             network. By studying the learning dynamics of networks with one hidden layer,
             we discovered that the network’s activation function has an unexpectedly strong
             impact on the representational geometry: Tanh networks tend to learn representa-
             tions that reflect the structure of the target outputs, while ReLU networks retain
             more information about the structure of the raw inputs. This difference is consis-
             tently observed across a broad class of parameterized tasks in which we modulated
             the degree of alignment between the geometry of the task inputs and that of the
             task labels. We analyzed the learning dynamics in weight space and show how the
             differences between the networks with Tanh and ReLU nonlinearities arise from
             the asymmetric asymptotic behavior of ReLU, which leads feature neurons to spe-
             cialize for different regions of input space. By contrast, feature neurons in Tanh
             networks tend to inherit the task label structure. Consequently, when the target
             outputs are low dimensional, Tanh networks generate neural representations that
             are more disentangled than those obtained with a ReLU nonlinearity. Our find-
             ings shed light on the interplay between input-output geometry, nonlinearity, and
             learned representations in neural networks.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The geometric structure of representations learned by neural networks sheds light on their internal
function and is key to their empirical success. The ability of networks to adapt their representa-
tions to capture the structure of training data has been shown to improve their ability to generalize
(Atanasov et al., 2021; Yang & Hu, 2020; Baratin et al., 2021) and to make effective use of increas-
ing dataset sizes (Vyas et al., 2022). Moreover, representations learned from data are essential to the
success of transfer learning between tasks (Neyshabur et al., 2020).
Representational geometries dynamically evolve during network training and arise from an interac-
tion between the structure of the inputs provided to the network, the outputs it is trained to produce,
and the network architecture. In this study, we conduct an in-depth investigation of the impact of
input geometry, label geometry, and nonlinearity on learned representations. We employ a param-
eterized family of classification tasks that allows us to probe the impact of each of these factors
independently and focus on single-hidden-layer networks in which we can precisely describe repre-
sentation learning dynamics over the course of training.

2       R ELATED WORK

Prior work has observed that hidden layer representations tend to increasingly reflect the geometry
of the task labels during training (Atanasov et al., 2021; Fort et al., 2020) and that this phenomenon
implicitly regularizes neural network training. Theories have been developed to explain this phe-
nomenon in linear networks (Atanasov et al., 2021; Shan & Bordelon, 2021). However, the impact
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of nonlinearity on learned representational geometry is comparatively poorly understood (though
see Sahs et al. (2022); Chizat & Bach (2020)). Moreover, learned network representations must
extract structure besides label structure to explain the success of transfer learning (Neyshabur et al.,
2020).
Many authors have studied the impact of different choices of neural network activation function.
Most of the theoretical and empirical work on the subject has focused on the effect of activation
function choice on network training dynamics and performance (Hayou et al., 2019; Ding et al.,
2018; Ramachandran et al., 2017). By contrast, in this work, we focus on how the activation function
shapes learned representations in tasks where performance is high.
Our work relates to studies on “neural collapse,” (Papyan et al., 2020; Kothapalli et al., 2022), a phe-
nomenon often observed empirically in which prolonged training causes final-layer representations
in deep networks to “collapse” to represent only the label information. Prior theoretical work on the
subject shows that neural collapse emerges from gradient descent dynamics in an “unconstrained
features” parameterization in which the final layer network responses to each datapoint are opti-
mized as free parameters (Zhu et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2023). However, the parameters fit during
network training are the weights of the network, and the network architecture, activation function,
and input data geometry impose constraints on how network responses can be transformed across
layers. Our work sheds light on how these constraints impact the propensity for neural collapse.


3    M EASURES OF REPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY

In this work, we characterize learned representational geometry in a number of ways. The tasks we
consider involve mapping inputs, which are generated from a small set of binary latent variables, to
one (single-output case) or several (multi-output case) binary labels.
First, we track the linear decodability (using an SVM) of different labelings of these clusters from
the network representation, including those the network was trained on and those it was not. The
discrepancy between decodability of trained vs. untrained labelings measures the extent to which
the network preserves rich information about the inputs, or discards all but the label information.
Second, we use kernel alignment metrics, commonly used in assessing the similarity of two neural
network representations (Cristianini et al., 2001; Kornblith et al., 2019; Kriegeskorte et al., 2008).
For two mean-centered representations of a set of d data points X1 ∈ Rn1 ×d and X2 ∈ Rn2 ×d , we
may define corresponding kernel matrices K1 = X1T X1 , K2 = X2T X2 ∈ Rd×d . Then, the kernel
alignment between these representations is defined as

                                                        Tr(K1 K2 )
                               C(K1 , K2 ) = p
                                                  Tr(K1 K1 ) · Tr(K2 K2 )

Concretely, this corresponds to the entry-wise correlation coefficient between the kernel matrices.
For inputs, X, output labels Y , and hidden representations Z, there are two alignment values we
measure: the ‘target alignment’ C(KZ , KY ), the ‘input alignment’ C(KZ , KX ). We also vary the
‘input-output alignment’ C(KX , KY ) of our tasks.
Third, we measure the parallelism score (PS) of the target labels in the representation, a measure of
disentanglement that indicates which a given feature is encoded in the same way regardless of the
value of other input features (Bernardi et al., 2020). Concretely, in a task with 2k inputs generated
by k underlying binary variables y1 , ..., yk , the parallelism score of a representation for a variable yi
is computed as follows. First, we condition on a set of values of the other k − 1 factors. Then, we
take the vector that separates the mean value of the representation when yi = +1 and the mean when
yi = −1. This process is repeated for all 2k−1 possible conditioned values of yj̸=i , and the average
pairwise cosine similarity between the resulting vectors is computed. Parallel coding directions of
task-relevant quantities allow for better few-shot generalization and are a signature of disentangled
abstract representations Higgins et al. (2018); Sorscher et al. (2021).
Finally, we measure cross-condition generalization performance (CCGP) (Bernardi et al., 2020),
which measures the extent to which a linear classifier trained to categorize a restricted set of inputs
will generalize accurately to categorizing unseen, out-of-distribution inputs. CCGP for a quantity


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            A                                                                 B           Decoding                      Decoding
                                                                                                                                          Parallelism
                                                                                           (labels)               (untrained labelings)
                                                                                   1                                1                   1



                                                                                  0.9                             0.9                   0
                                                                                           Target                          Input                CCGP
                                                                                          alignment                     alignment
                                                                                      1                            1                    1


                                                                                      0                           0.5                   0
                                                                                       0            40k              0            40k       0            40k
                                                                                        Training steps                Training steps         Training steps


            C      input space                          ReLU gradient             4       Tanh gradient             D
                    x1


                                                                                               inter-class
                                                           inter-class
                                                      x1                     x2           x1                 x2
                                 in
                                      tra


                                 ss
                                         -c


                              la                                                                             Δw
                                         la


                             c                                           w
                          r-
                                                                             Δw       intra-class w
                                          ss


                                                   intra-class
                        te
                   in                                      x3                                  x3
              x3                              x2           x4                                  x4
                           x4

Figure 1: A. Schematic of binary classification task with unstructured inputs. B. Measures of rep-
resentational geometry during training. Error bars indicate standard deviation over 20 simulated
networks. C. Schematic illustrating the inter-class axis and and intra-class axis (left) and the pro-
cedure for computing the expected gradients of the task loss with respect to the input weights,
projected along these axes (right two panels). The derivative f ′ of the activation function is shown
by the shading of space, and the vector w ⃗ indicates the current value of the input-layer weight being
considered. In this example, in the ReLU case, only the x2 data point contributes to the gradient (red
arrow). In the Tanh case, the gradient (dashed arrow) receives contributions from all four data points
(colored arrows). D. Trajectories of input weights to hidden layer neurons along the inter-class and
the intra-class axes. Each line segment represents an individual neuron from a simulation, and small
circles indicate the initial conditions. Vector field indicates the gradient of the task objective.

of interest is high when the representational axes that encode that quantity are relatively unaffected
by additional information about the the input, a property which enables few-shot learning Sorscher
et al. (2021); Lindsey & Issa (2023); Johnston & Fusi (2023). Concretely, in a task with binary
feature structure as above, to compute CCGP for a variable yi , we fix a setting of all values of yj̸=i
and fit a decoder for yi on this subsampled dataset. Then we evaluate the average performance of
the decoder on all 2k−1 − 1 other settings of yj̸=i . This quantity is averaged over the 2k−1 possible
choices of the setting of yj̸=i used for decoder training.
See Appendix D for an example that provides further intuition for the CCGP and PS metrics.


4   R EPRESENTATIONS INDUCED BY BINARY CLASSIFICATION OF
    UNSTRUCTURED INPUT PATTERNS

To begin, we considered the following simple classification task. Four points x1 , ..., x4 ∈ RN ,
corresponding to prototypical inputs (“cluster centers”), were sampled randomly from a unit normal
distribution. Then, individual samples were drawn from normal distributions centered at the xi with
variance σ 2 (set to 1.0 throughout the main text, but see Section 5.2). We trained networks with a
single hidden layer to map samples from the first two clusters (x1 and x2 ) to y = 0 and from the
last two clusters (x3 and x4 ) to y = 1 (Fig. 1A), with cross-entropy loss. For ease of subsequent
analysis, we train only the first-layer weights and freeze the second-layer weights at binary ±1
values (all qualitative effects are robust to this choice, see Appendix B). This task is designed to
assess how much the task structure (geometry of the outputs) imposes itself on the network’s hidden
layer representation through learning.
We found the choice of nonlinearity strongly affects the learned geometry. In particular, Tanh net-
works learned representations that reflected the low dimensional geometry of the targets (high target
alignment, parallelism score, and CCGP), while ReLU networks learned representations that more
faithfully preserved the geometry of the input clusters (high input alignment and ability to decode


                                                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


untrained labelings of the input points) (Fig. 1B). Notably, in both kinds of networks, the ability
to decode the class labels (the “trained dichotomy”) from the network representation was high and
increased throughout training. We also measured the ability to decode classes the network was not
trained on. Decoding performance for such “untrained dichotomies” was high for both networks, but
over the course of training, it increased in the ReLU networks and decreased in the Tanh networks.

4.1     A NALYSIS OF LEARNING DYNAMICS

4.1.1    M ETHODS
We next sought to understand our results by analyzing the learning dynamics of the input weights
of hidden neurons. To visualize learning dynamics, we made several simplifying assumptions. As
mentioned previously, we fixed the output weights of the network throughout training to discrete
values, such that learning takes place only in the input weights to the hidden layer. We discretized
the distribution of output weights, such that the neurons can be categorized into groups with identical
output weights. Furthermore, we make an assumption about the error statistics during training,
namely that task performance is approximately equal across items (e.g. the network is just as likely
to correctly output the labels of input 1 as it is for input 2). Another equivalent description is that
the error matrix, Y − Ŷ , has a constant direction and only changes in magnitude. This assumption
is reasonable, given the symmetry of the tasks we consider.
Under these assumptions, we may describe the learning dynamics of the input weights, w,     ⃗ of a
particular hidden neuron with activation function f and frozen output weights wo , as follows:
                               X                                        X
                       ∆w
                        ⃗=          wo (yi − ŷi )f ′ (w
                                                       ⃗ T ⃗xi )⃗xi =       ϵi f ′ (w
                                                                                    ⃗ T ⃗xi )⃗xi         (1)
                                i                                       i

where i indexes the training examples, ŷi is the output of the readout layer ( with sigmoid nonlin-
earity applied) for training example i, and we have grouped together wo (yi − ŷi ) = ϵi . Note that the
evolution of w⃗ depends only on its own state, and not that of other hidden neurons. Furthermore,
each hidden neuron with the same output weights (i.e. those belonging to the same “group”) will be
subject to the same dynamics. These simplifications allow us to generate a vector field describing
network learning dynamics by plotting the ∆w   ⃗ vector for an arbitrary choice of wo .
We visualize the gradients in a two-dimensional space defined by the inter-class axis and  P an intra-
class axis. The inter-class axis is equal to the covariance between input and output:         i yi x
                                                                                                   ⃗i . In
the 4-input, binary classification task under consideration, it corresponds to x1 + x2 − x3 − x4 .
Intra-class axes are orthogonal to the inter-class axis, and capture differences between inputs of the
same label; in this case, the intra-class axes are x1 − x2 and x3 − x4 . The choice of which intra-class
axis is most useful to visualize depends on the neuron being considered: for a neuron with positive
output weight, the interesting dynamics take place in the x1 − x2 axis since the neuron maintains
approximately zero selectivity for x3 and x4 . Note that weights in a linear network would evolve
only along the inter-class axis; dynamics along the intra-class axis are a consequence of nonlinearity.
See Fig. 1C for a schematic illustrating these computations.
For a neuron with positive output weight wo , the average gradient of the task loss L with respect
to that neuron’s input weights w ⃗ is a sum of multiple components, each corresponding to an input
cluster (Equation 1). The terms of this sum are vectors aligned with the corresponding input ⃗xi ,
weighted by the sign of the label of ⃗xi , and the value of f ′ (w
                                                                 ⃗ T ⃗xi ) for the given value of w
                                                                                                  ⃗ evaluated
at the ⃗xi – this weighting is indicated by the blue shading in Fig. 1C. In the ReLU case, f ′ is 1
when w ⃗ and ⃗xi are positively aligned and zero otherwise. As a result, the gradient tends to push w       ⃗
further in the direction of inputs ⃗x for which it is already selective. In the Tanh case, the gradient
pushes w ⃗ towards inputs with the positive label (or away from inputs with the negative label) to
which that neuron is neither strongly selective nor anti-selective. This has the effect of dampening
strong within-class selectivity for Tanh neurons.

4.1.2    L EARNING DYNAMICS
As a result of the dynamics described above, in Tanh networks, all neurons grew increasingly aligned
with the inter-class axis (Fig. 1D, left). ReLU networks instead exhibited heterogeneity across neu-


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          CCGP
                                                                   Tanh
                                                                   ReLU


Figure 2: A. Schematic of binary classification task with input structure parameterized by δ, a factor
indicating the degree of separability of the two classes (green and magenta clusters). B. Measures of
representational geometry following network training as a function of δ. Error bars indicate standard
deviation over 20 simulated networks. C. Trajectories of input weights to hidden layer neurons as in
Fig. 1D, for different values of δ.

rons, with some growing aligned with the inter-class axis and others developing intra-class selectiv-
ity (Fig. 1D, right). To understand this difference, we looked at the dynamics of gradient descent.
In Fig. 1D we plot the vector field defined by projecting the expected gradient of the task objective
with respect to input weights onto the inter- and intra-class axes, as described above. We find that
weights in Tanh networks predominantly evolve in a direction of increased inter-class selectivity and
decreased intra-class selectivity, independent of their initial conditions. Weights in ReLU networks
are driven to accentuate the selectivity they possess in their random initial condition.
The different dynamics are explained by the degree of symmetry of the nonlinearity of the activation
function: the one-sided saturating behavior of ReLU causes some inputs to be encoded in the weights
(those that bring the neuron above threshold) and others to be ignored (below threshold). This breaks
the symmetry between the input items that would share the same gradient in the absence of the
nonlinearity, leading to specialization and elevated intra-class selectivity. This symmetry breaking
is less likely in Tanh neurons, given that Tanh is symmetric (both around the origin, which governs
dynamics at initialization, and asymptotically). We explore the relative importance of the behavior
of the nonlinearities at initialization vs. their asymptotic behavior in Section 9.


5     E FFECT OF INPUT GEOMETRY ON LEARNED REPRESENTATIONS

5.1   E FFECT OF SEPARABILITY OF TARGET OUTPUTS

We generalized the previous task by parametrically controlling the geometric arrangement of the
cluster centers x1 , ..., x4 , rather than sampling them randomly. Specifically, the input geometry was
parameterized by a scalar quantity δ corresponding to the degree to which the two classes were
linearly separable in the input space. The δ = 1 case corresponds to the previous task, in which
the clusters are equidistant, and hence the trained dichotomy is easily decodable (Fig. 2A, right). In
the δ = 0 case, the clusters were arranged on a two-dimensional square such that x1 and x2 (and
x3 and x4 ) were positioned on opposite corners of the square (Fig. 2A, left), which is an XOR task
and requires a nonlinear transformation of the inputs. Intermediate values of δ interpolated between
these two extremes (Fig. 2A, middle). Note that this construction can be regarded as varying the
input-output kernel alignment of the task (low δ corresponds to lower alignment).
In the full XOR task (δ = 0), no matter the nonlinearity used by the network, a representation
emerged in the hidden layer with low target alignment, parallelism score, and CCGP (Fig. 2B).
This finding is unsurprising, as in this task, a disentangled representation of the output geometry
cannot be obtained by one neural network layer. For intermediate values of δ, however, it is not
obvious to what extent the network will leverage the linearly separable component of the inputs for
disentanglement. We found that Tanh networks, for any values of δ greater than a small threshold,
form representation in which the geometric structure of the inputs was largely discarded in favor of
the binary output structure (Fig. 2B). For ReLU networks, the alignment of the representation with


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the output structure increased more gradually as δ varied from 0 to 1, and strong signatures of the
input structure remained in the learned representation regardless of the value of δ.
To understand these effects, we again analyzed the evolution of the input weights with learning,
focusing as before on the inter-class axis and intra-class axes. We found that for δ = 0, only intra-
class selectivity emerged for all neurons in all networks, which is unsurprising as the inter-class axis
in this case is degenerate ((x1 + x2 ) − (x3 + x4 ) = 0). For any nonzero values of δ, Tanh neurons
almost uniformly developed inter-class selectivity, while ReLU neurons evolved in a heterogeneous
fashion, with the proportion of intra-class neurons decreasing with δ (Fig 2C).

5.2        E FFECT OF INPUT NOISE

We also assessed the impact of input noise on representation learning (see Fig. 3). To facilitate a fair
comparison of learned representations across networks, we introduced a distinction between degree
of input noise σtrain and σtest used during training and during analysis of learned representations,
respectively. The value of σtest was fixed at 1.0 for all analyses, and the value of σtrain varied.
We found that Tanh networks exhibit a sharp transition in learned representation, from abstract
representations to input geometry-preserving representations, as training noise increases. The level
of noise at which this transition occurs is related to the separability of the trained dichotomy; for
high values of separability, learned abstraction is robust to higher levels of noise during training.
                   Decoding accuracy             Decoding accuracy               CCGP                            Parallelism               Input alignment          Target alignment
                       (trained)                    (untrained)
             1.0                                                                                       1.0                           1.0


    n h      0.5                                                                                       0.0                           0.5

 Ta
             0.0                                                                                      −1.0                           0.0

             1.0                                                                                       1.0                           1.0

                       Separability of
                       trained dichotomy
                                  0.0


       LU 0.5                     0.25
                                  0.5
                                                                                                       0.0                           0.5


    Re
                                  0.75
                                  1.0

             0.0                                                                                      −1.0                           0.0
               0.125    0.5     2.0        8.0 0.125   0.5   2.0    8.0 0.125   0.5   2.0       8.0      0.125   0.5    2.0    8.0     0.125   0.5   2.0     8.0 0.125   0.5   2.0    8.0
                     Training noise                Training noise           Training noise                   Training noise                Training noise            Training noise



Figure 3: Values of various representational metrics for different values of δ (separability of trained
dichotomy) and σ 2 (training noise) in the δ-separable classification task of Section 5.

The effect of increased noise in Tanh networks is to induce more “ReLU-like” representations that
vary gradually as a function of the input geometry. By comparison, learned representations in ReLU
networks are impacted much less by training noise. This behavior makes sense, given the analysis in
the previous section revealing that Tanh networks are dramatically affected by the separability of the
target outputs in input space, while ReLU networks are less sensitive to the degree of separability.
Increasing the degree of input noise has the effect of increasing the degree of separability required
for Tanh neurons to reliably tune to the component of input space that correlates with the label.
When separability is insufficiently strong given the noise level, Tanh network behavior grows more
similar similar to the δ = 0 case. Interestingly, we also observe an increase in target alignment and
a decrease in input alignment for modest values of input noise in ReLU networks. We explore this
phenomenon further in Appendix E.


6       G ENERALIZING ANALYSIS TO MORE COMPLEX TASKS

So far, we studied in depth a set of tasks involving just four input clusters. Now we check if the
insights derived from these simple tasks hold more broadly. In the δ-separable XOR task, increasing
the separability parameter makes the input geometry more similar to the output geometry, resulting
in a higher target alignment in the hidden layer. We generalize this construction to assess more gen-
erally how the kernel alignment between input and target patterns determines hidden layer geometry.
To do so, we use the following procedure to sample tasks with a specified input-output alignment.


                                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We parameterize a family of tasks with P randomly placed input clusters and k < P binary output
targets, in which we control the alignment between input and target kernels (Fig 4A). To do so, we
first draw k random but balanced binary target classes, Y . Then, for a specified alignment value c,
we draw a random input kernel, KX , from the set of all symmetric positive definite matrices such
that C(KX , KY ) = c, where KY = Y T Y . One element of this set is special, and it is the KX
with the flattest eigenspectrum, i.e. the maximal linear dimensionality. The solid lines in Fig. 4
use this maximal-dimensional input geometry, while the dots use other random draws with lower
dimensionality. With KX in hand, there are many ways we can generate N -dimensional input
                                     1
patterns X, and we use X = OΛ 2 U T , where U and Λ are the eigenvectors and eiegenvalues,
respectively, of KX , and O is a random N × P orthonormal matrix. We end up with a set of random
inputs X, and output labels Y , with a centered kernel alignment of exactly c.
In Fig 4B, we plot our measures of representational geometry for P = 8 and 32 inputs, varying k,
the number of targets, from 1 to P − 1. As in the simple case of Section 5, the target alignment
always increases more dramatically for Tanh networks compared to ReLU as input-output alignment
increases. Moreover, as expected, the parallelism score increases when the target geometry is low-
dimensional and decreases when it is high-dimensional, and hence the target geometry itself has
low parallelism. Note that the effect of multi-dimensional outputs is explored in more depth in a
case study (k = 2) in Appendix A. The behavior of CCGP mostly matches that of parallelism, but
there are several cases where a large difference in parallelism is not reflected by a large difference
in CCGP, particularly in cases with relatively few outputs, where the decoding task measured by
CCGP may be easier.

7   P HENOMENA IN MULTI - LAYER NETWORKS
We wished to see whether our findings on simulated tasks generalize at all to networks with more
than one layer. To address this, we chose one of the tasks from Figure 4 (that with P = 32 inputs and
k = 5 targets) and trained networks with 5 or 10 hidden layers. We focused on tasks in which the out-
puts were nonlinearly separable in input space, as real-world tasks require dealing with nonlinearly
separable inputs, and such tasks are most likely to expose differences between deep and shallow
networks (target-aligned representations cannot be produced in a single-layer for nonlinearly sepa-
rable targets). We evaluate on two tasks, varying in their difficulty; intuitively, the difficulty is the
degree to which the output labels are nonlinearly entangled in the input space (see Appendix F for
a more precise explanation). The target and input alignment evolve as expected along the layers of
the network, with target alignment increasing and input alignment decreasing (Fig. 5). The effects
of non-linearity and task difficulty are also consistent with our results from shallow networks – deep
tanh networks learn more target-aligned representations than deep relu networks in their final layer,
especially for the more difficult task. We also observe interesting phenomena with respect to the
progression of target / input alignment across layers of the network in the easy vs. hard task, which
we leave to future work to investigate in more detail.

8   C ONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK EXPERIMENTS
To assess the applicability of our findings to more realistic tasks, we trained convolutional networks
image classification task, experimenting with two architectures – a small network with two convolu-
tional and two fully connected layers, and the ResNet-18 architecture – and two datasets, CIFAR-10
and STL-10. To enable computation of CCGP and parallelism score, we modified the tasks slightly
so that the 10 classes in the dataset were assigned to 5 labels, grouping together pairs of classes. This
allowed us to treat the input classes analogously to the input clusters in the simulations above for the
purpose of computing CCGP and PS. Kernel alignment and test accuracy were also computed. In all
cases, we observe the same qualitative dependence of all these metrics on the choice of activation
function (though the effects vary in magnitude) (Fig 4C).

9   I SOLATING THE ROLE OF ACTIVATION FUNCTION ASYMMETRY
Finally, we sought to identify the source of the different representations learned by Tanh and ReLU
networks. We hypothesize two candidate mechanisms: the symmetric saturation of the Tanh func-


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   A                    Sample targets Y                                  Sample aligned input kernel                               Generate inputs X

                                                                                                                                                       XT X = K X
                                        Y={,,,}                                KX
                                       KY =                                                 0            0.2           0.8
                                                                                                      C(KX, KY)


                  B                      Target
                                        geometry
                                                                    Target alignment
                                                                  P=8            P = 32                  P=8
                                                                                                                  Parallelism
                                                                                                                          P = 32                    P=8
                                                                                                                                                           CCGP
                                                                                                                                                                     P = 32
                           1
               =


                                      line segment
               k

                                  P
                                  2
                          g
                       lo
               =
            k


                                       hypercube
                                  1
                          P-
               =
               k


                                        simplex
                                                                  Input-output alignment                 Input-output alignment                     Input-output alignment

                   C                                        Test accuracy         Target alignment        Input alignment              Parallelism                   CCGP
                                                                                0.4                                                                        0.8
                                  2 layer conv +                       Tanh                            0.50
                                                     0.50                                                                        0.5
                                  2 layer FC,                          ReLU     0.2                                                                        0.6
                                  CIFAR-10           0.25                                              0.25                      0.0
                                                             0           500          0          500          0         500            0             500         0          500
                                                                                                                                                           0.7
                                                     0.50                      0.3
                                  2 layer conv +                       Tanh                            0.50
                                                                               0.2                                               0.5                       0.6
                                  2 layer FC,                          ReLU
                                                     0.25                      0.1                     0.25
                                  STL-10                                                                                         0.0                       0.5

                                                                                                        0.4                                                0.8
                                                     0.65
                                  ResNet-18                            Tanh 0.25
                                                     0.60                                               0.2                      0.5
                                  CIFAR-10                             ReLU                                                                                0.6
                                                     0.55
                                                                               0.00                                              0.0
                                                             0          500           0         500           0         500            0             500         0          500
                                                          Training epochs         Training epochs         Training epochs          Training epochs           Training epochs


Figure 4: A. Cartoon of the random sampling process, illustrated for P = 4 inputs and k = 2
outputs. B. Target alignment, PS, and CCGP as functions of input-output alignment in random
classification tasks, for different values of P (columns) and k (rows). Cartoons schematize the
target geometry for each value of k (the number of target dimensions). In the plots, solid lines are
the unique maximum-dimensional input geometry for specified alignment, and dots are 12 random
samples of other lower-dimensional geometries. All tasks have a training noise variance of 1. C.
Metrics in the final layer of a convolutional network trained on CIFAR10. Error bars are standard
errors over random initializations.

                                                                  ReLU                                                                              Tanh
                                       5-layer network                    10-layer network                             5-layer network                       10-layer network
           k
        tas


                                                         Target                                                                            Target
     sy


               Kernel alignment
    Ea

           k
         as


                                                                                                                        Target
        t


                                        Target
     rd
    Ha


                                         1
                                                 Layer                          Layer                                         Layer                                   Layer



Figure 5: Target and input kernel alignment for the representations at each hidden layer in multi-
layer networks. Each network is trained until convergence. The inputs are generated as in Fig. 4,
with the addition of a constraint on the dimensionality of the inputs for the ‘hard’ task (see Section 7
and Appendix F). All tasks have a training noise variance of 1.



                                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           A          Symmetric saturation               B             Linearity at origin
               Tanh                                          Tanh
                           k=1          k=5                              k=1          k=5
               ReLU                                          ReLU
               ReLU1                                         — shift
                                                             + shift


Figure 6: Activation function perturbation experiment. The target alignment is shown, as in Fig.
4, for P = 32 inputs. A. Adding positive saturation to the ReLU function for arguments > 1. B.
Shifting the ReLU function negatively (reddish) or positively (greenish) in the argument.



tion, and its linear behavior close to the origin. Our analysis of the gradients in the simple task of
Section 4 suggests that the degree of symmetry in the asymptotic behavior of the nonlinearity is im-
portant since it prevents individual neurons from developing selectivity for one input over another.
However, it is also plausible that the behavior of the nonlinearity locally around the origin matters
most if networks learn solutions that do not deviate much from their initialization. To differentiate
between these hypotheses, we construct nonlinearities with symmetric asymptotic saturating behav-
ior but asymmetric behavior around the origin (Fig. 6a, f(x) = min(max(x, 0), 1)), or asymmetric
saturating behavior but linear behavior around the origin (Fig. 6b, f(x) = max(x+b, 0), b<0).
We find that networks using a nonlinearity with two-sided saturation (Fig. 6a) behave almost iden-
tically to Tanh networks despite asymmetry around the origin. Recall from Fig. 1C, D that in the
Tanh case, the two-sided saturation of the nonlinearity prevents neurons from growing overly se-
lective or anti-selective for particular inputs with a given label, as when this occurs, the value of f ′
evaluated at those inputs is low, dampening the magnitude further weight updates aligned with that
input direction. Qualitatively, the same phenomenon occurs in the gradients of any nonlinearity that
saturates in both the positive and negative directions.
We also tried perturbing the offset of ReLU to make it linear and symmetric around the origin with-
out modifying its asymptotic behavior. We found this has a modest effect on learned representational
geometry, leading to more target-aligned representations when the linear region of the ReLU nonlin-
earity contained the origin (Fig. 6b). This makes sense, as linear or otherwise symmetric behavior
of the activation function derivative f ′ around the initialized value of the input weights should result
in an initial evolution of input weights along the inter-class axis with learning, until they reach a
region of weight space where f ′ is asymmetric with respect to the inputs ⃗x.
We conclude that activation function behavior around the origin influences learned solutions, but
symmetric asymptotic saturating behavior exerts a powerful influence towards target alignment.



10    C ONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

The geometry of learned neural representations combines the structure present in inputs and target
outputs, influencing a network’s task performance and ability to generalize to new data. Here,
we introduced a framework for modeling the joint structure of task inputs and outputs, and we
studied how neural representations reflect these structures. Surprisingly, the activation function
plays an important role in determining the alignment between the learned representational geometry
and the target geometry, with Tanh typically leading to more disentangled representations of the
structure of the labels than ReLU. These differences in learned representations trade off different
benefits. Disentangled representations are compact Ma et al. (2022), allow for generalization and
compositionality, and have been shown to improve adversarial robustness (Willetts et al., 2019; Yang
& Hu, 2020; Papyan et al., 2020). However, they are inefficient representations for storing memories
and for binding together information about multiple variables Boyle et al. (2022); Johnston et al.
(2023). Moreover, learning disentangled representations of the label structure may impair the ability
to transfer learning to tasks with different semantics. Our work sheds light on the aspects of network
architecture and task structure factors that are important in navigating this tradeoff.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


11    ACKNOLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by NSF NeuroNex Award DBI–1707398, The Simons Foundation, The
Gatsby Foundation (GAT3708), the Swartz Foundation and the Kavli Foundation. JL was also
supported by the DOE CSGF (DE–SC0020347). The authors declare no competing interests.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Neural networks as kernel learners:
  The silent alignment effect. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00034, 2021.
Aristide Baratin, Thomas George, César Laurent, R Devon Hjelm, Guillaume Lajoie, Pascal Vin-
  cent, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Implicit regularization via neural feature alignment. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2269–2277. PMLR, 2021.
Silvia Bernardi, Marcus K Benna, Mattia Rigotti, Jérôme Munuera, Stefano Fusi, and C Daniel
   Salzman. The geometry of abstraction in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Cell, 183(4):
   954–967, 2020.
Lara Boyle, Lorenzo Posani, Sarah Irfan, Steven A Siegelbaum, and Stefano Fusi. The geometry of
  hippocampal ca2 representations enables abstract coding of social familiarity and identity. bioRxiv
  and in press in Neuron, pp. 2022–01, 2022.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks
  trained with the logistic loss. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1305–1338. PMLR, 2020.
Nello Cristianini, John Shawe-Taylor, Andre Elisseeff, and Jaz Kandola. On kernel-target alignment.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Bin Ding, Huimin Qian, and Jun Zhou. Activation functions and their characteristics in deep neural
  networks. In 2018 Chinese control and decision conference (CCDC), pp. 1836–1841. IEEE, 2018.
Stanislav Fort, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mansheej Paul, Sepideh Kharaghani, Daniel M Roy,
  and Surya Ganguli. Deep learning versus kernel learning: an empirical study of loss landscape
  geometry and the time evolution of the neural tangent kernel. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:5850–5861, 2020.
Soufiane Hayou, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith Rousseau. On the impact of the activation function on
  deep neural networks training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2672–2680.
  PMLR, 2019.
Irina Higgins, David Amos, David Pfau, Sebastien Racaniere, Loic Matthey, Danilo Rezende,
   and Alexander Lerchner. Towards a definition of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1812.02230, 2018.
Jiachen Jiang, Jinxin Zhou, Peng Wang, Qing Qu, Dustin Mixon, Chong You, and Zhihui Zhu.
   Generalized neural collapse for a large number of classes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05351,
   2023.
W Jeffrey Johnston and Stefano Fusi. Abstract representations emerge naturally in neural networks
 trained to perform multiple tasks. Nature Communications, 14(1):1040, 2023.
W Jeffrey Johnston, Justin M Fine, Seng Bum Michael Yoo, R Becket Ebitz, and Benjamin Y Hay-
 den. Semi-orthogonal subspaces for value mediate a tradeoff between binding and generalization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07766, 2023.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.
Vignesh Kothapalli, Ebrahim Rasromani, and Vasudev Awatramani. Neural collapse: A review on
  modelling principles and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04041, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2:4, 2008.
Jack W Lindsey and Elias B Issa. Factorized visual representations in the primate visual system and
  deep neural networks. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–04, 2023.
Yi Ma, Doris Tsao, and Heung-Yeung Shum. On the principles of parsimony and self-consistency
  for the emergence of intelligence. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering,
  23(9):1298–1323, 2022.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learn-
  ing? Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:512–523, 2020.
Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020.
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V Le. Searching for activation functions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.05941, 2017.
Justin Sahs, Ryan Pyle, Aneel Damaraju, Josue Ortega Caro, Onur Tavaslioglu, Andy Lu, Fabio
  Anselmi, and Ankit B Patel. Shallow univariate relu networks as splines: initialization, loss
  surface, hessian, and gradient flow dynamics. Frontiers in artificial intelligence, 5:889981, 2022.
Haozhe Shan and Blake Bordelon. A theory of neural tangent kernel alignment and its influence on
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14301, 2021.
Ben Sorscher, Surya Ganguli, and Haim Sompolinsky. The geometry of concept learning. BioRxiv,
  pp. 2021–03, 2021.
Nikhil Vyas, Yamini Bansal, and Preetum Nakkiran. Limitations of the ntk for understanding gen-
  eralization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10012, 2022.
Matthew Willetts, Alexander Camuto, Tom Rainforth, Stephen Roberts, and Chris Holmes. Improv-
 ing vaes’ robustness to adversarial attack. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00230, 2019.
Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Feature learning in infinite-width neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.14522, 2020.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A ge-
  ometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29820–29834, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gaussian inputs                                                     Nudged
A       E FFECT OF MULTIDIMENSIONAL OUTPUT ON LEARNED REPRESENTATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Single output



    A                                                                                                                                                                                               Gaussian
                                                                                                                                                                                                     B       inputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                              tanh                                                                        ReLU               Nudged inputs
                                        Output                                                                                                                                                                         1.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh            ReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Single output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.50

                                      +/0 -/0                           +/+           +/-            -/+              -/-          0/+            0/-                                                                  0.25                      7Dnh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gaussian inputs
                                        Hidden
                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5eLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ReLU                                                                 δ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eG g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ln ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ln Ln


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ln P
                                                                    Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nP ut



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nP e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UD G



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UD P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eG



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eG



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  en



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UD G



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UD GL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lg Ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nt CG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (t CC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (t ecR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lg p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Single output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nt cR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ln

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dl In



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dl 7D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (u C
                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (u De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Two outputs

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gaussian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 inputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Group +/+  tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Group +/0                                   ReLU        Nudge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              δ
    C                                                 Group +/+                                    Group -/-                                  Group +/0                                 Group 0/+                       D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Inter-class axis
                                      0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Inter-class axis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tanh
           Input weight projection
            onto cluster centroiG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Single output
    Tanh


                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Two outputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             δ
                                                Cluster 1 (+/+)     Cluster 3 (-/+)        Cluster 1 (+/+)       Cluster 3 (-/+)       Cluster 1 (+/+)     Cluster 3 (-/+)       Cluster 1 (+/+)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tanh
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cluster 3 (-/+)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ReLU tanh                             ReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Intra-class axis                       Intra-class axis
                                                Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)        Cluster 2 (+/-)       Cluster 4 (-/-)       Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)       Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)
                                     −0.3
                                            0                                  40k     0                                    40k    0                                  40k    0                                  40k
                                                       Training steps                             Training steps                              Training steps                            Training steps


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Inter-class axis
                                      0.3
                                                      Group +/+                                    Group -/-                                  Group +/0                                 Group 0/+


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Two outputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             δ
           Input weight projection
            onto cluster centroiG
    ReLU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tanh             ReLU
                                      0.0


                                                Cluster 1 (+/+)     Cluster 3 (-/+)        Cluster 1 (+/+)       Cluster 3 (-/+)       Cluster 1 (+/+)     Cluster 3 (-/+)       Cluster 1 (+/+)     Cluster 3 (-/+)
                                                Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)        Cluster 2 (+/-)       Cluster 4 (-/-)       Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)       Cluster 2 (+/-)     Cluster 4 (-/-)
                                     −0.3
                                            0
                                                       Training steps
                                                                               40k     0
                                                                                                  Training steps
                                                                                                                            40k    0
                                                                                                                                              Training steps
                                                                                                                                                                      40k    0
                                                                                                                                                                                        Training steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                40k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Intra-class axis                       Intra-class axis

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Two outputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             δ
Figure 7: A. Schematic of binary classification task with unstructured inputs and two outputs. The
outputs are trained to classify four input clusters according to two different labelings ofReLU
                                                                            tanh           the inputs.
In this case the hidden layer of the network is divided into eight groups of neurons defined by their
two output weights (positive: blue, negative: red, zero: no line). B. Measures of representational
geometry at network initialization (left of each line segment) and following training (right of each
line segment). Error bars indicate standard deviation over 20 simulated networks. D. Alignment
(dot product similarity) of input weights to hidden layer neurons with the four input cluster centers.
Shown for four of the eight hidden layer neuron groups. Error bars indicate standard deviation across
neurons within a single network. E. Trajectories of input weights to hidden layer neurons along the
inter-class (x1 + x2 − x3 − x4 ) and the intra-class axis (x1 − x2 ). Each line sigment represents an
individual neuron from a simulation, and small circles indicate the beginning of the trajectory (at
network initialization). Shown for hidden layer neurons with an output weight of +1. Vector field
background indicates the expected average direction that weights will evolve due to gradient of the
task objective.

Here we include an in-depth exploration of networks trained with two targets and four items. We
modified our tasks by now assigning each of the four input clusters to two different binary labels:
(1, 1), (1, 0), (0, 1), and (0, 0), respectively (Fig 7). We modified the network architecture by adding
a second output unit; each output unit was tasked with predicting one of the two labels. Thus, in
this task, there were two trained dichotomies (x1 /x2 vs. x3 /x4 , and x1 /x3 vs. x1 /x4 ) and one
untrained dichotomy (x1 /x4 vs. x2 /x3 ). For analysis, we again used frozen readout weights dis-
cretized into eight groups (Fig 7A), which we found was sufficient to approximate the behavior of
networks trained with randomly initialized output weights. Again, we found a noticeable difference
in the learned representations of ReLU and Tanh networks, with Tanh networks reflecting the ge-
ometry of the targets more than ReLU networks (Fig 7B). Again, we analyzed the source of these
phenomena by tracking the alignment of input weights to each neuron with the four input cluster
centroids. In general, we observed that neurons grew positively tuned to inputs which matched their


                                                                                                                                                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


output weights, negatively tuned to inputs mismatched with their output weights, and not tuned at
all to inputs matched with one output weight and mismatched with the other (Fig. 7C). However, in
the ReLU networks, a clear asymmetry emerged in the degree of positive tuning to matched input
clusters and the degree of negative tuning to mismatched input clusters. As a result, in the ReLU
networks, roughly half the neurons (those with nonzero outputs to both class readout units) devel-
oped selectivity primarily for one of the four input clusters. As a result, these ReLU units developed
strong selectivity for intra-class differences, while Tanh units did not (Fig. 7D). This behavior was
observed to be uniform across the hidden neurons (Fig. 7D).
Thus, both the multi-output task produced similar results as the similar output task in terms of
representational geometry, the source of these effects was somewhat different. In both cases, the
gradient of the task objective drives input weights to accrue inter-class selectivity in Tanh networks.
However, for ReLU networks, the picture is different. In the single-output case, the emergence of
intra-class selectivity arises due to heterogeneity in initial conditions of input weights, while in the
multi-output case it also arises due to heterogeneity in initial conditions of output weights.

B        I MPACT OF CONSTRAINTS ON THE OUTPUT WEIGHTS

           Decoding accuracy       Decoding accuracy                               Input alignment      Target alignment
               (trained)              (untrained)                Parallelism
         1.00                   1.00                     1.0                    1.0                  1.0                    Tanh
                                                                                                                            Tanh (fixed readouts)
                                                                                                                            Tanh (fixed discretized readouts)
         0.95                   0.95                                            0.5                  0.5                    ReLU
                                                                                                                            ReLU (fixed readouts)
                                                         0.5                                                                ReLU (fixed discretized readouts)
         0.90 0              40k 0.90 0            40k         0            40k 0.0 0            40k 0.0 0            40k
                Training steps        Training steps           Training steps       Training steps       Training steps



Figure 8: Measures of representational geometry during training for three cases: randomly ini-
tialized trainable readouts, randomly intiialized fixed readouts, and discretized (binary ±1) fixed
readouts.
In our experiments we used frozen output weights with discretized values. In Fig. 8 we show that
the behavior of representation learning is essentially the same when we relax the discretization and
allow the readouts to be trained.

C        F URTHER DETAILS ON RANDOM ALIGNED KERNEL SAMPLING

Our sampling procedure for tasks with a specified input-output alignment used in Section 5 has
some important considerations, which will be further elaborated in this section. Firstly, obviously,
the sampled matrices must be symmetric and positive semi-definite (SPSD), and they need to have
the required correlation value. Secondly, kernels with the same alignment value can have different
dimensionality (i.e. eigenspectra).
It is worth clarifying that we assume all kernels are already centered, meaning that the features
used to compute them have been mean-subtracted. Or, equivalently, that their nullspace contains
the vector 1 of all ones. They should also have unit trace, TrK = 1. Both are non-restrictive
assumptions, since the CKA is invariant to scaling and shifting of features.
The set of matrices with a given correlation value, c, to a reference matrix KY is the solution set
of a quadratic form1 , while the SPSD matrices (of unit trace) are a compact convex body. We will
refer to this set as Kc . Our procedure is to randomly sample a SPSD matrix, and project it onto the
quadric surface, taking care to remain SPSD. This method certainly does not ensure uniformity, but
it is simple and empirically shows a wide spread of samples even in relatively high dimensions.
An important consideration with this method is the linear dimensionality of the input geometry,
intuitively a measure of correlations between input patterns. If we define dimensionality in terms of
the participation ratio of the eigenvalues, λ, of K:

                                                                            P      2
                                                                           ( i λi )
                                                                  p.r.(K) = P 2
                                                                              i λi

    1
        C(KX , KY ) = c ⇔ Tr(KX KY )2 = c2 Tr(KX KX )Tr(KY KY ).


                                                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Cross-condition generalization                                                                  Parallelism score (PS)
                    performance (CCGP)

                                                                                                                            (0, 1)         (1, 1)

           Fit classi er for                                       Classi er generalizes
                                                                                                       Find vector                                       Find vector
           x2 for samples         (0, 1)            (1, 1)       to samples where x1 = 1
                                                                                                      encoding x2                                       encoding x2
            where x1 = 0                                              -> high CCGP
                                                                                                  conditioned on x1 = 0                             conditioned on x1 = 1


                                                                                                                           (0, 0)          (1, 0)


                                  (0, 0)            (1, 0)
                                                                                                                and         are parallel -> high parallelism score


                         (1, 1)
                                                                                                                                   Find vector
                                                                                                            (1, 1)                encoding x2
                                                                                                                              conditioned on x1 = 1
                                           (1, 0)
                                                             Classi er does not generalize
                                                               to samples where x1 = 1                                      (1, 0)
                                                                    -> low CCGP
                         (0, 0)                                                                                                            and         are
    Fit classi er for                                                                                        (0, 0)
    x2 for samples
                                                                                                                                     not parallel -> low parallelism score
     where x1 = 0
                                           (0, 1)                                                  Find vector
                                                                                                  encoding x2             (0, 1)
                                                                                              conditioned on x1 = 0
      fi   fi


Figure 9: Examples of representational geometries with high and low CCGP and PS, for data gen-
erated by two underlying binary variables, i.e. data points of the form (x1 , x2 ) where xi ∈ {0, 1}.

then, per our assumption of unit trace, this is just ∥K∥−2
                                                        F . In the special case when c = 0 the set K0
is convex, and this implies that there is a unique kernel matrix Kmax which maximises p.r.(K), i.e.
minimises ∥K∥F . If we draw a line between KY and Kmax , we get the set of input kernels which
form the solid lines of Fig. 4B and Fig. 5 of the main text.


D          E XPLANATION OF CCGP AND PS METRICS

See Figure 9.


E          C OMPARISON OF WEIGHT DYNAMICS AT DIFFERENT NOISE LEVELS IN
           R E LU NETWORKS

In Section 5.2 we observed in ReLU networks an interesting increase in the values of target align-
ment / parallelism / CCGP, and decrease in the value of input alignnment, for intermediate values of
the input noise σ. Here (Fig. 10) we provide an analysis that sheds some light on this phenomenon.
For diffeerent noise values, we tracked the relationship between the value of the input weights to
a network hidden-layer neuron and the corresponding value following training. In the absence of
noise, neurons initialized with sufficient intra-class selectivity relative to their initial inter-class se-
lectivity are destined to maintain it over time (remain in the purple or green regions in Fig. 10 – see
weight trajectory plots in Fig. 1D, 2C for an explanation of why). In the presence of noise, neu-
rons with substantial intra-class vs. inter-class selectivity at initialization can nevertheless evolve to
develop primarily inter-class selectivity over the course of training. Note that this explanation does
not account for why, at extremely high noise values, target alignment drops again (Fig. 3C) – we
leave an in-depth characterization of this phenomenon to future work, but suspect it arises because
the input noise grows substantial enough for the weights to accrue significant projections along axes
other than the two we visualize here.


                                                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Zero input noise                                                            Greater input noise


                                          Inter-class axis


                                                                                Inter-class axis
 Inter-class axis


                       Intra-class axis                      Intra-class axis                       Intra-class axis


Figure 10: Effect of input noise on training dynamics of ReLU networks trained on the tasks in
Section 5.2, in the case of maximal separability of the trained dichotomy, varying the level of input
noise σ 2 during training. Each point corresponds a hidden-layer neuron in the network, and the
position of the point indicates the value of the input weights for that neuron at initialization. The
colors of the dots indicate which of the three colored regions the input weights end up in at the end
of training.

F                   E XPLANATION OF TASKS USED IN SYNTHETIC MULTI - LAYER NETWORK
                    EXPERIMENTS

Here we describe the tasks used in Section 7. Formally, the “hard” task is generated by sampling
input data of minimal possible dimensionality (5), or equivalently an input data kernel of rank 5,
subject to the constraint of zero input-output kernel alignment. Intuitively, this task involves inputs
generated by 5 binary latent variables, and the input-output function requires a nonlinear conjunction
of all 5 (e.g. whether the number of latent variables set to 1 is even or odd).
The “easy” task involves sampling inputs of maximal possible dimensionality (27 dimensions, i.e. a
rank-27 input data kernel) subject to the kernel alignment constraint. Intuitively, this task, the targets
require nonlinear conjunction of only two of the input dimensions.


                                                                 15
