Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS E NHANCED C ONTROLLABILITY OF D IFFU -
SION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


Figure 1: Diverse results from our proposed methods given single content image (the leftmost).
Controlling λ in our proposed sampling method (GCDM) results in different magnitudes of style
translation in (a). While fixing the content feature, applying convex combinations between the style
features of the content and the style images shows smooth interpolations as shown in (b). PCA on
the learned style code gives disentangled attribute-specific manipulation directions in (c). Detailed
experiment setups and more results are in Sections F.1, F.2 and in Fig. 18 in the supplementary.

                                           A BSTRACT

         As Diffusion Models have shown remarkable capabilities in generating images,
         the controllability of Diffusion Models has received much attention. However,
         there is still room for improvement of controllability in some aspects, such as
         feature disentanglement of Diffusion Models for extended editability and com-
         posing multiple conditions naturally. In this paper, we present three methods that
         can be used in either training or sampling to enhance the controllability of Dif-
         fusion Models. Concisely, we train Diffusion Models conditioned on two latent
         codes, a spatial content mask, and a flattened style embedding. We rely on the
         inductive bias of the progressive denoising process of Diffusion Models to encode
         pose/layout information in the spatial structure mask and semantic/style infor-
         mation in the style code. We also propose two generic sampling techniques for
         improving controllability. First, we extend Composable Diffusion Models to al-
         low for some dependence between conditional inputs, to improve the quality of
         generations while also providing control over the amount of guidance from each
         condition and their joint distribution. Second, we propose timestep-dependent
         weight scheduling for content and style latents to further improve the translations.
         We observe better controllability compared to existing methods and show that
         with our proposed methods, Diffusion Models can be used for effective image
         manipulation and image translation.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Improving controllability of generative models has been one of the most prominent research topics
in past few years, e.g., GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Härkönen et al., 2020), VAE (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Bouchacourt et al., 2018), Flow-based Models (Dinh et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2020),
Masked Generative Transformers (Chang et al., 2023), and Autoregressive Models (Yu et al., 2023).
The enhanced controls are useful for many practical applications such as Image Synthesis (Park


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
    see the custom
    grid.
              '
    Mac: Control-
                                                                              Learnable
    option-command-
    G                                                                                                 Figure 2: overview of our proposed framework.
    Win: Alt-F9 (or Alt-
                                                                               Fixed
    Fn-F9 on some
    laptops)
                                                        ∈ ℝ$×&                                        We first obtain z0 from the pretrained Autoen-
                                        !* (&)          "*
                                                                                                      coder (Esser et al., 2021), which is the actual
                                ! "! |"" ,
                                                                                                      input for the LDM (Rombach et al., 2022). The
                                                                 Denoising
          !!"#                                                   Unet %(')
                                                                                                 )̂   external encoders Ec (ψ) and Es (ϕ) and the de-
                           "$                      "+                                                 noising UNet ϵ(θ) are trained together without
                                        !) ($)          ")                                            any additional objectives.
    Overview                                            ∈ ℝ#
    of the framework

et Detailed
   al., 2020),     '()*("Domain
                          )   × ! +    × ⨀ (Hoffman
                                  Adaptation
                                    '
                                               "           et al., 2018), Style Transfer (Huang et al., 2018; Lee
                                                                                         (')*)
                                                                                         !
   operations
et al.,   2018)       and   Interpretability (Lang et al., 2021)   to name a few.
   at *-th layer of )(+)                     (')
                                            -,
                                                         (')
                                                        --                     '
                                                               . ' (". ' ) -©*2022/Adobe.
                                                                                    '
                                                                                      "/All
                                                                              Rights Reserved.

Recently, Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) have gained much attention
due to their impressive performance in image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ramesh et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022) and likelihood estimation (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). Even though
there have been many research papers on extending controllability of Diffusion Models, it has rela-
tively remained underexplored how to disentangle the latent space of diffusion models, and how to
combine the multiple conditions naturally during the sampling in a controllable way.
Indeed, the topic of generative models with multiple external disentangled latent spaces has been
widely explored in GANs (Park et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Kwon & Ye,
2021). A common theme across such methods is to learn a structure/content code to capture the
underlying structure (e.g., facial shape and pose in face images) and a texture/style code to capture
global semantic information (e.g. visual appearance, color, hair style etc.). Similar approaches have
been tried in Diffusion Models in (Kwon & Ye, 2022; Preechakul et al., 2022), however, these
techniques do not learn multiple controllable latent spaces.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework as shown in Fig. 2 to effectively learn two latent spaces
to enhance controllability in diffusion models. Inspired by (Park et al., 2020; Kwon & Ye, 2021)
we add a Content Encoder that learns a spatial layout mask and a Style Encoder that outputs a
flattened semantic code to condition the diffusion model during training (Section 3.1). The content
and style codes are injected differently into the UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to ensure they
encode different semantic factors of an image.
Though decomposing content and style information from an image enables better controllability,
enforcing independence between the codes during sampling may not always be ideal. For example,
face structure (e.g. square or round face) that is ideally encoded in the content code and gender (e.g.
male or female) an attribute encoded in the style code (Park et al., 2020), may not be independent
and treating them as such might lead to unnatural compositions (Fig. 3). However, an existing
method Composable Diffusion Models (CDM) (Liu et al., 2022) assumes conditioning inputs are
independent and hence shows unnatural compositions for certain prompts like ‘a flower’ and ‘a
bird’ (see Fig.6 in (Liu et al., 2022)). We extend the formulation in (Liu et al., 2022) and propose
Generalized Composable Diffusion Models (GCDM) to support compositions during inference when
the conditional inputs are not necessarily independent (Section 3.3). This also provides the ability
to control the amount of information from content, style, and their joint conditioning separately
during sampling. We observe significantly better translations with GCDM and also show improved
compositions in Stable Diffusion compared to CDM (Fig. 5).
In addition, we leverage the inductive bias (Balaji et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2021; 2022) of Diffusion
Models that learns low-frequency layout information in earlier steps and high-frequency or imper-
ceptible details in the later steps of the reverse diffusion process, to further improve results. We use a
predefined controllable timestep-dependent weight schedule to compose the content and style codes
during generation. This simulates the mixture of denoising experts proposed in (Balaji et al., 2022)
by virtue of varying the conditional information at different timesteps during inference.

2          P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED W ORKS
2.1             D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) like DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) showed impressive
image generation and likelihood estimation but had a computationally expensive sampling proce-
dure. DDIM (Song et al., 2020) reduced the sampling time by deriving a non-Markovian variant of
DDPM. Similarly, ImprovedDDPM (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) also improved sampling speed and
proposed to learn the variance schedule that was fixed in previous works to enhance mode coverage.


                                                                                                         2
                                                Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3: Conceptual illustration of CDM
                  !#∗
                              Sampling                                                                                                                                                 and GCDM. (a) The result based on CDM
                                                                  !#̂            CDM                                   !#̂
                                                                                 (can be out of manifold)
                                                                                                                             CDM
                                                                                                                                                                                       can be outside of manifold while the joint
                                                    ∇!! log % '$ )#
                                !#̂
                                                                                               A guidance by
                                                                                                                                GCDM
                                                                                                                                                    A guidance by
                                                                                                                                                                                       guidance stays on manifold. (b) GCDM
                                                                                               ∇$% p(!# , !! |(% )                                  ∇$% p(!# , !! |(% )                trades off between the independent guidance
!!̂                                     !!̂
                        !#̂                                                                    (staying on manifold)
      !!̂                         !!̂                                                                                                                                                  provided by CDM (stronger effects of the
            !!∗                               !!∗                                                           !!̂                                                                  !!̂
                                                                                                                                                                                       condition) and the joint guidance (more re-
                                                                          ∇!! log %('" |)# )                                                                                           alistic). Please see Fig. 5, 6 (main paper) and
cts of leveraging inductive bias                                      (a)
                                                                      (b) CDM v.s. Joint guidance                            (b)
                                                                                                                             (c) GCDM                                                  Fig. 16 (supplementary).
                                                                                                                              © 2022 Adobe. All Rights Reserved. Adobe Confidential.


                                                LDM (Rombach et al., 2022) used a pretrained autoencoder (Esser et al., 2021) to train a diffusion
                                                model on the learned latent space, reducing time and memory complexity without loss in quality.
                                                More descriptions are provided in Section D in the supplementary.

                                                    2.2        C ONTROLLABILITY IN D IFFUSION M ODELS

                                                Guidance:
                                                Some recent works have explored modeling the conditional density p(xt |c) for controllability.
                                                Dhariwal et al. (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) proposed to use a pretrained classifier but finetuning
                                                a classifier that estimates gradients from noisy images, which increases the complexity of the over-
                                                all process (Ho & Salimans, 2022). Ho et al. (Ho & Salimans, 2022) proposed to use an implicit
                                                classifier while Composable Diffusion Models (Liu et al., 2022) (CDM) extend the classifier-free
                                                guidance approach to work with multiple conditions assuming conditional independence. Though
                                                guidance approaches help control the generation, they do not offer fine-grained controllability or
                                                support applications such as reference-based image translation.
                                                Conditional Diffusion Models:
                                                Conditional Diffusion Models have been explored in diverse applications showing state-of-the-art
                                                performance in text-to-image generation (DALLE2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al.,
                                                2022), Parti (Yu et al., 2022)). These methods use pretrained embeddings (e.g., CLIP) that support
                                                interpolation but not further editability. Instructpix2pix (Brooks et al., 2023) proposed to generate
                                                synthetic paired data via pretrained GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and StableDiffusion, with which con-
                                                ditional Diffusion Models are trained. DiffAE (Preechakul et al., 2022) proposed to learn a semantic
                                                space that has nice properties making it suitable for image manipulation. However, a single latent
                                                space capturing all the information makes it difficult to isolate attributes to manipulate. Recently,
                                                ControlNet and T2Iadapter (Mou et al., 2023; Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) showed impressive perfor-
                                                mance in conditioning image generation. They use additional auxiliary networks and layers that are
                                                trained to encode structure into pretrained text2image Diffusion Models. However, our architecture
                                                is particular to reference-based image translation, the proposed GCDM and timestep scheduling are
                                                generic and applicable to any multi-conditioned Diffusion Models beyond image translation.
                                                Inference only Editing:
                                                SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) enables structure-preserving edits while Prompt-to-prompt (Hertz et al.,
                                                2022) modifies the attention maps from cross-attention layers to add, remove, or reweigh the impor-
                                                tance of an object in an image. DiffusionCLIP (Kim et al., 2022), Imagic (Kawar et al., 2022) and
                                                Unitune (Valevski et al., 2022) propose optimization-based techniques for text-based image edit-
                                                ing. Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) finetune pretrained
                                                models using a few reference images to get personalized models. Though the above techniques are
                                                helpful with editing, most of these methods require computationally expensive optimization, modify
                                                the weights of pretrained model for each sample, and/or don’t support fine-grained controllability
                                                for reference-based image translation. The closest related work to ours is DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye,
                                                2022). They enabled reference and text-guided image translation by leveraging Dino-VIT (Caron
                                                et al., 2021) to encode content and style. However, their approach requires costly optimization
                                                during inference and doesn’t support controlling the final generation.


                                                    3       P ROPOSED M ETHOD

                                                Our framework is based on the LDM (Rombach et al., 2022) architecture as it is faster to train
                                                and sample from, compared to pixel-based diffusion models. Let x be an input image and ELDM
                                                and DLDM be the pretrained and fixed encoder and decoder respectively. The actual input space
                                                for our diffusion model is the low-dimensional latent space z = ELDM (x). The output of the


                                                                                                                                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reverse diffusion process is the low dimensional latent ẑ0 which is then passed through the pretrained
decoder as x = DLDM (ẑ0 ) to get the final image x̂0 .

3.1   L EARNING C ONTENT AND S TYLE L ATENT SPACES

Inspired by DiffAE (Preechakul et al., 2022) and similar approaches in GANs (Kwon & Ye, 2021),
we introduce a content encoder Ec ( · ; ψ) and a style encoder Es ( · ; ϕ) in our framework as shown
in Fig. 2. The objective for training is formulated as:
                       min Ez0 ,ϵt ∥ϵt − ϵ(zt , t, Ec (z0 ; ψ), Es (z0 ; ϕ); θ)∥22 ,

                        θ,ψ,ϕ
where zt is from the forward process, i.e., zt = q(zt |z0 ). To ensure that the encoders capture
different semantic factors of an image, we design the shape of zs and zc asymmetrically as done in
(Park et al., 2020; Tumanyan et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Kwon & Ye, 2021;
                                                                                            h  w
Cho et al., 2019). The content encoder Ec (z0 ; ψ) outputs a spatial layout mask zc ∈ R1× 4 × 4 where
w and h are the width and height of z0 latent. In contrast, Es (z0 ; ϕ) outputs zs ∈ R512×1×1 after
global average pool layer to capture global high-level semantics. At each layer of the denoising UNet
ϵ( · ; θ), the style code zs is applied using channel-wise affine transformation while the content code
zc is applied in a spatial manner. In specific, let ⊙ denote the element-wise product (i.e., Hadamard
product), let ⊗ denote outer product, and let 1 denote all one’s vector/matrix where subscript denotes
dimensionality. We define a variant of adaptive group normalization layer (AdaGN) in the UNet as:

               AdaGN(hℓ ) =[1C ⊗ (1H,W + t1 φℓ (zc ))] ⊙ [(1C + ζ ℓ (zs )) ⊗ 1H,W ]
                                                                                                       (1)
                                ⊙ [[(1C + t2 ) ⊗ 1H,W ] ⊙ GN(hℓ ) + [t3 ⊗ 1H,W ]],

where φℓ is the spatial-wise content-specific term operating down or upsampling at ℓ-th layer to
make the dimensions of φℓ (zc ) and hℓ match. ζ ℓ is the channel-wise style-specific term which is
implemented as an MLP layer. hℓ is (hidden) input to the ℓ-th layer, and t1 , t2 and t3 are timestep-
specific adjustment terms inspired by Eq. 7 in DiffAE (Preechakul et al., 2022). The (1 + ) struc-
ture reveals the residual architecture of the content, style, and timestep modifications that maintain
the input if all adjustment terms are zero. When C, H, W are all 1 (i.e., the scalar case), the equation
can be simplified to reveal the basic structure as : (1 + t1 φ(zc ))(1 + ζ(zs ))((1 + t2 )h + t3 ).

3.2   T IMESTEP S CHEDULING FOR C ONDITIONING

It has been observed in (Choi et al., 2021; 2022; Balaji et al., 2022) that low-frequency information,
i.e., coarse features such as pose and facial shape are learned in the earlier timesteps (e.g., 0 <
SNR(t) < 10−2 ) while high-frequency information such as fine-grained features and imperceptible
details are encoded in later timesteps (e.g., 100 < SNR(t) < 104 ) in the reverse diffusion process.
Inspired by this, we introduce a weight scheduler for zc and zs that determines how much the content
and the style conditions are applied to the denoising networks. We use the following schedule:
                                         1                                   1
                   wc (t) =                         , ws (t) =                           ,              (2)
                            1 + exp (−a(t − b))                   1 + exp (−a(−t + b))
where a is a coefficient for determining how many timesteps content and style are jointly provided
while b indicates the timestep at which ws (t) ≥ wc (t). We also tried a simple linear weighting
and a constant schedule but observed that the proposed schedule gave consistently better results
(examples are provided in Section G.2 in the supplementary). When applying, we use weighted
form, denoted φ̄ and ζ̄, of the style and content functions during sampling. They are defined as
φ̄(zc , t) := wc (t)φ(zc ) and ζ̄(zs , t) := ws (t)ζ(zs ), which respectively replace φ and ζ in Eq. 1.
We additionally evaluate using timestep scheduling during training. It is an interesting future direc-
tion showing better decomposition of content and style (Section G.1 in the supplementary).

3.3   G ENERALIZED C OMPOSABLE D IFFUSION M ODELS (GCDM)

As mentioned in Section 1, CDM has an inherent limitation that conditional independence is as-
sumed (i.e., C1 ⊥ C2 |Xt ), which may not always hold in practice. Incorporating the joint compo-
nent into CDM formulation possibly yields a better composition of seemingly irrelevant objects in


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the real world, e.g., c1 = ‘an octopus’ and c2 = ‘a pyramid’, by finding the real manifold that both
objects can be naturally placed together. Thus, we propose GCDM which can potentially improve
the composition of multiple conditions.
Furthermore, GCDM formulation can enhance controllability over the generation enabling extended
control over CDM. The conceptual benefit of GCDM over CDM can be understood by Fig. 3. (a)
shows an example that the content and the style guidances from CDM generate unrealistic samples
because the combined guidance is outside the manifold. On the contrary, the joint guidance helps
keep the generation within the manifold. (b) visualizes the proposed GCDM which can be seen as
a linear interpolation between CDM and the joint guidance. GCDM has the added advantage of
enabling separate controls for c1 (e.g., style), c2 (e.g., content), and realism.
Definition 3.1 (Generalized Composable Diffusion Models (GCDM)). The score function of
GCDM is the unconditional score function plus a convex combination of joint and independent
guidance terms formalized as:
                                                       h
    ∇xt log p̃α,λ,β1 ,β2 (xt |c1 , c2 ) ≜ ϵ(xt , t) + α λ(ϵ(xt , t, c1 , c2 ) − ϵ(xt , t)) (3)
                                                          |              {z             }
                                                                   ∇xt log p(c1 ,c2 |xt )
                                                                           X                                     i
                                                        + (1 − λ)                  βi ϵ(xt , t, ci ) − ϵ(xt , t) ,
                                                                                       |          {z           }
                                                                         i={1,2}            ∇xt log p(ci |xt )

where α ≥ 0 controls the strength of conditioning, λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the trade-off between joint
and independent
    P           conditioning, and βi controls the weight for the i-th condition under the constraint
that i βi = 1.

Note that the implicit classifiers, e.g., ∇xt log p(ci |xt ), play a role in guiding xt to be close to
the corresponding condition. The GCDM formulation p̃ in Definition 3.1 stems from the idea of
extending controllability of naive joint conditioning ∇xt log p(xt |c1 , c2 ) to mixed conditioning be-
tween joint and independent guidance. Similar to previous studies (Ho & Salimans, 2021; Liu et al.,
2022), the guidance terms (i.e., the implicit classifiers) to be controlled are derived from reformulat-
ing the joint conditioning by simple Bayes rule. Please see Section B in the Supplementary for the
derivations.
We next show some of the interesting features of GCDM. First, GCDM generalizes simple joint
guidance, CDM, and Classifier-Free Guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021) (CFG).
Proposition 3.2 (GCDM Generalizes Joint Guidance, CDM and CFG). If λ = 1, then GCDM
simplifies to joint guidance:
   ∇xt log p̃λ=1 (xt |c1 , c2 ) = ϵ(xt , t) + α(ϵ(xt , t, c1 , c2 ) − ϵ(xt , t)) = ∇xt log p(xt |c1 , c2 ) .         (4)
                                  |                   {z                       }
                                                  Joint Guidance

If λ = 0, then GCDM simplifies to CDM:
                                                            h X                                        i
             ∇xt log p̃λ=0 (xt |c1 , c2 ) = ϵ(xt , t) + α               βi (ϵ(xt , t, ci ) − ϵ(xt , t)) .            (5)
                                                            i={1,2}
                                             |                             {z                            }
                                                                         CDM

If λ = 0 and β2 = 0, then GCDM simplifies to CFG:
               ∇xt log p̃λ=0,β2 =0 (xt |c1 , c2 ) = ϵ(xt , t) + αβ1 (ϵ(xt , t, c1 ) − ϵ(xt , t)) .                   (6)
                                                    |                  {z                      }
                                                                             CF G


The proof is simple from inspection of the GCDM definition. Second, the GCDM PDF p̃ from
Definition 3.1 is proportional to a nested geometric average of different conditional distributions.
Corollary 3.3. The GCDM distribution p̃ is proportional to nested geometric averages of condi-
tional distributions of xt :
                                                                                                (1−λ)  α
                                          (1−α)                 λ          β1          (1−β1 )
      p̃α,λ,β1 ,β2 (xt |c1 , c2 ) ∝ p(xt )       p(xt |c1 , c2 ) p(xt |c1 ) p(xt |c2 )                   . (7)


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The outermost geometric average is between an unconditional and conditional model. Then inside
we have the geometric average of the joint and independent conditional, and finally inside the inde-
pendent conditional we have a geometric average of the independent conditionals. The derivation is
provided in Section C in the supplementary.
Note that GCDM and timestep scheduling are generic sampling techniques for Diffusion Models
that can also be applied to other tasks beyond image translation (Fig. 5). A thorough investigation
of the effect of the various hyperparameters is provided in Section E.1 in the supplementary.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We comprehensively evaluate the proposed model on image-to-image translation and additionally
show qualitative examples of GCDM and CDM on text-to-image composition with stable diffusion.
Implementation details are provided in Section E.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets
We train different models on the commonly used datasets such as AFHQ (Choi et al., 2020),
FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) and LSUN-church (Yu et al., 2015).
Baselines
DiffuseIT: The most similar work to ours based on diffusion models is DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye,
2022) that tackles the same problem formulation. We compare our results with DiffuseIT using their
pretrained model and default parameters.
DiffAE+SDEdit: Since Diffusion Autoencoder (Preechakul et al., 2022) does not directly support
image-to-image translation, we combine that with SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021). The input image
for the reverse process is x600 (chosen empirically) obtained as q(x600 |xc ) by running the forward
process on the content image. The semantic feature zsem from the semantic encoder of DiffAE is
used given the style image xs .
DiffAE+MagicMix: We also combine MagixMix (Liew et al., 2022) with DiffAE. Similar to Dif-
fAE+SDEdit, this model takes x600 from xc as input and zsem from xs as conditioning. Addition-
ally, at each timestep, the approximated previous timestep x̂t−1 is combined with xt−1 from the
content image xc , i.e., x̂t−1 = vx̂t−1 + (1 − v)q(xt−1 |xc ). For this experiment, v = 0.5 is used and
the noise mixing technique is applied between t = [600, 300].
SAE: Swapping Autoencoder (Park et al., 2020) based on GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is also
evaluated. Since the available pretrained model is on a resolution of 512, we resize the generated
results to 256 for a fair comparison.
Evaluation Metrics
FID: We use the commonly used Fréchet inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) to ensure the
generated samples are realistic. We follow the protocol proposed in (Choi et al., 2020) for reference-
based image translation. To obtain statistics from generated images, 2000 test samples are used as
the content images, and five randomly chosen images from the rest of the test set are used as style
images for each content image to generate 10,000 synthetic images.
LPIPS: Even though FID evaluates the realism of the generations, the model could use just content
and ignore style (or vice versa) and still get good FID. Following (Choi et al., 2020), we use LPIPS
score obtained by measuring the feature distances between pairs of synthetic images generated from
the same content image but with different style images. Higher LPIPS indicates more diverse
results. It is ideal for the model to tradeoff between LPIPS and FID, i.e., incorporate enough style
information from different style images for the same content image (increasing LPIPS) but without
going out of the real distribution (decreasing FID).

4.2   C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING W ORKS

Qualitative Results.
Fig. 4 visually shows example generations from different techniques. We observe that Dif-
fAE+SDEdit loses content information while DiffAE+MagicMix generates unnatural images that
naively combine the two images. This indicates that a single latent space even with additional


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
              Win: Alt-F9 (or Alt-Fn-F9 on some laptops)

                                                                                     DiffAE        DiffAE     Ours        Ours                      Ours
                  Content                      Style         DiffuseIT     SAE      + SDEdit     + MagicMix 𝜆 = 0.9     𝜆 = 0.6                   𝜆 = 0.3


                                                                                                                         © 2022 Adobe. All Rights Reserved. Adobe
                                                                                                                                                      Confidential.

Figure 4: Comparison of the proposed model with baselines on FFHQ dataset. Our method generates
more realistic combinations of the content and style images with better controllability.

techniques such as SDEdit and MagicMix is not suitable for reference-based image translation. Dif-
fuseIT and SAE models maintain more content information but do not transfer enough information
from the style image and have no control over the amount of information transferred from style.
An important benefit of our proposed method is better controllability. First of all, by manipulating
λ, we can control how much joint guidance is applied. In Fig. 4, decreasing λ indirectly increases
the effect of style from the style image when βc = 0 and βs = 1, where βc and βs are the weights
for each conditional guidance. It is because the smaller λ brings more information from the style
guidance (ref. 1 − λ term in Eq. 3). For example, the man on the second row has more wrinkles
and a beard as λ decreases. Second, given a fixed value of λ, we can control the amount of the
content and the style guidance by controlling βc and βs as shown in Fig. 6. More examples showing
the superior performance of our method in controllability are provided in Fig. 1 in the supplementary.
                   Table 1: Quantitative comparison using FID and LPIPS on FFHQ dataset.
             DiffuseIT                     SAE             DiffAE+SDEdit     DiffAE+MagicMix          Ours(λ = 0.9)    Ours(λ = 0.6)                         Ours(λ = 0.3)
    FID       29.99                        25.06                26.63              84.55                  11.99            13.40                                 15.45
   LPIPS       0.47                         0.39                0.64                0.41                  0.34             0.42                                   0.49

Quantitative Results.
Table 1 shows the quantitative comparison in terms of FID and LPIPS metrics on FFHQ dataset.
Our variants generate images that are realistic as indicated by the lowest FID scores compared with
other models while also performing better on diversity as measured by the highest LPIPS except for
DiffAE+SDEdit method. However, DiffAE+SDEdit does not show a meaningful translation of style
onto the content image. DiffAE+MagicMix shows the worst performance because of its unrealistic
generation. SAE and DiffuseIT show lower LPIPS scores than ours, indicating that they transfer
relatively little information from the style image onto the generated samples (i.e., less diverse).
We can also observe that increasing λ (when βc = 0 and βs = 1) makes LPIPS worse while
improving FID. In other words, the stronger the joint guidance is the more realistic but less diverse
the generations. This verifies our assumption in Fig. 3 that the joint component has an effect of
pushing the generations into the real manifold.

4.3      E FFECT OF GCDM AND T IMESTEP S CHEDULING

Table 2: FID comparisons between                                             Table 3: Comparisons between CDM and GCDM in
SAE and our model with CDM and                                               FFHQ. Best method without timestep scheduling is high-
GCDM on AFHQ dataset.                                                        lighted in bold and with scheduling is highlighted with *.
          SAE         CDM                   GCDM               GCDM                          w/o schedule                        w/ schedule
                                           (λ = 0.9)          (λ = 1.0)
                                                                                         CDM       GCDM     CDM       GCDM (βc = 1)                           GCDM (βs = 1)
  FID      9.29       10.57                   9.75              8.58              FID    21.43      14.46   10.50        10.21*                                  10.61
 LPIPS     0.45        0.59                  0.59                0.57
                                                                                 LPIPS   0.47        0.51   0.31          0.28                                   0.33*


We compare SAE (Park et al., 2020) (the best performing baseline) and ours with CDM and GCDM
on AFHQ dataset in Table 2. The joint guidance (λ = 1) gets the lowest FID indicating that the
generations are more realistic as it pulls the guided results to be within the real data manifold. We


                                                                                         7
             Photo of a bear and a car in the red forest                            Photo of a bear and a car in the red forest

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

  Photo of aPhoto
            flying whale  in bird
                   of a red  the sky
                                  andand  tons of
                                      a yellow    floating petals
                                               flower                      Photo of a flying whale in the sky and tons of floating petals


             Photo
           Photo of of
                    anaoctopus
                        bear andand
                                  a car in the red
                                     a pyramid  in aforest
                                                      desert                     Photo of an octopus and a pyramid in a desert


  Photo of aCDM
            flying whale in the sky and tonsGCDM
                                            of floating petals                       CDM                              GCDM
Figure 5: GCDM vs CDM for text-to-image generation with Stable Diffusion. We can observe that
CDM generates unnatural images (e.g., blending two objects) that may be out of the real manifold
while GCDM       ensures realistic generations (e.g., combining two objects in a realistic way)
       Photo of an octopus and a pyramid in a desert


                      without 𝑡 scheduling     with 𝑡 scheduling


               CDM                                 GCDM


 Content      Style     CDM      GCDM        CDM    GCDM     GCDM
                                                   (𝛽! = 1) (𝛽" = 1)


 Figure 6: Timestep scheduling improved the                            Figure 7: Visualization of the effect of each
 results of both CDM and GCDM and gives                                guidance term on generation. xT is randomly
 the best results when combined with GCDM.                             sampled.

can also see that GCDM can be thought of as interpolating between CDM and the joint guidance
since FID for GCDM (λ = 0.9) is in between the joint and CDM. By comparing LPIPS and FID
of the variants of GCDM, we can see that the outputs become less diverse as realism is increased.
SAE shows worse performance than ours in terms of both diversity and realism. The qualitative
comparisons can be found in Fig. 16 in the supplementary.
Generalizability of GCDM.
We also compare the performance of CDM and GCDM in composing text prompts for text-to-image
generation using Stable Diffusion V2(Rombach et al., 2022) in Fig. 5. The phrases before and after
‘and’ are used as c1 and c2 . The full sentence is used to represent joint conditioning.
As shown in Fig. 5, CDM tends to fail in composing multiple conditions if both conditions contain
object information. For example, the red bird and the yellow flower are merged in most cases. On the
other hand, GCDM consistently shows better compositions in the generated images. This empha-
sizes that GCDM is a generalized formulation for composing multiple conditioning inputs providing
more control to the user in terms of realism and diversity as illustrated in Fig. 3. Additional results
comparing CDM, GCDM (joint only), and GCDM can be found in Fig. 20.
Effect of Timestep Scheduling.
To more carefully analyze the effect of timestep scheduling when combined with GCDM or CDM,
we alter the timestep scheduling so that there is at least a 0.1 weight on style or content. Specif-
ically, we change the upper and lower bounds of the sigmoid to be 0.1 and 0.9 in Eq. 2, e.g.,
wc′ (t) = 0.8wc (t) + 0.1. The results can be seen in Table 3 and Fig. 6. Without timestep scheduling,
GCDM shows better performance in both FID (realism) and LPIPS (diversity) than CDM. Com-
bined with timestep scheduling, both CDM and GCDM show meaningful improvements in FID in
exchange for losing diversity. This is because timestep scheduling improves content identity preser-
vation. Additionally, timestep scheduling with GCDM variants shows better FID or LPIPS than
CDM depending on the strength of guidance terms showing varied control over the generations.

4.4    A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION

In this section, we analyze each of the components of our framework using AFHQ and LSUN-
church dataset and aim to better understand the content and style latent spaces. Further analysis and
results on PCA, latent interpolation, and KNN are in Section F.1, F.2 and F.3 in the supplementary.
Visualization of Each Guidance Term.
  The proposed GCDM in Section 3.3 has guidance from three terms, the joint conditioning and


                                                                       8
                   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                               Same
                                                Same!!! !~#(0,
                                                          ~#(0,')')                                                                         Same
                                                                                                                                             Same!!!!!!~#(0,
                                                                                                                                             Same       ~#(0,')
                                                                                                                                                       ~#(0,  ')
                                                                                                                                                              ')                                                                       S
                       Content
                        Content   Style
                                   Style                                                                                Content
                                                                                                                        Content
                                                                                                                         Content   Style
                                                                                                                                   Style
                                                                                                                                    Style                                                                            Content   Style


Same !! ~#(0, ')                                Same
                                                Same !!!!~#(0,
                                                         ~#(0,')
                                                               ')                                                                           Same !! ~#(0, ')
                       Content
                        Content   Style
                                   Style                                                                                Content    Style

                                    Figure 8: Reference-based image translation results on LSUN-church.
                   style and content conditionings separately. Fig. 7 shows a comparison of the effect of these terms.
                   From the content guidance (column 3), it can be seen that the generated animals are not exactly the
                   same as the content image but have the exact same structure and pose. Similarly, when only style
                   guidance is used (column 4), the pose is random while the style such as color and fur corresponds to                                © 2022
                                                                                                                                                            © Adobe. All Rights
                                                                                                                                                              2022 Adobe.       Reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                           All Rights     AdobeAdobe
                                                                                                                                                                                      Reserved. Confidential.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Confidential.



                   the style image. From columns 5-6, it can be observed that the GCDM results have more semantic
                   information from the style than the results by simply using the joint guidance.

                   Classifier-based comparisons.
                   To further understand what kind of                Table 4: Classifier-based comparisons in FFHQ.
                   attributes are encoded in style and
                   content latent spaces, we use pretrained          Probability            xc                xs
                                                           © 2022 Adobe. All Rights Reserved. Adobe Confidential.                                         © 2022 Adobe. All Rights Reserved. Adobe Confidential.



                   classifiers to predict the attributes of       Att. is Equal (%) Gender Age   Race Gender Age   Race
                   translated images and compare them                    SAE        65.95  62.36 50.40 34.05 26.40 27.91
                                                                   Ours (λ = 0.9)   65.14  53.79 53.31 34.86 31.60 28.51
                   with the original style and content im-         Ours (λ = 0.25)  26.61  25.94 31.73 73.39 56.77 44.48
                   ages. We sample 2000 random images
                   from the test set to use as xc and another 2000 as xs to form 2000 content-style pairs. Next, we
                   acquire the translated output xo and corresponding pseudo labels yc , ys , and yo by leveraging an
                   off-the-shelf pretrained attribute classifier (EasyFace). In Table 4, we show the probabilities that
                   the final generated image xo has an attribute from content image as p(ycatt = yoatt ) and likewise
                   for style image. Both ours and SAE are designed to make zs encode global high-level semantics,
                   e.g., Gender, Age, etc. Thus, methods would show ideal performance if yoatt = ysatt ̸= ycatt .
                   We see that most global attributes come from the content image for SAE indicating conservative
                   translations from the style image (as seen in Fig. 4 and lower LPIPS in Table 1). In contrast, ours
                   has a controllable way of deciding the strength of attributes from the style image through λ. The
                   lower the value of λ, the more disentangled and consistent the attributes will be in the generations.

                   Information Encoded in Each Latent Space.
                   We analyze the role of the denoising network ϵθ and the encoders Ec and Es by analyzing what
                   information is encoded in the respective latent spaces. Fig. 8 shows the results of fixing the content
                   while varying the style images (and vice versa). xT is fixed as well to reduce the stochasticity. The
                   remaining stochasticity comes from the white noise at each timestep during the reverse process.
                   From the results, we can see that the structure information is maintained while style information
                   changes according to the style image (and vice versa) as we intended. Similarly, in Fig. 17 in
                   supplementary, we forward the same image to content and style encoders while the generation starts
                   from different random noise xT .

                   5     C ONCLUSION
                   We propose a novel framework for enhancing controllability in image-conditioned diffusion mod-
                   els for reference-based image translation and image manipulation. Our content and style encoders
                   trained along with the diffusion model do not require additional objectives or labels to learn to de-
                   compose style and content from images. The proposed generalized composable diffusion model
                   extends CDM for a more generalized scenario. It shows significantly better performance when
                   compared with CDM for translation as well as compositing text prompts. We also show that
                   timestep-dependent weight schedules for conditioning inputs can help improve overall results and
                   controllability. Additionally, the learned latent spaces are observed to have desirable properties like
                   PCA-based attribute manipulation and smooth interpolations. Quantitative and qualitative evalua-
                   tion shows the benefits of the proposed sampling techniques.


                                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022. 2, 4

Diane Bouchacourt, Ryota Tomioka, and Sebastian Nowozin. Multi-level variational autoencoder:
  Learning disentangled representations from grouped observations. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018. 1

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023. 3

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 3

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 3

Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image gen-
  eration via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023. 1

Wonwoong Cho, Sungha Choi, David Keetae Park, Inkyu Shin, and Jaegul Choo. Image-to-image
 translation via group-wise deep whitening-and-coloring transformation. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10639–10647, 2019. 4

Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Con-
  ditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02938,
  2021. 2, 4

Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
  Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11472–11481, 2022. 2, 4

Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 8188–8197, 2020. 6

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 2, 3

Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real NVP. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=HkpbnH9lx. 1

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. A disentangling invertible interpretation network
  for explaining latent representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020. 1

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021. 2, 3

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022. 3


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sher-
  jil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.    Generative adversarial nets. In
  Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2014.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2014/file/
  5ca3e9b122f61f8f06494c97b1afccf3-Paper.pdf. 1, 6
Erik Härkönen, Aaron Hertzmann, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Sylvain Paris. Ganspace: Discovering
  interpretable gan controls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9841–9850,
  2020. 1
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022. 3
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 6
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI. 5
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022. 3
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2
Judy Hoffman, Eric Tzeng, Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Phillip Isola, Kate Saenko, Alexei Efros,
  and Trevor Darrell. Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain adaptation. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1989–1998. Pmlr, 2018. 2
Xun Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, Serge Belongie, and Jan Kautz. Multimodal unsupervised image-to-
  image translation. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp.
  172–189, 2018. 2, 4
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019. 6
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022. 3
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022. 3
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013. 1
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diagonal attention and style-based gan for content-style disen-
  tanglement in image generation and translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13980–13989, 2021. 2, 4
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15264, 2022. 2, 3, 6
Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim,
  William T Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, et al. Explaining in style:
  Training a gan to explain a classifier in stylespace. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 693–702, 2021. 2


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diverse
  image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 35–51, 2018. 2, 4
Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Daquan Zhou, and Jiashi Feng. Magicmix: Semantic mixing with
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16056, 2022. 6
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional vi-
  sual generation with composable diffusion models. Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), 2022. 2, 3, 5
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 3, 6
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023. 3
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021. 2
Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Oliver Wang, Jingwan Lu, Eli Shechtman, Alexei Efros, and Richard
  Zhang. Swapping autoencoder for deep image manipulation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:7198–7211, 2020. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7
Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-
  fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10619–10629, 2022. 2,
  3, 4, 6
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2204.06125. 2, 3
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 3, 8
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015. 2
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. 2022. 3
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sal-
  imans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image dif-
  fusion models with deep language understanding, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2205.11487. 3
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015. 2
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. 2
Narek Tumanyan, Omer Bar-Tal, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Splicing vit features for semantic
  appearance transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10748–10757, 2022. 4


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dani Valevski, Matan Kalman, Yossi Matias, and Yaniv Leviathan. Unitune: Text-driven image edit-
  ing by fine tuning an image generation model on a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09477,
  2022. 3
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.03365, 2015. 6
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana Parekh, Xin
   Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich
   text-to-image generation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10789. 3
Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, Candace Ross, Adam Polyak, Russell Howes,
  Vasu Sharma, Puxin Xu, Hovhannes Tamoyan, Oron Ashual, Uriel Singer, Shang-Wen Li, Susan
  Zhang, Richard James, Gargi Ghosh, Yaniv Taigman, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Asli Celikyilmaz,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models: Pretrain-
  ing and instruction tuning, 2023. 1
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023. 3


                                               13
